MUNICIPAL CHARTER AND CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published in 1987 by Order of the City Council 
Adopted December 28, 1988 
Republished in 2017 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO 
____________ 
Alan Webber 
Mayor 
____________ 
Signe I. Lindell, District 1 
Renee Villarreal, District 1 
Peter N. Ives, District 2 
Carol Romero-Wirth, District 2 
Roman "Tiger" Abeyta, District 3 
Chris Rivera, District 3 
Michael A. Harris, District 4 
JoAnne Vigil Coppler, District 4 
City Council 
____________ 
Geno Zamora 
Interim City Attorney 
____________ 
Yolanda Y. Vigil 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, as supplemented through November 9, 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and subsections are inserted by using the decimal system. New sections may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of parts, may be placed at the end of the section embracing the subject. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
(Index or Indexes) 
    The (index or indexes) (has or have) been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Vice-President of the Supplement Department, and Connie Hamilton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Melissa Byner for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross-references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico. 2017. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 1988-36 
AN ORDINANCE 
ADOPTING A REVISION AND CODIFICATION OF THE ORDINANCES OF 
THE CITY OF SANTA FE IN THE COUNTY OF SANTA FE, STATE OF NEW MEXICO 
    WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Santa Fe in the County of Santa Fe, New Mexico has caused its ordinances of a general and permanent nature to be compiled and revised and embodied in a revision and codification known as "The Santa Fe City Code of 1987". 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE IN THE COUNTY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO, AS FOLLOWS: 
    Section 1. The ordinances of the City of Santa Fe in the County of Santa Fe, New Mexico, of a general and permanent nature, as codified, Chapters I to XXV are hereby ordained as "The Santa Fe City Code of 1987". 
    Section 2. All of the provisions of "The Santa Fe City Code of 1987" shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance. 
    Section 3. Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the Santa Fe City Code 1981 is repealed and the Santa Fe City Code 1987 supersedes it in its entirety. 
    Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 3 of this ordinance shall not affect: 
a.  Those ordinances and resolutions of the governing body duly enacted but not compiled in the Code of the City of Santa Fe 1987; they continue in full force; 
b.  Not repealed are such ordinances and resolutions of the governing body which have been enacted since the enactment of Ordinance No. 1987-6. These shall be appropriately compiled within the Santa Fe City Code 1987 and proper distribution shall be made by the City Clerk in the form of supplement sheets to the Code; 
c.  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; 
d.  Any prosecution, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to the effective date of this ordinance; 
e.  Any right of franchise conferred by the Governing Body; 
f.  Any right, right-of-way or easement acquired or established in any street, road, highway or other public place within the City; 
g.  Any ordinance of the City providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, acceptance or vacation of any street, road or highway within the City; 
h.  Any ordinance or resolution of the City promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the City or authorizing the issuing of bonds or other evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract of or obligation assumed by the City; 
i.  The annual budget appropriation ordinances or resolution, and all ordinances and resolutions appropriating or transferring funds; 
j.  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Governing Body not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this revision; 
k.  Any ordinance or resolution of the Governing Body fixing compensation or salaries of the City officials and employees or the pay and compensation of positions and clerical employments which are not provided for in this revision and which are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith; 
l.  Any ordinance or resolution of the Governing Body creating employments, positions or offices and fixing duties therefor which are not provided for in this revision and which are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith; and 
m.  Any ordinances of the Governing Body adopted upon final passage after the 11th day of March, 1987. 
    Section 5. The effect of proposed changes contained in the Code is listed below: 
CHAPTER I: GENERAL 
    Chapter I contains the official title, general definitions and rules of construction that are intended to provide uniform construction and interpretation of general terms used throughout the revision, as well as for all other ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. The Chapter also contains a severability clause relating to the entire code. 
    Section 1-3 has been revised to contain the general penalty clause applicable to the entire Code. In subsection 1-3.1 a maximum penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) fine or 90 days imprisonment or both fine and imprisonment is established to agree with State Statutes. Subsection 1-3.1 eliminates the need to restate the maximum penalty clause each time a new regulatory ordinance is adopted. Subsection 1-3.2 states that each and every day a violation exists is deemed a separate violation. Other Code provisions relating to Summons to Appear, Suspension and probation are also included in this Section. 
CHAPTER II: ADMINISTRATION 
    This Chapter forms the Administrative Regulations for the City of Santa Fe, and includes regulations pertaining to the Mayor and Councilors, ordinances and resolutions, Municipal Court, City Manager, City Clerk, Officers and Employees of the City, the Departments of Local Government, Library and Santa Fe Fiesta. 
CHAPTER III: AIRPORT 
    This Chapter contains regulations pertaining to the airport. 
CHAPTER IV: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL 
    Regulations on the restrictions and licensing of the sale, transportation or distribution of alcoholic beverages are included in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER V: ANIMAL CONTROL 
    Chapter V contains the ordinances establishing the administration of the animal control ordinances by the director. It also includes the establishment of the animal control centers; vaccination of dogs and cats; rabid animals; biting animals; licensing of dogs; the regulations and permit requirements for kennels, pet shops and shelters; the regulations pertaining to animals and cruelty to animals; restriction on the sale of certain animals; and exotic animal and guard dogs. 
CHAPTER VI: BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 
    This Chapter codifies the establishment of the Arts Board, the Board of Adjustment, Civil Defense Council, Community Development Board, Design Review Board, Design Review Committee, Development Review Committee, Grievance Review Board, Historic Design Review Board, Industrial Park Authority, Library Board and Metropolitan Water Board. 
CHAPTER VII: BUILDING AND HOUSING 1 [] 
    This Chapter includes the ordinances adopting the Uniform Building Code; Uniform Administrative Code; moving of buildings, fallout shelters, the building inspector; electrical code; mechanical code; housing code; uniform plumbing code; uniform solar energy code, swimming pool code and address assignments. 
CHAPTER IX: ELECTION AND POLITICAL CAMPAIGN CODES 
    Regulations on elections and political campaigns are included herein. 
CHAPTER X: ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 
    This Chapter includes regulations concerning littering, noise, weeds and general environmental standards. 
CHAPTER XI: FINANCE AND BUDGET 
    This Chapter includes the establishment of the Fiscal Year; budget preparation and adjustment, claims in excess of budget, payment of expenditures, investment of public funds, bonded indebtedness and sale or lease of City property. 
CHAPTER XII: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
    The adoption of the National Fire Codes, the Fire Prevention Code and the regulation of fireworks are included in Chapter XII. 
CHAPTER XIII: RESERVED 
CHAPTER XIV: LAND DEVELOPMENT 2 [] 
    The Land Development Chapter has been rearranged for clarity. This Chapter has been divided into Articles and Divisions to provide easier access to text provisions. 
Article I Definitions Article II Administration (Commissions and Committees) Article III Administrative Procedures Article IV Use Regulations Article V Design Standards Article VI Special Review Districts and Standards Article VII Subdivision Article VIII Environmental Standards Article IX Improvements and Dedications  
CHAPTER XVIII: LICENSES AND TAXES 
    This Chapter contains the regulation of business licenses; fees, the licensing of peddlers, secondhand dealers, sales and auctions, taxicabs, carnivals and circuses, pushcart vendors, Plaza Park vendors, the gross receipts tax and lodger's occupancy tax. 
CHAPTER XIX: PERSONNEL 
    Personnel ordinances and regulations are complete in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER XX: POLICE REGULATIONS 
    Ordinances which are enforced by the Police Department are codified in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER XXI: SANITATION 
    The regulations on the collection and disposal of garbage are included herein. 
CHAPTER XXII: SEWERS 
    Regulations relating to sewers are included in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER XXIII: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
    The regulations on paving of streets, excavations, maintenance of curbs, gutters and sidewalks, and uses of sidewalks, streets, parks and the Plaza and Plaza Park are included in Chapter XXIII. 
CHAPTER XXIV: TRAFFIC 
    This Chapter adopts the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance by reference and also contains amendments to that ordinance. 
CHAPTER XXV: WATER 
    Regulations on water and conservation methods are included in Chapter XXV. 
APPENDICES: 
Appendix A Incorporation Proclamation Appendix B First Council Minutes Appendix C City Organization Appendix D Gas Franchise Appendix E Electric Franchise Appendix F Telephone Franchise Appendix G Water Franchise Appendix H Cable Television Franchises  
    Throughout the Code there has been reorganization and editing of the source ordinances, not to effect substantive changes but intended to eliminate word duplications and overlapping and to effect uniformity of expression. In some cases provisions of the source ordinances have not been included in the Code either because they have been expressly or impliedly repealed by later ordinances, are obsolete or no longer apply in the City of Santa Fe. 
    Section 6. A copy of the Santa Fe City Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Santa Fe and shall remain there for the use and examination of the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Santa Fe by impressing thereon the seal of the City of Santa Fe, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Santa Fe to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the Code is in effect. 
    Section 7. Amendments to the Code. Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the City Council to make them a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated into such revisions so that reference to "The Santa Fe City Code, 1987" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted they shall thereafter be printed, as provided hereunder inserted in the book containing the Santa Fe City Code as amended and supplemented thereto. 
    Section 8. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing "The Santa Fe City Code, 1987," required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in the Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code and shall when finally adopted be included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Code, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein. 
    Section 9. The City Clerk of the City of Santa Fe, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a copy of this adopting ordinance in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Santa Fe. Sufficient copies of the Santa Fe City Code shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this adopting ordinance coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes. 
    Section 10. Copies of the book containing "The Santa Fe City Code, 1987", may be purchased from the City Clerk upon the payment of a fee set by the City Clerk and the City Council may arrange by resolution the procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof. 
    Section 11. Each section of "The Santa Fe City Code, 1987" and every part of each section an independent section or part of a section and the holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to effect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections o} parts thereof. 
    Section 12. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication thereof according to law. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this December 28, 1988. 
  
/s/   
      SAM PICK, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
  
/s/   
      FRANCES C. ROMERO, 
      CITY CLERK 
          APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
  
/s/   
      JAMES C. MCKAY, 
      CITY ATTORNEY   Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Chapter VIII will not be used; page numeration used by Chapter VII. 

--- () --- 
Chapter VI; XVI; XVII will not be used; page numeration used by Chapter XIV. 

CITY OF SANTA FE - MUNICIPAL CHARTER 
Contains amendments through March 4, 2014. 
The Charter of the City of Santa Fe was adopted by the voters of the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico, at a Special Municipal Election held on December 9, 1997; amended by the voters of the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico, at a Regular Municipal Election held on March 4, 2008; and amended by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at a Regular Municipal Election held on March 4, 2014. Amendments are noted with the appropriate text. 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of Santa Fe, a capital city for four centuries, a community with rich and lasting multi-cultural traditions and a history of tolerance towards all peoples, cultures, traditions, and lifestyles, recognize our right to define our way of life and our form of government. With this Charter we affirm that right and express our determination to secure for ourselves and our children the continuity of our cultural values, our personal freedoms, and our well being. Therefore, we, the people of Santa Fe, pursuant to the constitution and laws of New Mexico, do hereby enact this charter for the City of Santa Fe. 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

1.01. - Purpose and incorporation. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Charter is to provide for maximum self-government and the greatest possible exercise of home rule powers. In no case shall the city have any fewer powers than a non-charter municipality in the state of New Mexico. 
B.  Incorporation. The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Santa Fe shall remain and continue to be a body politic and corporate with the same name and boundaries as existed prior to the effective date of this Charter. The boundaries of the city may be changed as provided by law. 
1.02. - Powers. 
A.  Powers. The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of New Mexico. 
B.  Acceptance of devolution of powers. By enacting this Charter pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico Constitution, and pursuant to the New Mexico Municipal Charter Act, the City of Santa Fe accepts the full and complete devolution of home rule powers granted in the constitution and the laws of the State of New Mexico to each municipality that adopts a municipal charter. Accordingly, the city shall have all powers possible for a home rule municipality to possess under the New Mexico Constitution and the laws of the State of New Mexico, including all implied powers and all powers necessary to implement all express powers of the city, as if each and every one of the city's implied powers were fully, completely and expressly enumerated in this Charter. 
C.  Powers of general law municipal corporations. The city shall be entitled to exercise any and all powers granted by law or the New Mexico Constitution to municipal corporations, except to the extent there may be a conflict between the exercise of the powers and the provisions of this Charter, in which case, this Charter shall operate to limit the city's ability to exercise such powers. 
1.03. - Construction. 
    The powers of the city under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and shall be interpreted to favor maximum local self-government. 
1.04. - Intergovernmental relations. 
The city may exercise any of its powers jointly or in cooperation with any other government entity. 
1.05. - State and municipal laws. 
A.  Repeal. All city ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations that are in force when this Charter becomes effective are repealed only to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of this Charter. 
B.  Supersedes. To the extent that the New Mexico Constitution and laws of the State of New Mexico permit, all laws relating to or affecting the city or its agencies, officers or employees that are in force when this Charter becomes effective are superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent with or interfere with the effective operation of the Charter. 
C.  Status of consistent state law. Any provision of the New Mexico Municipal Code or any other state law relating to municipalities shall apply to the city only to the extent that such code or law is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. To the extent that any state law relating to municipalities is consistent with this Charter, the city may avail itself of the rights, privileges and powers conferred by such law, regardless of whether the law vests power in home rule municipalities, non-home rule municipalities or both. 
1.06. - Rights and property. 
A.  Property rights. All rights and property that were vested in the city prior to the effective date of this Charter shall remain so vested once the Charter is effective. No existing right or liability and no pending litigation shall be affected by adoption of this Charter. No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time that this Charter becomes effective shall be affected by operation of this Charter. 
B.  Contract rights. All contracts, agreements and franchises entered into by the city or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect, in accordance with their respective terms. Public improvement for which legislative action has been taken under laws, ordinances or resolutions existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in a manner that is in full compliance with this Charter as is possible in accordance with the provisions of existing laws, ordinances and resolutions. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICY STATEMENTS 

2.01. - Code of ethics. 
The proper administration of democratic government requires public officials to exercise a high degree of integrity and honesty, free from undue and inappropriate influence and further requires that government decisions and policy be made in a fair manner, guided by the best interests of the people and the community, so that the public may have confidence in its government. To effect these ends, the governing body shall by ordinance establish standards for the ethical conduct of all elected and appointed officials and all employees of the city, and provide consequences for violating such ethical standards. 
2.02. - Human and civil rights. 
The human and civil rights of the residents of Santa Fe are inviolate and shall not be diminished or otherwise infringed. To that end, no city ordinance, resolution or policy shall be enacted or adopted nor shall any action be condoned which discriminates on the basis of ethnicity, race, age, religion, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, medical condition or citizenship status; nor shall any ordinance enacted or policy adopted protecting or enhancing these rights be subject to the right of referendum or initiative. The governing body shall preserve, protect and promote human rights and human dignity, and shall, through all of its activities, including but not limited to employment, awarding of contracts, housing accommodation, and the provision of city services, prohibit and discourage such discrimination. To effect these ends, the governing body may enact ordinances and establish appropriate commissions with jurisdiction, authority, and staff sufficient to effectively administer this policy. 
2.03. - Environmental protection. 
The natural beauty of Santa Fe, its historical heritage, and its unique architectural style are among the city's most valued and important assets. In order to enhance the beauty and quality of both the natural and built environment within and around the city, the governing body shall protect, preserve and enhance the city's natural endowments, plan for and regulate land use and development, manage the city's growth, encourage source reduction, re-use and recycling of materials, and promote and maintain an aesthetic and humane urban environment. To effect these ends, the governing body may take whatever action is necessary and may enact ordinances and may establish appropriate commissions with jurisdiction, authority, and staff sufficient to effectively administer this policy. Because water quality and availability are extremely important to the citizens of Santa Fe, the governing body shall protect, preserve, and enhance the city's water resources through regulation, conservation and relating development to water availability. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 2.03 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. 
    This section was amended to include the last sentence that mandates the governing body to protect, preserve and enhance the city's water resources through regulation, conservation and relating development to water availability. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
2.04. - Cultural and neighborhood preservation. 
The people of Santa Fe derive invaluable benefits from our multi-cultural heritage. The multi-ethnic and multi-racial residents who have made their homes here over the centuries have each left their unique cultural mark on our city, producing a rich blend of stories, traditions and neighborhoods. The result is a community that treasures a variety of artistic, literary and musical forms, that symbolizes an architectural style, and that celebrates the diversity of those who have chosen to live here. We therefore declare that the multi-cultural heritage and neighborhoods of Santa Fe are essential to the people of this community and that public officials shall at all times exercise their powers with sensitivity to and respect for that cultural and neighborhood heritage. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 2.04 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. 
    This section was amended to add neighborhood preservation to the existing policy. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
2.05. - Campaign finance and campaign practices. 
The escalating cost of campaigning for elective office provides an opportunity for monied interests to control the electoral process of city government. Candidates may be encouraged to put the interests of their campaign contributors ahead of the needs and concerns of their constituents, and the passage or defeat of a measure may be skewed by monied interests to the detriment of the public interest. In order to eliminate financing inequities, conflicts of interest, and the potential for corruption inherent in this situation, the governing body shall enact such ordinances, and may appoint such commissions and take such other actions as may be necessary to make campaigns for elective office more democratic. To this end, the governing body shall facilitate voting, establish ethical standards for the conduct of campaigns, regulate lobbying of city officers and employees, provide methods of voter education that will enhance the possibility for an open, accountable and responsive campaign process, encourage broad-based contributions from the public, and require that each candidate and campaign committee for issues appoint one central committee to coordinate, control and report all financial transactions and make full and timely disclosure of all campaign contributions and expenditures. The governing body shall provide for meaningful public financing of campaigns. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 2.05 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    The last sentence of this section was amended from "consider the issue of financing campaigns, including public financing" to "provide for meaningful public financing of campaigns". 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008 
2.06. - General plan. 
The governing body shall establish and adopt by ordinance or resolution the policies, goals and objectives outlined in the city General Plan. Such policies, goals and objectives shall not be revised or amended without one or more public hearings by the governing body. 
2.07. - Support for local business and an enduring local economy. 
A local economy is critical to a healthy and prosperous community. The governing body shall, as guiding principles, strive to support local business, a strong local entrepreneurial spirit, and an enduring local economy that recognizes the rights of all to earn a living wage. 
    History : An Amendment to Article II was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election adding this new Section 2.07. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
  
ARTICLE III. - CITIZEN RIGHTS 

3.01. - Referendum. 
A.  Right of referendum. Registered voters who are residents of the city shall have the power to repeal any adopted ordinance, except as prohibited by law or this Charter. 
B.  Prohibited use of referendum power. The power of referendum shall not extend to: the budget; the capital program; any ordinance appropriating money; the levy of taxes, unless a referendum is specifically authorized by state law; salaries of city officers or employees; zone map amendments; ordinances authorizing bonds or other obligations when such ordinances, bonds, or other obligations are revenue bonds or have previously been approved at a city election; or any ordinance adopted in furtherance of the human and civil rights policy of this Charter; and any ordinance mandated by this Charter. 
C.  Approval as to form. The city clerk shall not accept for filing any referendum petition that the clerk has not approved as to form. The form of the proposed petition shall be submitted to the city clerk prior to its circulation in the city for signature. The city clerk shall indicate in writing on a proposed petition that it is approved as to form if the petition contains: 
[1]  a heading which states that the petition is for the purpose of referendum to repeal an ordinance, specifying the title, number and a brief description of the ordinance; 
[2]  a place for the person signing the petition to write the date, name (printed), address, and signature; and 
[3]  a statement that any person knowingly providing, or causing to be provided, any false information on a petition, forging a signature, or signing a petition when that person knows that he or she is not a qualified elector in the City of Santa Fe, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  Collection of petition signatures. The collection of the petition signatures must be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
E.  Number of signatures. A referendum petition shall be deemed sufficient if signed by qualified electors in an amount equal to thirty-three and one-third percent or more of the actual voters at the last mayoral election, including at least ten percent of the voters for mayor in each council district in the last mayoral election. The city clerk shall determine the number of actual voters at the last mayoral election. 
F.  Time for filing of petition. A referendum petition shall be filed with the city clerk not more than ninety days following the date on which the city clerk approved the petition as to form. 
G.  Verification of petition. Upon receipt of a referendum petition which has previously been approved as to form, the city clerk shall verify the petition in accordance with NMSA 1978 Section 3-1-5, and the city clerk and governing body shall perform the duties otherwise required by NMSA 1978 Section 3-1-5, except to the extent such provisions are inconsistent with this section of the charter. 
H.  Governing body review. After a petition has been verified, the city clerk shall promptly present the referred ordinance to the governing body at its next scheduled session. The governing body shall within thirty days consider the ordinance in accordance with its established procedures for repealing ordinances. If the governing body fails to repeal the ordinance within thirty days, the governing body shall enact an election resolution for the purpose of submitting the ordinance to a vote. The governing body shall enact such election resolution at the meeting at which it fails to repeal the ordinance. 
I.  Ballot presentation. The ballot shall contain the full text of the ordinance as adopted by the governing body. Below the text of the ordinance shall be the words "for the ordinance" and "against the ordinance" with spaces for crosses after each phrase. 
J.  Results of election. In order to have a valid election, at least twenty percent of the qualified electors of the city must cast ballots. If a majority of the votes cast are in favor of the ordinance, then the ordinance shall continue in effect. If a majority of the votes cast are against the ordinance, then it shall be deemed repealed upon certification of the election results. 
    History : Amendments to Section 3.01 were approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    Amendments to this section include: at the end of Subsection B., adding "and any ordinance mandated by this Charter" as a prohibited use of referendum power; in Subsection C.[1], changing the style of the heading for a referendum petition; in Subsection E., changing the method used to determine the number of petition signatures required from 20% of registered voters to 33 1/3 % of actual voters voting for mayor in the last mayoral election, including at least 10% of the actual voters, instead of registered voters, for mayor in each council district; in Subsection F., extending the time period for collecting petition signatures from 60 days to 90 days and changing the trigger date starting this time period from "the date on which the governing body voted to enact the ordinance" to "the date the city clerk approved the petition as to form" which has the effect of permitting referendums on any ordinance instead of only those ordinances that were enacted within the previous 60 days; and deleting the previous Subsection H., which was captioned "Effect of a Verified Petition." 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008. 
3.02. - Initiative. 
A.  Right of initiative. Registered voters who are residents of the city shall have the power to propose ordinances to the governing body, except as prohibited by law or this charter. 
B.  Prohibited use of initiative power. The power of initiative shall not extend to: the budget; the capital program; any ordinance appropriating money; the levy of taxes; salaries of city officers or employees; zone map amendments; ordinances authorizing bonds or other obligations when such ordinances, bonds, or other obligations are revenue bonds or have previously been approved at a city election; or any ordinance that would violate the human and civil rights policy of this charter. 
C.  City attorney's opinion required. The city attorney shall review and render and publish a public opinion as to the legality and form of any proposed ordinance before it is submitted to the governing body for consideration. 
D.  Approval as to form. The city clerk shall not accept for filing any initiative petition that the clerk has not approved as to form. The form of the proposed petition shall be submitted to the city clerk prior to its circulation in the city for signature. The city clerk shall indicate in writing on a proposed petition that it is approved as to form if the petition contains: 
[1]  a heading which states that the petition is for the purpose of enacting an ordinance by initiative, and which sets forth in full the text of the proposed ordinance; 
[2]  a place for the person signing the petition to write the date, name (printed), address and signature; and 
[3]  a statement that any person knowingly providing, or causing to be provided, any false information on a petition, forging a signature, or signing a petition when that person knows that he or she is not a qualified elector in the City of Santa Fe, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
E.  Collection of petition signatures. The collection of the petition signatures must be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
F.  Number of signatures. An initiative petition shall be deemed sufficient if signed by qualified electors in an amount equal to thirty-three and one-third percent or more of the actual voters in the last mayoral election, including at least ten percent of the actual voters for mayor in each council district in the last mayoral election. The city clerk shall determine the number of actual voters at the last mayoral election. 
G.  Time for filing of petition. An initiative petition shall be filed with the city clerk not more than ninety days following the date on which the city clerk approved the petition as to form. 
H.  Verification of petition. Upon receipt of an initiative petition which has previously been approved as to form, the city clerk shall verify the petition in accordance with NMSA 1978 Section 3-1-5, and the city clerk and council shall perform the duties otherwise required by NMSA 1978 Section 3-1-5, except to the extent such provisions are inconsistent with this section of the charter. 
I.  Governing body review. After a petition has been verified, the city clerk shall promptly present the proposed ordinance to the governing body at its next scheduled session. The governing body shall within thirty days consider the proposed ordinance in accordance with its established procedures for enacting ordinances. If the governing body fails to adopt the initiated ordinance as proposed within said thirty days, the governing body shall enact an election resolution for the purpose of submitting the initiated ordinance to a vote. The governing body shall enact such election resolution at the meeting at which it fails to adopt the initiated ordinance. 
J.  Ballot presentation. The ballot shall contain the full text of the initiated ordinance. Below the text of the initiated ordinance shall be the words "for the ordinance" and "against the ordinance" with spaces for crosses after each phrase. 
K.  Results of election. In order for an initiative to be approved at least twenty percent of the qualified electors of the city must cast ballots. If the initiated ordinance receives a majority of the votes cast, then the ordinance is adopted. An adopted initiated ordinance shall be deemed effective upon certification of the election results, unless a later date is specified in the ordinance. 
    History : Amendments to Section 3.02 were approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    Amendments to this Section include: in Subsection F., changing the method used to determine the number of petition signatures required from 20% of registered voters to 33 1/3 % of actual voters voting for mayor in the last mayoral election,including at least 10% of the actual voters, instead of registered voters, for mayor in each council district; and in Subsection G., extending the time period for collecting petition signatures from 60 days to 90 days. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008. 
3.03. - Recall. 
A.  Right of recall. Registered voters who are residents of the city or residents of the district from which a councilor was elected shall have the right to recall certain elected officials in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
B.  Officials subject to recall. The mayor and city councilors shall be subject to recall. 
C.  Prohibited use of recall power. No elected official shall be subject to a recall election within the first year of each term of office or within the last year of each term of office. 
D.  Number of recall elections. No elected official shall be subject to a recall election more than one time during each term of office. 
E.  Approval as to form. The city clerk shall not accept for filing any recall petition that the clerk has not approved as to form. The form of the proposed petition shall be submitted to the city clerk prior to its circulation in the city for signature. The city clerk shall indicate in writing on a proposed petition that it is approved as to form if the petition contains: 
[1]  a heading which states that the petition is for the purpose of recall, which sets forth in full the name of the official recall is sought against and the reasons for the recall; 
[2]  a place for the person signing the petition to write the date, name (printed), address and signature; and 
[3]  a statement that any person knowingly providing, or causing to be provided, any false information on a petition, forging a signature, or signing a petition when that person knows that he or she is not a qualified elector in the City of Santa Fe, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
F.  Collection of petition signatures. The collection of the petition signatures must be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Santa Fe. 
G.  Number of signatures. 
[1]  For mayor. A recall petition shall be deemed sufficient if signed by qualified electors in an amount equal to thirty-three and one-third percent or more of the actual voters at the last mayoral election, including at least fifteen percent of the actual voters for mayor from each council district. The city clerk shall determine the number of actual voters for mayor in each district. 
[2]  For councilor. A recall petition shall be deemed sufficient if signed by qualified electors in an amount equal to thirty-three and one-third percent or more of the actual voters at the last mayoral election in the district from which the councilor was elected. The city clerk shall determine the number of actual voters in the district at the last mayoral election. 
H.  Time for filing of petition. A recall petition shall be filed with the city clerk not more than ninety days following the date on which the city clerk approved the petition as to form. 
I.  Verification of petition. Upon receipt of a recall petition which has previously been approved as to form, the city clerk shall verify the petition in accordance with NMSA 1978 Section 3-1-5, and the city clerk and council shall perform the duties otherwise required by NMSA 1978 Section 3-1-5, except to the extent such provisions are inconsistent with this section of the charter. 
J.  Governing body review. After a petition has been verified, the city clerk shall promptly present the recall petition to the council at its next scheduled session. The council shall enact an election resolution for the purpose of submitting the recall to a vote. 
K.  Ballot presentation. The ballot shall contain the full name of the elected official subject to recall. Below the name shall be the words "for the recall" and "against the recall" with spaces for crosses after each phrase. 
L.  Results of election. In order for a recall of the mayor to be approved, at least twenty percent of the qualified electors of the city must cast ballots. In order for a recall of a councilor to be approved, at least twenty percent of the qualified electors of that councilor's district must cast ballots. Additionally, the number of persons voting for the recall of the mayor or councilor must exceed the number of votes the official received when elected. If a majority of the votes cast are in favor of recall, and the number of votes cast meets the foregoing criteria, the official shall be recalled. 
    History : Amendments to Section 3.03 were approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    Amendments to this Section include: in Subsection G.[1] changing the method used to determine the number of petition signatures required for an election to recall the mayor from 20% of registered voters to 33 1/3 % of the number of actual voters voting for mayor in the last mayoral election, including at least 15% of the actual voters, rather than registered voters, for mayor in each council district; in Subsection G.[2] changing the method used to determine the number of petition signatures required for an election to recall a councilor from 20% of registered voters to 33 1/3 % of the number of actual voters, voting for mayor, at the last mayoral election in the district from which the councilor was elected; and in Subsection H. extending the time period for collecting petition signatures for recall of mayor and councilors from 60 days to 90 days. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008 
3.04. - Citizen complaints. 
The governing body shall provide a procedure for receiving, acknowledging, and responding to complaints or grievances concerning the city or its operations. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 

4.01. - Elections. 
A.  Regular elections. Regular city elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in March of each even-numbered year. 
B.  Non-partisan elections. Elections for city officers shall be non-partisan. The party affiliation of candidates shall not appear on the ballot nor on any official document relating to the candidate or to the election. 
4.02. - Qualified voters. 
A.  For mayor and municipal judge. All registered voters resident in the city shall be qualified to vote for mayor and municipal judge. 
B.  For councilors. All registered voters resident in a district shall be qualified to vote for a councilor from that district. 
4.03. - Nominating petitions. 
A.  For mayor and municipal judge. Any person wishing to be a candidate for the office of mayor or municipal judge shall file with the city clerk a nominating petition containing the signatures of at least one-half of one percent of the registered voters of the city. 
B.  For councilor. Any person wishing to be a candidate for the office of councilor shall file with the city clerk a nominating petition containing the signatures of at least one-half of one percent of the registered voters of the district, which the candidate seeks to represent. 
C.  Number of registered voters. The city clerk shall determine the number of registered voters of the city and of each council district as of the date of the election proclamation. 
4.04. - Election code. 
Unless inconsistent with this Charter or city ordinances, the Municipal Election Code and NMSA 1978, Section 3-1-5, as may be amended from time to time, shall govern all municipal elections. The forms and procedures for the conduct of all city elections shall be provided by the city clerk in accordance with state law and city ordinances. The governing body may provide for the use of electronic, mechanical or other devices for voting and counting the votes not inconsistent with law. 
4.05 - Public campaign financing. 
The governing body shall adopt an ordinance or ordinances to provide for meaningful public financing of campaigns for all municipal elected officials within two years after the effective date of the amendment to the Charter that includes this requirement. Prior to such adoption, the governing body shall take such action as is reasonable and necessary to provide for a well-informed consideration and review of the issue of public campaign financing and to solicit public input on the substance that may be included in such an ordinance or ordinances, including, but not limited to the creation of a subcommittee, task force or similar body that will conduct public meetings, study alternative methods of public campaign financing and make recommendations to the governing body on a form of ordinance for consideration by the governing body. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 4.05 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    The former Section 4.05 captioned "Campaign finance and campaign practices" and reading "The governing body shall by ordinance adopt a campaign finance and practices code within one year of the adoption of this Charter." was deleted and this new Section 4.05 is substituted. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008. 
4.06. - Ranked-choice voting. 
    Commencing with the general municipal election in March 2010, or as soon thereafter as equipment and software for tabulation of votes and the ability to correct incorrectly marked, in-person ballots, is available at a reasonable price and at all subsequent elections, the mayor, city councilors and municipal judge shall be elected using a ranked choice (sometimes called instant runoff) voting system allowing voters to rank in order of their preference the candidates for each office appearing on the ballot. If, after counting all voters' first choice listed on their ballots for an office, no candidate receives a majority of votes cast, the candidate with the fewest votes shall be eliminated. Each ballot shall be tallied again for that office counting the vote from each ballot for the highest ranked candidate who has not been eliminated. If still no candidate for that office receives a majority, the process shall be repeated until a candidate receives a majority of the votes for that office. 
    History : An Amendment to Article IV was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election adding this new Section 4.06. 
    Effective Date: Ranked choice voting will go into effect commencing with the regular municipal election in March 2010 or as soon thereafter when equipment and software for tabulating the votes and allowing correction of incorrectly marked, in-person ballots are available at a reasonable price. 
4.07. - Campaign contribution limits. 
The governing body shall have an ordinance that limits the amount of campaign contributions that can be accepted by all candidates. 
    History : An Amendment to Article IV was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election adding this new Section 4.07. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
4.08 - Timely disclosure of the purposes of tax increases and bond measures. 
The governing body shall adopt an ordinance that ensures that the City shall provide and disseminate in a timely manner the purposes of proposed expenditures for any tax increase or bond measure that requires ratification by the voters. 
    History : An Amendment to Article IV was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election adding this new Section 4.08. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
  
ARTICLE V. - THE MAYOR 

5.01. - Powers and duties. 
The city shall have a mayor who shall: 
A.  be elected at large by the voters of the city; 
B.  have a vote on all matters that come before the governing body; 
C.  be the chief executive officer of the city; 
D.  appoint and remove, subject to the approval of the governing body, the city manager, city attorney, city clerk, and members of advisory commissions; 
E.  cause the ordinances and regulations of the city to be faithfully and constantly obeyed; 
F.  have, within the city limits, the power conferred on the sheriffs of counties to suppress disorders and keep the peace; 
G.  propose programs and policies to the governing body; 
H.  represent the city in intergovernmental relationships; 
I.  present an annual state of the city message; 
J.  perform other duties compatible with the nature of the office as the governing body may from time to time require; 
K.  be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes; and; 
L.  be recognized by the governor for purposes of military law. 
    History: An amendment to Section 5.01(B) was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. The amendment added the phrase "or when his or her vote will provide the necessary number of votes required by law for taking action on an issue before the governing body." 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008 
    An amendment to Section 5.01(B) was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. The amendment changed the language to read that the mayor shall "have a vote on all matters that come before the governing body." 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
5.01. - Powers and duties. [EFFECTIVE MARCH 12, 2018] 
The city shall have a mayor who shall: 
A.  be elected at large by the voters of the city; 
B.  have a vote on all matters that come before the governing body; 
C.  be the chief executive officer of the city whose position shall be full-time; 
D.  earn an initial salary of $74,000 until such time that an independent salary commission is established by city ordinance and such commission sets the salary for mayor; 
E.  appoint with the consent of the governing body, the city manager, city attorney, city clerk, and members of advisory commissions; 
F.  exercise administrative control and supervision over the city manager, city attorney and city clerk; 
G.  have the authority to remove the city manager, city attorney and city clerk; 
H.  cause the ordinances and regulations of the city to be faithfully and constantly obeyed; 
I.  have, within the city limits, the power conferred on the sheriffs of counties to suppress disorders and keep the peace; 
J.  propose programs and policies to the governing body; 
K.  represent the city in intergovernmental relationships; 
L.  present an annual state of the city message which shall identify among other matters the mayor's legislative agenda for the upcoming year; 
M.  work with city personnel and timely prepare an annual budget and proposed spending priority for review and approval by the finance committee and the governing body; 
N.  be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes; and 
O.  be recognized by the governor for purposes of military law. 
History: An amendment to Section 5.01(B) was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. The amendment added the phrase "or when his or her vote will provide the necessary number of votes required by law for taking action on an issue before the governing body." 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008 
An amendment to Section 5.01(B) was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. The amendment changed the language to read that the mayor shall "have a vote on all matters that come before the governing body." 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
Amendments to Section 5.01 were approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. The amendments: 
 Changed paragraph C. to establish the position of mayor as full-time; 
 Created a new paragraph D., to establish a salary of for the mayor until an independent salary review commission is established; 
 Changed paragraph E. (formerly Paragraph D) to establish that mayor appoints "with the consent" of the governing body; 
 Created a new Paragraph F., to establish that the mayor shall "exercise administrative control and supervision over the city manager, city attorney and city clerk"; 
 Created a new paragraph G., to establish that the mayor shall "have the authority to remove the city manager, city attorney and city clerk"; 
 Changed paragraph L. (formerly paragraph I) to include that the mayor "shall identify among other matters the mayor's legislative agenda for the upcoming year"; 
 Deleted former paragraph J that stated that the mayor shall "perform other duties compatible with the nature of the office as the governing body may from time to time require"; and 
 Created a new paragraph M., to establish that the mayor shall "work with city personnel" to establish the annual budget. 
    Effective Date: March 12, 2018 
5.02. - Eligibility. 
Registered voters who reside in the city shall be eligible to run for the office of mayor. 
5.03. - Term of office. 
The mayor shall be elected for a term of four years, which shall begin on the sixth day after the election and continue until a successor has been duly elected and has taken office. 
5.04. - Mayor pro tempore. 
At the first meeting of the council following a regular city election, the mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the council, a councilor to serve as mayor pro tempore until the next regular city election. The mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor in the absence or temporary incapacity of the mayor. 
5.05. - Vacancy in office. 
The office of mayor shall become vacant upon the mayor's death, resignation, termination of residency in the city, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law or this charter. When such a vacancy occurs, the mayor pro tempore shall serve as mayor until the next regular city election. If the offices of both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore are vacant, then a councilor shall be elected by the remaining members of the governing body to serve as mayor until a special election can be held. 
5.06. - Grounds for removal from office. 
A mayor may be removed from office in accordance with applicable state law or this Charter. 
ARTICLE VI. - THE GOVERNING BODY 

6.01. - Composition. 
The members of the governing body, exclusive of the mayor shall be known and designated as councilors. The mayor and the councilors together are the governing body of the city. 
6.02. - Powers and duties. 
A.  The governing body shall serve as the principal policy maker of the city. 
B.  All legislative powers of the city shall be vested in the governing body, except as otherwise required by law or this charter. The governing body shall provide for the exercise of its powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 
C.  The governing body shall by ordinance fix the annual salaries of the mayor, the municipal judge and councilors and shall review those salaries not less than every four years. 
D.  The governing body shall by ordinance set a policy for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the mayor, the municipal judge and city councilors. 
6.02. - Powers and duties. [EFFECTIVE MARCH 12, 2018] 
A.  The governing body shall serve as the principal policy maker of the city, and shall, as necessary, amend existing policies that are consistent with other provisions of the charter. The governing body shall consider the legislative agenda put forth by the mayor and propose amendments to existing policies and propose new policies. 
B.  All legislative powers of the city shall be vested in the governing body, except as otherwise required by law or this charter. The governing body shall provide for the exercise of its powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 
C.  The governing body shall by ordinance fix the annual salaries of the municipal judge and councilors and shall review those salaries not less than every four years. 
D.  The governing body shall by ordinance establish an independent salary review commission whose sole purpose shall be to review and set the mayor's salary. The independent salary review commission shall review the mayor's salary no less than every four years. 
E.  The governing body shall by ordinance set a policy for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the mayor, the municipal judge and city councilors. 
    History : Amendments to Section 6.02 were approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. The amendments: 
 Changed paragraph A, to include that the governing body shall "as necessary, amend existing policies" and "consider the legislative agenda put forth by the mayor"; and 
 Created a new paragraph D. to establish an independent salary review commission to review and set the mayor's salary no less than every four years. 
    Effective Date: March 12, 2018 
6.03. - Districts. 
The city shall be divided into four dual-member districts numbered one through four. District boundaries shall be reviewed and revised at least every ten years following the decennial census by an independent citizens' redistricting commission. The governing body shall, by ordinance, establish a procedure for the appointment and deliberations of the commission which will, to the maximum practicable extent, ensure that the commission's decisions will be based exclusively on the following principles in the following order of priority: 
A.  each district shall contain as nearly as possible substantially the same population based upon the most recent federal census; 
B.  districting plans must avoid dilution of minority voting strength; 
C.  communities of interest, including those based upon ethnic and economic factors, shall be preserved within a single district whenever reasonable; 
D.  each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territories. The total length of all district boundary lines shall be as short as possible; 
E.  districting plans shall compensate for U.S. census undercount of minorities. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 6.03 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election to establish the "independent citizens' redistricting commission." 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
  
6.04. - Eligibility. 
Registered voters who reside in the district shall be eligible to run for the office of councilor from that district. 
6.05. - Term of office. 
Councilors shall be elected for a term of four years, which shall begin on the sixth day after the election and continue until a successor has been duly elected and has taken office. The terms of office of the two councilors from each district shall be staggered so that one councilor shall be elected from each district at each regular municipal election. 
6.06. - Vacancies in office. 
The office of a councilor shall become vacant upon the member's death, resignation, termination of residency in the district from which elected, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law or this charter. When such a vacancy occurs, the mayor shall within thirty days appoint a qualified elector from the district in which the vacancy has occurred to serve until the next regular city election, at which time a qualified elector shall be elected to fill the remaining unexpired term, if any. The governing body shall approve or disapprove the mayor's appointment not later than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the appointment. 
6.07. - Grounds for removal from office. 
A councilor may be removed from office in accordance with applicable state law or this Charter. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

7.01. - Establishment. 
There shall be a municipal court for the city, which shall be presided over by a full-time municipal judge. The governing body may by ordinance authorize the election of additional municipal judges. 
7.02. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have all jurisdiction provided under state law and city ordinances. 
7.03. - Eligibility. 
Registered voters who reside in the city and are licensed members of the New Mexico Bar shall be eligible to run for the office of municipal judge. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 7.03 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    The amendment added the phrase "and are licensed members of the New Mexico Bar" to the eligibility requirements. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008 
7.04. - Term of office. 
The municipal judge shall be elected for a four-year term, which shall begin on the sixth day after the election and continue until a successor has been duly elected and has taken office. 
7.05. - Vacancy in office. 
The office of a municipal judge shall become vacant upon the judge's death, resignation, termination of residency in the city or membership in the New Mexico Bar, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law. In case of such vacancy, the mayor with the consent of the governing body shall within thirty days appoint a person who meets the eligibility requirements for the office of municipal judge to serve until the end of the unexpired term of that municipal judge. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 7.05 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2008 Regular Municipal Election. 
    The amendment added the phrase "or membership in the state bar" as a circumstance under which the office of municipal judge shall become vacant. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2008 
7.06. - Grounds for removal from office. 
The municipal judge may be removed from office in accordance with applicable state law. 
7.07. - Salary. 
The governing body shall review and set the salary for the municipal judge at least every four years. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY MANAGER 

8.01. - Appointment. 
    The city manager shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the governing body. 
8.01. - Appointment. [EFFECTIVE MARCH 12, 2018] 
The city manager shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the governing body. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 8.01 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. 
    This section was amended to delete "advice and" before "consent". 
    Effective Date: March 12, 2018 
8.02. - Qualifications. 
The city manager should be professionally trained and have the necessary administrative and managerial skills to manage the municipality. 
8.02. - Qualifications. [EFFECTIVE MARCH 12, 2018] 
The city manager should be professionally trained and have the necessary administrative and managerial skills to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the city manager. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 8.02 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. 
    This section was amended to delete "manage the municipality" and insert "carry out the duties and responsibilities of the city manager". 
    Effective Date: March 12, 2018 
8.03. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall: 
A.  be the chief administrative officer of the city; 
B.  have the power to hire and fire all city employees; and 
C.  have such other powers as are provided for in city ordinances and state law. 
8.03. - Powers and duties. [EFFECTIVE MARCH 12, 2018] 
The city manager shall: 
A.  be the chief administrative officer of the city; 
B.  have the power to hire and fire all city employees, except for the city attorney and city clerk; and 
C.  have such other powers as are provided for in city ordinances and state law. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 8.03 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. 
    This section was amended to insert in paragraph B., "except for the city attorney and city clerk". 
    Effective Date: March 12, 2018 
8.04. - Removal. 
The city manager may be suspended or removed: 
A.  by the mayor subject to the approval of the council; or 
B.  by the governing body by a majority vote of all members at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
8.04. - Removal. [EFFECTIVE MARCH 12, 2018] 
The city manager may be suspended or removed: 
A.  by the mayor; or 
B.  by a vote of six councilors at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
    History : An Amendment to Section 8.04 was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election. 
    This section was amended to state that the city manager may be suspended or removed by "the mayor" or "a vote of six councilors". 
    Effective Date: March 12, 2018 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS GOVERNMENTAL ISSUES 

9.01. - Investments. 
The city shall follow the laws and policies of the State of New Mexico regarding investment of public funds. 
9.02. - Procurement. 
The governing body shall, by ordinance, adopt a fair and equitable procurement code for the city within one year of the adoption of this Charter. 
9.03. - Personnel system. 
The hiring, supervision, promotion, and discharge of all city employees shall be governed by a personnel system based on principles of efficiency, ability, and non-discrimination. The governing body shall by ordinance adopt a merit personnel system consistent with these principles, and any duly adopted collective bargaining agreements. 
9.04 - Independent audit committee. 
The governing body shall, by ordinance, adopt an independent audit committee for the City. 
    History : An Amendment to Article IX was approved by the voters of the City of Santa Fe at the March 4, 2014 Regular Municipal Election adding this new Section 9.04. 
    Effective Date: May 5, 2014 
  
ARTICLE X. - CHARTER REVIEW AND AMENDMENT 

10.01. - Charter review. 
A charter review commission shall be appointed as needed, but not less frequently than every ten years. The governing body shall by resolution determine the manner of appointment of the commission, provided that there shall be an odd number of commissioners. 
10.02. - Charter amendment or repeal. 
This Charter may be amended or repealed as provided by law. The city attorney shall review and render and publish a public opinion as to the legality and form of any proposed charter amendment before it is submitted to the voters. 
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

11.01. - Transition. 
A.  Elected officials. City officials who are incumbent on the effective date of this Charter shall serve out their elected terms unless recalled under the provisions of this Charter. 
B.  Appointed officials. All incumbent appointed officials and commissioners shall serve out their appointed terms unless removed in accordance with city ordinances, resolutions or state law. 
11.02. - Mandated ordinances. 
The governing body shall enact all ordinances required by this charter within one year of the effective date of the Charter. Where an ordinance exists on a required subject, the governing body shall review, revise as necessary, and re-enact such ordinance within one year from the effective date of the Charter. 
11.03. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Charter are severable, and if any provision or part of a provision is held to be unlawful or unconstitutional, the remainder of this Charter shall not be affected. 
11.04. - Effective date of charter. 
This Charter shall become effective on March 15, 1998. 
THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE WAS ADOPTED BY THE VOTERS OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO, AT A SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION HELD ON DECEMBER 9, 1997; AMENDED BY THE VOTERS OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO, AT A REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION HELD ON MARCH 4, 2008; AND AMENDED BY THE VOTERS OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO, AT A REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION HELD ON MARCH 4, 2014. 
  
ATTEST: _____
JAVIER M. GONZALES, Mayor  
_____     
YOLANDA Y. VIGIL, CITY CLERK 
(SEAL) 
CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1-1 - TITLE; DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. 

1-1.1 - Short Title. 
    This code may be cited as the "Santa Fe City Code of 1987" or by the abbreviation "SFCC 1987." 
(Code 1973,  1-1; Ord. #1980-36,  1; Code 1981,  1-1-1) 
1-1.2 - Definitions. 
A.  Whenever a term is defined within the context of any law or ordinance, that specific meaning shall take precedence over the general definitions of this section. 
B.  As used in the Santa Fe City Code of 1987: 
    City means Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
    City manager means the person appointed by the mayor with the approval of the governing body; the manager is the chief administrative officer of the city. 
    Council means the councilors as a group, exclusive of the mayor. 
    County means Santa Fe County, New Mexico. 
    Governing body means the councilors and the mayor, or the councilors and a mayor pro tempore, meeting in a session which has been duly called in accordance with the state Open Meetings Act. 
    Majority means five (5) of the members of the governing body; extraordinary majorities may be specified in particular laws or ordinances, constituting a greater or lesser number, and the extraordinary majority shall apply in such specific cases. 
    Mayor means the elected mayor, who is the presiding officer of the governing body and the chief executive officer of the city. 
    Mayor pro tempore means the councilor selected to act as mayor in the absence of the mayor. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Preceding means the next before and following or succeeding means the next after. 
    Quorum means, in regard to a meeting of the governing body, at least five (5) members: either four (4) councilors plus the mayor, or five (5) councilors including the mayor pro tempore. 
    Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curb line or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means New Mexico. 
    Street means and shall include avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and means the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body. 
    Tenant or occupant means, when applied to a building or land, any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Voting majority means, given a quorum, a majority of those present, unless otherwise specified by law or ordinance. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Code 1973,  1-2; amended 9/30/80; SFCC 1981,  1-1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  12-2-2 NMSA 1978. 
1-1.3 - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of ordinance provisions, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body or repugnant to the context of the particular provision or ordinance: 
A.  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed according to such meaning; 
B.  Words importing the singular number may be extended to several persons or things, words importing the plural number may be applied to one (1) person or thing, and words importing the masculine gender only may be extended to the feminine; 
C.  Words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them unless otherwise expressed in the ordinance giving them authority; 
D.  A person reaches his "age of majority" on the first instant of his eighteenth birthday; 
E.  The word "annually" means per year, 
F.  "Keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as an agent or employee; 
G.  The words "land" and "real estate" includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature; 
H.  The word "misdemeanor" shall not have the meaning given it in the state Criminal Code, and should it be used in any ordinance ordained before or after the Santa Fe City Code of 1987, it shall be construed to mean "violation of ordinance" and such shall be punishable according to subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987; 
I.  The word "oath" includes "affirmation" in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases "swear" includes "affirm"; 
J.  "Owner", applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint-owner, tenant-in-common, joint-tenant, tenant-by-the-entirety or person holding a community interest, of the whole or a part of such building or land; 
K.  The word "person" may be extended for firms, associations and corporations; 
L.  The word "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests; "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidence of debt; and "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments; 
M.  "Public place" includes any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream; 
N.  The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive or directory; 
O.  The words "signature" or "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it, and the making of the mark witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness; 
P.  The present tense includes the future tense; 
Q.  Time shall be computed as follows: the first day is excluded and the last day included, unless the last day falls on Sunday, in which case, the time prescribed shall be extended to include the whole of the following Monday; 
R.  The words "written" and "in writing" may include printing, engraving or any other mode of representing words and letters except where the written signature or mark of any person is required; and 
S.  Whenever an ordinance is repealed, which repealed a former ordinance, such former ordinance shall not thereby be revived unless it is expressly provided. 
(Code 1973,  1-2; SFCC 1981  1-1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  12-2-2 NMSA 1978. 
1-1.4 - Section Headings. 
    The section headings following the section numbers of Santa Fe City Code of 1987, printed in capital letters, are intended to be generally descriptive of the contents of the section and shall not be considered a limitation of the section. 
(Code 1973,  1-4; SFCC 1981,  1-1-4) 
1-2 - SEVERABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. 
    If any part or application of the Santa Fe City Code of 1987 is held invalid, the remainder of its application to other situations or persons shall not be affected. 
(Code 1973,  1-5; SFCC 1981,  1-1-5) 
1-3 - GENERAL PENALTY. 

1-3.1 - General penalty; continuing violations; suspension; probation. 
A.  Any violation of the Santa Fe City Code of 1987, not specifically provided for in any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order to the contrary, is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day that any such violation continues constitutes a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
B.  The municipal court may, upon entry of a plea of guilty or judgment of conviction: 
(1)  Suspend in whole or part the execution of sentence; or 
(2)  Place the defendant on probation for a period not exceeding one (1) year on terms and conditions the court deems best; or both. 
C.  The municipal court may, as a condition of probation, require the defendant to serve a period of time in volunteer labor to be known as community service. The type of labor and period of service shall be at the sole discretion of the court; provided that any person receiving community service shall be immune from any civil liability other than gross negligence arising out of the community service, and any person who performs community service pursuant to court order or any criminal diversion program shall not be entitled to any wages, shall not be considered an employee for any purpose and shall not be entitled to workmen's compensation, unemployment benefits or any other benefits otherwise provided by law. As used in this paragraph, "community service" means any labor that benefits the public at large or any public, charitable or educational entity or institution. 
D.  Suspension of execution of the sentence or probation, or both, shall be granted only when the municipal judge is satisfied it will serve the ends of justice and of the public, and that the defendant's liability for any fine or other punishment imposed is fully discharged upon successful completion of the terms and conditions of probation. 
(Code 1953,  1-6; Code 1973,  1-6; SFCC 1981,  1-1-6; Ord. #1987-28,  1; Ord. #1990-10,  1) 
1-3.2 - Imposition of municipal court fees. 
A.  The city hereby imposes the following fees which shall be collected by the municipal court upon conviction from persons convicted of violating any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle, except those related to parking, or any ordinance that may be enforced by the imposition of a term of imprisonment: 
(1)  Corrections fee ..... $30.00 
(2)  Judicial education fee ..... $3.00 
(3)  Court automation fee ..... $6.00 
(4)  Court administrative fee ..... $10.00 
(5)  In-house automation fee ..... $2.00 
(6)  Public safety fee ..... $5.00 
B.  As used in this section, convicted means the defendant has been found guilty of a criminal charge by the municipal judge, either after trial, a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere. 
C.  The corrections fee shall be deposited in a special city fund and shall be used for the uses set forth in this paragraph. Upon deposit of any corrections fees into the special city fund, regardless of the time of imposition of any corrections fee, two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the corrections fee shall be used for housing municipal prisoners in a county jail or detention facility or housing juveniles in a detention facility and one-third ( 1/3 ) of the corrections fee shall be transferred into the city's general fund for the court related purposes set forth below. 
(1)  Municipal jailer or juvenile detention officer training; 
(2)  The construction planning, construction, operation and maintenance of a municipal jail or juvenile detention facility; 
(3)  Complying with match or contribution requirements for the receipt of federal funds relating to jails or juvenile detention facilities; 
(4)  Providing inpatient treatment or other substance abuse programs in conjunction with or as an alternative to jail sentencing; 
(5)  Defraying the cost of transporting prisoners to jails or juveniles to juvenile detention facilities; or 
(6)  Providing electronic monitoring systems. 
D.  The judicial education fee and the court automation fee shall be remitted to the state according to the applicable state law. 
E.  The court administrative fee shall be retained by the city for the municipal court. 
F.  The in-house automation fee shall be retained by the city and used for in-house automation systems in the municipal court. 
G.  The public safety fee shall be retained by the city for use by the police department. 
H.  Five dollars ($5.00) out of the ten dollar ($10.00) administrative fee shall be specifically earmarked for alternative sentencing programs at the municipal court. If the amount collected under this paragraph is more than is needed for this program, the funds may be used for other court programs or costs. 
I.  A person convicted of a violation of the provisions of the Controlled Substances Act [30-31-1 NMSA 1978] or a person convicted of distribution or possession of a controlled substance pursuant to Section 16-15 SFCC 1987 shall be assessed, in addition to any other fee or fine, a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to defray the costs of chemical and other analyses of controlled substances. Collection of such fees shall be transmitted to the administrative office of the courts pursuant to  31-12-9 NMSA 1978. 
J.  A person convicted of driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs in violation of Section 12-6-12.2 of the City of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Code shall be assessed by the court, in addition to any other fee or fine, the fees as set forth in said section. 
K.  Upon issuance of a bench warrant, the municipal court shall assess an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) against the individual whose arrest is commanded by the bench warrant. Money collected pursuant to the bench warrant fee assessment authorized by this subsection shall be deposited in the general fund of the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  1; Ord. #2007-34,  1; Ord. #2009-25,  1; Ord. #2010-15,  1; Ord. #2011-6) 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to impose fines, punishment or both,  35-14-11 NMSA 1978. 
1-3.3 - Code violations; summons to appear in court; arrest warrant. 
A.  In cases involving violations of the Santa Fe City Code of 1987 or other municipal ordinances not amounting to a breach of the peace, the first process shall be a citation or summons requiring the party charged to appear before the municipal court, at a time fixed in the citation or summons. Upon the failure of the party charged to appear, a warrant for his arrest shall be issued by the municipal judge for the offense specified in the citation or summons, commanding that the party charged be arrested and proceedings had as in the case when arrest is made upon a warrant in the first instance. 
B.  Any person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed may, upon order of the court convicting him, be committed to the county jail or other place provided by the city for the incarceration of offenders until the fine or penalty is fully paid. 
(Ord. #1963-4,  1; Code 1973,  1-7; SFCC 1981, 1-1-17; Ord. #2007-34,  2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  35-15-3 NMSA 1978. 
1-3.4 - Provision for Suspension of Sentence; Probation. 
A.  Upon entry of a plea of guilty or upon a judgment of conviction, the municipal court may suspend in whole or in part the execution of sentence; or may place the defendant on probation for a period not exceeding one (1) year on terms and conditions which the court deems best; or the court may do both. 
B.  Suspension of execution of the sentence, or probation, or both, shall be granted only when the municipal judge is satisfied it will serve the ends of justice and of the public. 
C.  Upon successful completion of the terms and conditions of probation, the liability of the defendant who has been placed on probation for any fine or other punishment imposed shall be fully discharged. 
(Ord. #1961-21,  1-3; Code 1973,  1-8; SFCC 1981,  1-1-18) 
State Law reference- Authorizing suspension,  35-15-14 NMSA 1978. 
1-3.5 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 1-3.5, Code Provision for Destruction of Arrest Records When Defendant is Adjudicated Not Guilty, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1973-15; Code 1973  1-10 and SFCC 1981  1-1-19, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-28. 
1-4 - RESERVED.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 1-4, Nuisances; Abatement Procedure, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1953  12-10, Code 1973  18-6 and SFCC 1981,  1-1-7 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-1. See Section 10-9 for Abatement of Nuisances. 

1-5 - SEAL OF THE CITY. 

1-5.1 - Adoption of seal; description. 
    A seal is adopted for the city, the impression of which shall be as follows: 
A.  In the center, the word "SEAL"; and 
B.  Surrounding such word, in a circle, the words "City of Santa Fe, New Mexico. Organized July 13, 1891 ". 
(Code 1953,  1-7; Code 1973,  1-11; SFCC 1981,  1-1-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-18-1 NMSA 1978. 
1-5.2 - Provision for affixation of city seal. 
    The seal of the city shall be affixed to all transcripts, orders, certificates and other documents which it may be necessary and proper to authenticate under the provisions of the Santa Fe City Code of 1987 city ordinances and laws of the state. The city clerk shall be the keeper of the city seal and shall affix it to all instruments which are required to be attested by the city seal. 
(Code 1953,  1-8, 2-59; Code 1973,  1-12, 2-83; SFCC 1981,  1-1-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-18-1 NMSA 1978. 
1-6 - QUITCLAIM DEEDS TO REAL ESTATE IN CITY. 

1-6.1 - Execution of quitclaim deeds. 
    The mayor and city clerk, in the name of the city and in their own names and offices, respectively, shall execute proper deeds of quitclaim to the persons entitled thereto pursuant to the Act of Congress, approved April 9, 1900, entitled "An Act to Settle the Title of Real Estate in the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico". The mayor and city clerk shall be named as grantors in such deeds. 
(Code 1953,  2-76; Code 1973,  2-106; SFCC 1981,  1-4-1) 
1-6.2 - Form of Quitclaim Deed; Seal of the City Required. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall provide and adopt a form of quitclaim deed to be used exclusively in making the deeds required by the Act of Congress cited in subsection 1-6.1, and the city clerk is authorized to affix the seal of the city to the quitclaim deeds. 
(Code 1953,  2-77, 2-78; Code 1973,  2-107; SFCC 1981,  1-4-2) 
1-6.3 - Presentation to city attorney for investigation. 
    Persons who desire to take advantage of the Act of Congress referred to in subsection 1-6.1, shall present their deeds for the signatures of the mayor and the city clerk with their evidence or proof of right of title to the city attorney for investigation. 
(Code 1953,  2-79; Code 1973,  2-108; SFCC 1981,  1-4-3) 
1-6.4 - Investigation of city attorney and public works department; report. 
    The city attorney, along with the public works department shall investigate all deeds presented for signatures of the mayor and city clerk, all abstracts of title, all deeds and other instruments in writing and means relied on as color of title, and all proofs of actual possession, and report on the same in writing to the mayor and city clerk, showing their approval or disapproval thereof with their reasons in the premises, accompanying their report with the proofs and the deed tendered for execution. 
(Code 1953,  2-80; Code 1973,  2-109; SFCC 1981,  1-4-4) 
1-6.5 - Conflicting claims; procedure. 
    Where more than one (1) person claims the same tract of land and adversely to each other and independently apply for deeds thereto, the mayor and city clerk may order a hearing on oral or written testimony and documentary evidence concerning such conflicting claims, giving notice in writing, to the persons interested, of the time and place of such hearing and whether the same will be on oral or written testimony and shall execute the deed to the person better entitled thereto on the proofs, remitting the failing party to the courts for final adjudication of the controversy. 
(Code 1953,  2-82; Code 1973,  2-110; SFCC 1981,  1-4-5) 
1-6.6 - Records of quitclaim deeds. 
    A proper record of all deeds issued under Sections 1-6.1 through 1-6.6 SFCC 1987 shall be kept in an appropriate book maintained by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(Code 1953,  2-84; Code 1973,  2-112; SFCC 1981,  1-4-6) 
1-7 - CODE OF ETHICS.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of SFCC 1981,  1-5-1-1-5-10 and Ordinance Nos. 1982-4, 1984-60, 1986-43, 1987-23, 1993-34, 1995-30, 1997-23, 1998-31, 1999-22, 2000-33 and 2001-16. 

1-7.1 - Title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Code of Ethics." 
(Ord. #2005-14,  1) 
1-7.2 - Statement of policy. 
    The proper operation of a democratic government requires that public officials and public employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that governmental decision and policy be without conflicts of interest; that public office or employment not be used for personal gain; and that the public has confidence in the integrity of its government. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  2) 
1-7.3 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purposes of the Code of Ethics are: 
A.  To fulfill the obligation imposed on the governing body by Section 2.01 of the city of Santa Fe Municipal Charter to adopt an ordinance establishing standards for the ethical conduct of all public officials and public employees of the city, and to provide consequences for violating such ethical standards; 
B.  To adopt standards of behavior for public officials and employees of the city of Santa Fe that insure that decisions are made without consideration of personal benefit to the decision-maker; 
C.  To provide clear guidance with respect to such standards by clarifying which acts are allowed and which are not; 
D.  To advance openness in city government by requiring disclosure by public officials or public employees and establishing a process for reviewing and resolving alleged violations of this section; and 
E.  To exercise to the fullest extent the legislative powers granted to the governing body by Article X, Section 6, of the New Mexico Constitution and the New Mexico Municipal Charter Act ( 3-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978) and to adopt a code of ethics which particularly suits the local concerns and needs of the city of Santa Fe without regard to any provisions of state law that may be inconsistent with the city's code. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  3; Ord. #2011-8,  1) 
1-7.4 - Quasi-judicial acts subject to additional standards. 
    It is recognized that public officials and public employees are frequently called upon to participate in adjudicatory ("quasi-judicial") proceedings. The city of Santa Fe Code of Ethics applies to public officials and employees acting in a quasi-judicial capacity. There are, however, additional standards of conduct that are required of public officials and employees when acting in a quasi-judicial capacity which standards are imposed by the New Mexico and United States Constitutions and which are not set out in this section. Under the United States and New Mexico Constitutions those standards prohibit official actions tainted by a decision-maker's conflicts of interest, bias and prejudice, prejudgment, or other conduct creating the actuality or the appearance of impropriety. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  4) 
1-7.5 - Definitions. 
    As used in the Code of Ethics: 
    Business means a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, or other profit-making enterprise. 
    Confidential information means information which is acquired by a public official or public employee by reason of his or her public office or public employment, which has not previously been made public, and which is not required to be made available to the public under the Inspection of Public Records Act ( 10-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978). 
    Conflict of interest means a specific and identifiable prospect of pecuniary gain or loss, other than a gain or loss that is de minimis in amount or shared with a substantial segment of the general public, to any of the individuals or entities here listed from an official act of any public official or employee: 
(1)  The public official or public employee who is to perform the official act; 
(2)  Any member of his or her family; 
(3)  Any business of which he or she or any member of his or her household is an owner; 
(4)  Any employer, client or customer from whom the public official or public employee knows or reasonably should know that he or she or any member of his or her household or any business of which he or she is an owner has received remuneration of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) during the year preceding the official act; 
(5)  Any civic group, labor union, or social, charitable or religious organization of which the public official or public employee or a member of his or her household is an officer or director; or 
(6)  Any business or any of its owners, if the public official or public employee knows or reasonably should know that the business or any of its owners, has made "contributions" or has directed the making of "contributions," as that term is defined in subsection 9-2.3(I) SFCC 1987, to the public official's or public employee's campaign for elected office in an aggregate amount greater than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) during the two (2) years preceding the official act. A contribution made before March 18, 2014, shall not be counted toward the aggregate total. 
    Employer, in the case of a person who is employed by a governmental entity other than the city, means the governmental department for which the person works. 
    Family of an individual means members of the individual's household, his or her children, step-children, brothers, sisters, parents, step-parents, domestic partner and all persons claimed as dependents on the individual's latest federal income tax return. 
    Financial benefit means any money, service, license, permit, contract, loan, travel, entertainment, gratuity or any other thing of monetary value or any promise of any of these. 
    Governing body means the mayor and the city council. 
    Governmental body means the governing body and any board, commission or committee appointed by the governing body or by the mayor with the advice and consent of the governing body. 
    Household of an individual means all persons whose primary residence is in the individual's home, including non-relatives, who are not rent-payers or employees. 
    Official act means an official decision, vote including, but not limited to items on a consent calendar, recommendation, approval, disapproval or other action which involves the use of discretionary authority. 
    Owner of a business means each of the business's proprietors, partners or holders of more than two (2) percent of its outstanding stock. 
    Public employee means any exempt, classified, probationary, temporary, term or part-time employee of the city of Santa Fe except the municipal judge, the city manager, the city clerk, the city attorney and the members of the governing body. 
    Public official means the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk and any member of a governmental body, including the governing body. 
    Subordinate of a public official or public employee means a public employee over whose work for the city the public official or public employee has direction, supervision or control. All public officials and public employees except other members of the governing body are deemed to be subordinates of each member of the governing body. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  5; Ord. #2011-8,  2; Ord. #2014-12,  1) 
1-7.6 - Public officials and public employees; disclosure. 
A.  Each public official and public employee shall be given a copy of the Code of Ethics upon election, appointment or employment and shall sign a statement to the effect that the public official or public employee has received the Code of Ethics and understands that the public official or public employee shall abide by its terms and conditions. The city attorney's office shall conduct an annual review of the Code of Ethics for all public employees. 
B.  Upon election, appointment, or employment, public officials and department heads shall disclose in writing to the city clerk the information listed below. This information shall be updated every July and shall be available to the public at all times. 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Address and telephone number; 
(3)  Employer, if other than the city; 
(4)  Professional, occupational or business licenses; 
(5)  Membership on board of directors of corporations, public or private associations or organizations; and 
(6)  Businesses of which he or she is an owner. 
C.  The information on the disclosures shall be made available by the city clerk for inspection, upon request. In addition, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the disclosure statement for those public employees required to make disclosures to the personnel office for inclusion in the public employee's personnel file. The ethics and campaign review board shall be given copies of the disclosures for its review. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  6; Ord. #2011-8,  3) 
1-7.7 - Improper gifts; improper transactions; representation of private interests; conflicts of interest; and other prohibitions. 
A.  Improper Gifts to Public Officials and Employees. A public official or public employee shall not request or receive, directly or indirectly, a gift or other financial benefit, including, but not limited to, travel and accommodations, from any person or entity which, to the knowledge of the public official or public employee, has any prospect of direct or indirect pecuniary gain or loss from any official act to be performed by the public official or public employee, other than a gain or loss shared with a substantial segment of the general public. If a public official or public employee has received a gift or other financial benefit from a person or entity within the last calendar year and then discovers that this person or entity has any prospect of direct or indirect pecuniary gain or loss from any official act to be performed by the public official or public employee, that public official or public employee shall return the gift or shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest and shall deal with that conflict under the provisions of subsection 1-7.7M. SFCC 1987. However, nothing in this paragraph A. shall be deemed to prohibit any of the following: 
(1)  An occasional meal or nonpecuniary gift with a fair market value not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) valued in a manner consistent with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) rules. 
(a)  If relevant to the performance of his or her official duties, members of the governing body, the city manager, the city attorney, or the city clerk may receive an occasional non-pecuniary gift not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); however, such person shall report the gift, its value and the provider to the city clerk's office within ten (10) days of receipt of the gift, and such gift report shall be immediately posted by the city clerk, on the city's website. 
(b)  If relevant to the performance of his or her official duties, a public employee may receive an occasional non-pecuniary gift not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); however, such person shall report the gift, its value and the provider to the city manager and the public employee shall obtain the manager's approval prior to receiving the gift, and if approved, such gift report shall be immediately posted by the city clerk, on the city's website; 
(2)  An award, publicly presented in recognition of public service, having a fair market value not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) valued in a manner consistent with IRS rules except for employee of the month recognition or non-profit or civic recognition of a public employee that does not otherwise violate the Code of Ethics; 
(3)  A campaign contribution that is properly received and reported in the manner required by Section 9-2 SFCC 1987; 
(4)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the business of making loans; or 
(5)  Compensation for services rendered or capital invested or payment for a sale of property which is normal and reasonable in amount, commensurate with the value of the property sold or services rendered or the magnitude of the risk undertaken on the investment, and in no way increased or enhanced by reason of the recipient's position as a public official or public employee. 
B.  Improper Transactions with the City. Elected officials shall not accept paid employment from the city of Santa Fe for a period of one (1) year following the leaving of public office. A public official or public employee shall not enter into a contract or transaction with the city of Santa Fe during his or her term of office or employment or for a period of one (1) year following the leaving of public office or public employment when the contract or transaction is a result of an official act by that public official or public employee; provided, however, that nothing in this paragraph B. shall be deemed to prohibit a present or former public official or public employee from seeking or obtaining, on his or her own behalf, a city permit, license or service that is provided by the city on the same terms and conditions to a substantial segment of the general public. 
C.  Representation of Private Interests. 
(1)  A governing body member, the city manager, the city attorney and the city clerk shall not, during his or her term of office or within one (1) year after the termination thereof, accept monetary compensation from a third party for consulting with, representing or advising that party regarding any transaction with the city or matter before the city. 
(2)  A public employee shall not, during his or her term of employment or within one (1) year after the termination thereof, accept monetary compensation from a third party for consulting with, representing or advising that party regarding any transaction with the city department that the public employee is or was employed by or any matter before such city department in which the public employee has had or reasonably should expect to have any influence or personal involvement in his or her capacity as a city employee. 
(3)  A governmental body member, excluding members of the governing body, shall not, during his or her term of office or within one (1) year after the termination thereof, accept monetary compensation from a third party for consulting with, representing or advising that party regarding any transaction with such governmental body or matter before such governmental body in which he or she has had or reasonably should expect to have any influence or personal involvement in his or her capacity as a governmental body member. 
D.  Misuse of Confidential Information. A public official or public employee shall not use or disclose confidential information when he or she knows or reasonably should know that the use or disclosure will or may result in a financial gain or the avoidance of a financial loss on the part of any person or entity other than the city. 
E.  Misuse of City Resources. A public official or public employee shall not use city services, personnel or equipment for personal benefit, convenience or profit, except when such use is generally available to the public. 
F.  Nepotism. A public official or public employee shall not perform any act to obtain the employment or to influence the employment by the city of a member of his or her family. No public official or public employee shall serve as the immediate supervisor of a member of his or her family. 
G.  Financial Dealings with Subordinates. A public official or public employee shall not knowingly require, expressly or impliedly, or authorize another person to require that any subordinate of the public official or public employee engage in a non-official financial transaction, including a personal loan or charitable contribution. 
H.  Improper Political Campaigning. A public official or public employee shall not knowingly request or authorize another person to request that any subordinate of the public official or public employee make a campaign contribution or provide services to a political campaign, and shall not engage in political campaigning while on duty for the city, or use city funds, supplies, vehicles or facilities to benefit or assist a political campaign. 
I.  City Employment as a Political Reward. A public official or public employee shall not promise an appointment or the use of his or her influence to obtain an appointment to any position with the city as a reward for any political activity or contribution. 
J.  Honoraria. A public official or public employee shall not request or receive an honorarium for a speech or service rendered in the performance of his or her duties as a public official or public employee. For the purposes of this paragraph J., "honorarium" means payment of money, or any other thing of monetary value, but does not include reasonable reimbursement for meals, lodging or actual travel expenses incurred in making the speech or rendering the service. However, the public official or public employee shall report all such reimbursement to the city clerk within ten (10) days of receipt. 
K.  Workplace Bullying by Governing Body Members. A governing body member shall not intentionally bully any public employee, including the city manager, city attorney or city clerk. For purposes of this paragraph, workplace bullying means intentional behavior intended to create an abusive work environment for a public employee or public employees. Bullying behavior is behavior in the workplace that a reasonable person would find hostile, offensive, and not obviously related to the city of Santa Fe's legitimate business interests. Workplace bullying includes, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Use of disrespectful and devaluing language; 
(2)  Persistent or constant criticism in front of other persons (including co-workers, vendors, contractors or members of the public) for the purpose of humiliating an employee; 
(3)  Behavior or language that frightens, humiliates, belittles or degrades, including criticism that is delivered with yelling and screaming; 
(4)  Threats and intimidation, including threats to discipline or terminate a public employee. 
L.  Retaliation and Whistleblower Protection. A public official or public employee shall not be dismissed, threatened with dismissal, or otherwise singled out for retaliation for the reason that the person has filed a complaint of violation of this Code of Ethics or any other violation of a legal prohibition or requirement or has given evidence or participated in an investigation of any such violation. Any act in violation of this paragraph L. shall be deemed a violation of the Code of Ethics. The outcome of the original ethics complaint shall not be deemed relevant to the complaint of retaliation itself. 
M.  Conflicts of Interest. The following shall govern conflicts of interest: 
(1)  A public official or public employee who has a conflict of interest as defined in subsection 1-7.5 SFCC 1987 shall immediately disclose the conflict in the following manner: 
(a)  In the case of a member of a governmental body, to the governmental body at a public meeting; 
(b)  In the case of the city manager, the city attorney or the city clerk, to the governing body at a public meeting, and 
(c)  In the case of a public employee, to the city manager. 
(2)  A public official or public employee shall not perform an official act or attempt to influence another person to perform an official act in any matter in which he or she has a conflict of interest. 
(3)  If compliance with paragraph M.(2) above by a public official or public employee would deprive a governmental body of a quorum for taking necessary action or would render the city unable to take necessary action on any matter, and it is deemed an emergency, the public official or public employee shall be excused from such compliance when he or she has made the disclosure required by paragraph M.(1) above. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  7; Ord. #2011-8,  4; Ord. #2014-15; Ord. #2016-7) 
1-7.8 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 1-7.8, Discharge of Alleged Conflict of Interest, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2005-14, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2011-8. 
1-7.9 - Enforcement. 
A.  The Code of Ethics shall be enforced by the ethics and campaign review board pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-16 SFCC 1987. 
B.  The governing body may by separate ordinance establish an office of inspector general. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  12; Ord. #2011-8,  6) 
1-7.10 - Primacy of collective bargaining agreements. 
    In any situation where there is a conflict between any aspect of the Code of Ethics and a collective bargaining agreement, the agreement shall control. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  14) 
1-7.11 - Annual review. 
    The Code of Ethics shall be reviewed by the governing body on an annual basis not later than June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  15) 
1-8 - HUMAN RIGHTS. 

1-8.1 - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its power for the protection of the public welfare to prohibit discrimination in places of accommodation, resort or amusement due to race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
(Ord. #1958-19,  2; Code 1973,  14-2; SFCC 1981,  2-12-1) 
1-8.2 - Declaration; rights of persons. 
    All persons have the right to the full and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any place of public accommodation, resort or amusement within the city, subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all persons. This right is recognized and declared to be a civil right. 
(Ord. #1958-19,  3; Code 1973,  14-3; SFCC 1981,  2-12-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  28-1-1 through 28-1-14 NMSA 1978. 
CHAPTER II - ADMINISTRATION 
2-1 - MAYOR AND COUNCILORS. 

2-1.1 - Designation of council; mayor; and governing body. 
    The members of the city council, exclusive of the mayor, shall be known and designated as councilors. The mayor and the council together are the governing body of the city. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  2-11.2 by Ord. #1978-43; Ord. #1980-38,  3; SFCC 1981,  1-1-10) 
2-1.2 - Compensation of mayor and city councilors. 
    The mayor shall receive compensation for his or her service to the city as determined by the independent salary commission pursuant to Section 6-19 SFCC 1987. 
    The councilors shall receive compensation for their service to the city, in an amount equal to the maximum amount authorized by the legislature to be paid county commissions in Class "A" counties, as provided in Section 4-44-4 NMSA 1978, and as may be amended thereafter from time to time. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-20; Ord. #1985-66,  1; Ord. #1991-12,  1; Ord. #2003-2,  1; Ord. No. 2016-43  1) 
2-1.3 - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The mayor of the city shall be the chief executive officer of the city and it shall be his special duty to cause the ordinances and regulations of the city to be faithfully and constantly obeyed. He shall have and exercise within the city limits the power conferred on the sheriffs of counties to suppress disorders and keep the peace. He shall also perform such other duties compatible with the nature of his office as the city council may from time to time require. 
(Code 1953,  2-2; Code 1973,  2-12; Ord. #1981-15,  1; SFCC 1981,  1-1-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-11-1 NMSA 1978. 
2-1.4 - Appointments of committees, boards and commissions. 
A.  The mayor shall include in the city council agenda packet, for the meeting at which a nomination or appointment shall be made, the names and qualifications of prospective appointees to serve on any city committee, board, commission or task force. 
B.  There shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, at the first meeting of the governing body, or within ninety (90) days, the following: 
(1)  Such standing committees as the mayor and councilors deem appropriate; 
(2)  Such special committees as the mayor and councilors deem appropriate at that time, and from time to time during the year; and 
(3)  Members to the boards and commissions which have been created by ordinance, such members as are specified in the creating ordinance, and in the manner appropriate to each ordinance. 
C.  The appointees of paragraph A of this subsection shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. Where appointments are to terms of specified duration, the appointee to a vacancy shall be appointed to the remainder of the unexpired term. 
D.  Membership of the city of Santa Fe public works committee and finance committee shall consist of members of the Santa Fe governing body. 
E.  In the event a vacancy occurs in any committee, board or commission created pursuant to paragraph B above, the mayor shall make an appointment to fill that vacancy within ninety (90) days, in accordance with this section. 
F.  In the event a special committee is created at any time during the year, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall make appointments to fill that committee within ninety (90) days. 
(Code 1953,  2-38; Code 1973,  2-47; Ord. #1981-15,  3; SFCC 1981,  1-1-22; Ord. #1996-18,  1; Ord. #1996-19,  1; Ord. #1996-39,  1) 
Editor's note- As to appointment of city manager, see  2-4-3 SFCC 1987. 
State Law reference- Appointments,  3-11-5 NMSA 1978. 
2-1.5 - Voting on appointments. 
    All appointments by the mayor and city council shall be voted upon, and the concurrence of a majority shall be required, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. The names of those who voted and the vote each candidate received on the vote resulting in an appointment shall be recorded. 
(Code 1953,  2-39; Code 1973,  2-48; SFCC 1981,  1-1-23) 
State Law reference- Appointments,  3-11-5 NMSA 1978. 
2-1.6 - Mayor and city clerk to sign all commissions, licenses, permits; use of facsimile signature. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall sign all commissions, licenses and permits granted by the governing body and other acts that the law or ordinances may require, or the commissions, licenses and permits may be as authenticated under the Uniform Facsimile Signature of Public Officials Act. 
(Code 1953,  2-3; Code 1973,  2-13; SFCC 1981,  1-1-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-11-7 NMSA 1978. 
2-1.7 - Management of finances and property. 
    The governing body of the city shall have the management and control of the finances of the city, and of all the property, real and personal, belonging to the city. 
(Code 1953,  2-1; Code 1973,  2-11; SFCC 1981,  1-1.25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-12-3A(9) NMSA 1978. 
2-1.8 - Election of mayor pro tempore. 
    The members of the city council shall, at the first meeting after the election, elect from their own body a mayor pro tempore to act in the absence of the mayor, except as may otherwise be provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1953,  2-5; Code 1973,  2-15; SFCC 1981,  1-1-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-12-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-1.9 - Restrictions on governing body; administration of personnel system. 
    The governing body, in accordance with Section 3-12-2 NMSA 1978, shall neither perform, collectively nor individually, any executive function in the administration of the personnel system except as authorized by law and the City Personnel Act. Such executive functions of the governing body as a whole are set forth as follows: 
A.  To employ and remove the city manager; 
B.  To make collective recommendations to the city manager on general personnel policies; 
C.  To approve rules and regulations to implement the City Personnel Act; 
D.  To approve by a majority vote of the governing body any proposed reorganization of city government which either creates or abolishes a department. 
(Ord. #1972-3, Art. 2,  3; Code 1973,  21-15; SFCC 1981,  1-1.27; Ord. #1996-49,  1) 
2-1.10 - Restriction on appointment of mayor or council to municipal office. 
    The mayor and councilors shall not, during the time for which elected, and for one (1) year thereafter, be appointed to any municipal office which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have been increased, during the term for which elected, except in such cases as are provided by law. 
(Code 1953,  2-4; Code 1973,  2-14; SFCC 1981,  1-1-28) 
State Law reference- New Mexico Constitution, Art. IV,  27 and 28. 
2-1.11 - Rules of order; appointment of parliamentarian; training. 
A.  The governing body shall make or adopt and enforce a complete set of rules of order, and shall provide for the distribution to the appropriate members and staff. 
B.  The mayor shall select from the council membership one (1) councilor who shall be the parliamentarian and upon appointment shall receive training in parliamentary procedure. The city attorney, or his designee, shall also receive periodic training in parliamentary procedure. Annually, the parliamentarian and the city attorney shall provide an overview of parliamentary procedure to the governing body. 
(Code 1953,  2-4; Code 1973,  2-14; SFCC 1981,  1-1-28; Ord. #2012-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-12-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-1.12 - Call to special meeting; service of notice. 
    The mayor, or a majority of the members of the governing body, may call a special meeting. Notice of special meetings shall be served by written notice to each member of the governing body at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance of the meeting and shall be personally served on each member, or left at each member's usual place of residence. Such reasonable notice shall be served by the city manager or his authorized delegate and shall contain the time and place of the special meeting and the purpose of the special meeting. The certification of service of the notice shall become a part of the minutes of the special meeting. 
(Code 1953,  2-7; Ord. #1971-6; Code 1973,  2-17; SFCC 1981,  1-1.30; Ord. #1992-6,  1) 
2-1.13 - Standing committees. 
A.  Standing committee means an advisory committee, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, whose work is to be generally continuous and a part of the fundamental concerns of the governing body. 
B.  Except where the content of a law or ordinance specifies a different meaning, which shall apply in that case, the definition of standing committee in paragraph A of this subsection shall apply throughout the Santa Fe City Code of 1987. 
C.  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint the members of the standing committees at the organizational meeting of the governing body and at such other times as the governing body deems appropriate. 
D.  All standing committees shall consist of three (3) members unless otherwise provided by the governing body. 
(Code 1953,  2-29; Ord. #1968-8,  1; Code 1973,  2-38; Ord. #1982-28,  1; SFCC 1981,  1-1-31) 
2-1.14 - Special committees. 
A.  Special committee means an ad hoc advisory group which, in the discretion of the mayor or council, will facilitate the policy-making function of municipal government; such committee is appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council and may be comprised of councilors and citizens-at-large, or entirely of citizens-at-large. 
B.  Except where the context of a law or ordinance specifies a different meaning which shall apply in that case, the definition of special committee in paragraph A of this subsection shall apply throughout the Santa Fe City Code of 1987. 
C.  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint the members of the special committees at the organizational meeting of the governing body and at such other times as the governing body deems appropriate. 
D.  With the submission of their final report, or when the special committee's task is completed, the special committee is automatically dissolved. 
(Code 1953,  2-31; Code 1973,  2-40; SFCC 1981,  1-1-32) 
2-1.15 - Committees; commissions and boards to report to governing body. 
    The standing and special committees, boards and commissions of the governing body shall keep minutes of each public meeting. Copies of these minutes shall be submitted to the governing body in accordance with the Open Meetings Resolution. 
(Code 1953,  2-28; Code 1973,  2-37; Resolution No. 1979-40; SFCC 1981,  1-1-33) 
2-1.16 - Public utilities standing committee. 
    The mayor shall designate with the approval of the city council a standing committee comprised of five (5) members of the governing body which shall provide continuing oversight of the operations of the city's water, wastewater and solid waste collection and disposal utilities, study and solicit public comment and make recommendations to the governing body concerning annual operating budgets, capital improvements, the issuance of debt instruments, operational policies, procedures, rules and regulations, franchise agreements, for instance for gas, electricity, telephone and other utilities and utility service rates and fees based on sound business principles and wise stewardship of natural resources and in accordance with revenue requirements that may be established through bond covenants. 
(Ord. #1996-4) 
2-1.17 - Settlements; insurance claims. 
A.  Litigation settlements shall be a matter of public record subject to inspection. 
B.  The risk management division of the city of Santa Fe shall submit a quarterly report to the governing body of liability insurance claims filed against the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1998-15,  1) 
2-2 - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS. 

2-2.1 - Style and nature of ordinances. 
A.  The style of all ordinances shall be: "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE": 
B.  "Ordinance" is the term used to designate the enactment of the legislative body of a municipal corporation. It is a rule established by authority; a permanent rule of action; a law. 
(Code 1953,  2-35; Code 1973,  2-41; SFCC 1981,  1-1-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-17-2 NMSA 1978; see also Black's Law Dictionary, 4th ed. rev., St. Paul, 1968. 
2-2.2 - Style and nature of resolutions. 
A.  The style of all resolutions shall be: "BE IT RESOLVED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE": 
B.  A "resolution" is the formal expression of the opinion or will of the governing body, adopted by vote. 
(Code 1953,  2-35; Code 1973,  2-41; SFCC 1981,  1-1-35) 
Editor's note- See Black's Law Dictionary, 4th ed. rev., St. Paul, 1968. 
2-2.3 - Ordinances; notice by publication. 
A.  Notice by publication of the title and subject matter of any ordinance proposed for adoption by the governing body must take place no less than two (2) weeks prior to consideration of final action upon the ordinance in open session of the governing body. This section shall not apply to ordinances dealing with an emergency declared by the chairman of the governing body or the mayor, as the case may be, to be an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare of the municipality, or to ordinances the subject matter of which is amending the city zoning map, provided the amendment to the zoning map has been considered by, and recommended to the governing body by the planning commission. It is sufficient defense to any suit or prosecution to show that no notice by publication was made. 
B.  Notice of the proposed ordinance shall be published, by title and a general summary of the proposed ordinance, one (1) time as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
C.  Copies of the proposed ordinance shall be available to interested persons during normal business hours of the city clerk upon request and payment of a reasonable charge beginning with the date of publication and continuing to the date of consideration by the governing body. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-17-3, NMSA 1978. 
2-2.4 - Ordinances; effective date; proof of publication. 
A.  An ordinance shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose, shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer of the governing body and the city clerk, and shall bear the seal of the city. The ordinance shall be published one (1) time either in its entirety or by title and a general summary of the subject matter contained in the ordinance, whichever the governing body elects to do. 
B.  An ordinance shall not become effective until five (5) days after it has been published, unless otherwise provided by law. 
C.  If the ordinances of the city are codified, or codified and revised, it is not necessary to publish the entire codification. An ordinance, referring to the codification by title only and specifying one (1) place in the city where the codification may be inspected during normal business hours of the city clerk may be published in lieu of the complete codification. 
D.  Any court shall accept the following prima facie evidence that an ordinance has been published: 
(1)  The book in which the ordinances of the municipality are recorded; 
(2)  Any copy of an ordinance certified by the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy; 
(3)  Any ordinance published in book or pamphlet form under the authority of the municipality; or 
(4)  Any codification of ordinances prepared under the authority of the municipality. It is sufficient defense to any suit or prosecution to show that no publication was made. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-17-5, NMSA 1978. 
2-2.5 - Adoption of codes by reference; availability of copies. 
A.  A municipality may adopt by ordinance the conditions, provisions, limitations and terms of codes authorized by Section 3-17-6 NMSA 1978 or any other code not in conflict with the laws of New Mexico or valid regulations issued by any board or agency of New Mexico authorized to issue regulations. Any code so adopted shall provide for minimum requirements at least equal to the state requirements on the same subject. 
B.  An ordinance adopting any such code need only refer to the proper title and date of the code, without setting forth the code's conditions, provisions, limitations and terms, and may include any exception or deletion to the code by setting forth the exception or deletion. The ordinance shall further specify at least one (1) place within the city where the code is available for inspection during the normal business hours of the city clerk. A copy of the code shall be available upon request and payment of a reasonable charge. 
C.  Any amendment to such a code may be adopted in the same manner as other ordinances are adopted. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-17-6 NMSA 1981. 
2-2.6 - Procedure for the adoption of ordinances, resolutions and orders to enter contracts; voting. 
    In the passage or adoption of every ordinance and every resolution or order to enter into contract by the governing body, the ayes and nays shall be called and recorded; and to pass or adopt any ordinance or any such resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of members elected to the governing body is required. 
(Code 1953,  2-32; Code 1973,  2-42; SFCC 1981,  1-1-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-12-2 and 3-17-4 NMSA 1978. See also A.G. Opinion No. 69-148. 
2-2.7 - Approval by mayor of ordinance, resolution or other legislative action. 
    Within three (3) days after the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or other legislative action, the mayor shall validate the action by endorsing it with his signature. 
(Code 1953,  2-33, 2-34; Code 1973,  2-43, 2-44; Ord. #1981-15,  2; SFCC 1981,  1-1-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-17-4B NMSA 1978. 
2-2.8 - Repeal and amendment of ordinance. 
    Whenever any ordinance or any part thereof shall be repealed or amended by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or any part thereof thus repealed or amended shall continue in force until the publication and going into effect of the ordinance repealing or amending the same. No suit, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, received or accrued, under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall be affected, released or discharged by such repeal or amendment. 
(Code 1953,  2-36; Code 1973,  2-45; SFCC 1981,  1-1-41) 
2-2.9 - Repeal of repealing or amending ordinance. 
    Whenever any ordinance repealing or amending a former ordinance shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance unless it shall be so expressly provided therein. 
(Code 1953,  2-37; Code 1973,  2-46; SFCC 1981,  1-1-42) 
2-2.10 - Fiscal impact reports; ordinances and resolutions. 
A.  For the purpose of regulating the immediate and apparent long-range fiscal implications of proposed ordinances and resolutions, the City of Santa Fe Rules and Instructions for Fiscal Impact Reports is adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out herein.* 
B.  Fiscal impact reports shall be completed for all proposed ordinances and resolutions to be considered for adoption by the governing body. 
C.  A copy of the City of Santa Fe Rules and Instructions for Fiscal Impact Reports shall be kept for distribution at the city of Santa Fe finance office. 
D.  Completed fiscal impact reports shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. #1997-25,  1) 
2-3 - MUNICIPAL COURT. 

2-3.1 - Municipal court established; judge. 
    There is created the "municipal court" for the city, which court shall be presided over by the "municipal judge." The municipal judge shall be elected pursuant to municipal elections in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1953,  2-75; Ord. #1972-5; Code 1973,  2-104, 2-105; Ord. #1974-13,  1; SFCC 1981,  1-1-11; Ord. #1998-13,  1; Ord. #1999-15,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  35-14-1 NMSA 1978. 
2-3.2 - Municipal court jurisdiction. 
    The municipal court has jurisdiction over all offenses and complaints under ordinances of the city and may issue subpoenas and warrants and punish for contempt, and has such other jurisdiction as may be prescribed by state law. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-12) 
Editor's note- The City of Santa Fe Rules and Instructions for Fiscal Impact Reports may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  35-14-2 NMSA 1978. 
2-3.3 - Qualifications and salary of the municipal judge. 
    The municipal judge shall: 
A.  Be a registered voter who resides in the city of Santa Fe and is a licensed member of the New Mexico Bar; 
B.  Take the oath prescribed by subsection 2-7.1, SFCC 1987, and furnish a surety bond in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Such bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the judge's duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city; and 
C.  Receive an annual salary, in an amount equal to ninety (90) percent of the salary set for New Mexico state district court judges per annum less mandatory deductions including but not limited to FICA, federal withholding tax and any other voluntary deductions such as insurance. As set forth in Section 7.07 of the Santa Fe Municipal Charter, the governing body shall review and set the salary for the municipal judge at least every four (4) years. 
D.  Have the following programs or such other alternative and equivalent programs as the municipal judge may deem appropriate: 
(1)  Design, implementation, revision and enhancement of a drug court program including but not limited to grant writing, additional training, public speaking, educational and promotional efforts necessary to implement said program. 
(2)  Design, implementation, revision and enhancement of a home detention program intended to economize on municipal expenditures for incarceration. 
(3)  Design, implementation, revision and enhancement of a personal values alternative sentencing program for offenders between the ages of eighteen (18) and twenty-five (25) who plead guilty to any act of violence. 
(4)  Design, implementation, revision and enhancement of other alternative sentencing programs including but not limited to: 
(a)  Puentas course conducted in Spanish designed to instruct non-English speaking motorists of the laws of the state of New Mexico for operating motor vehicles. 
(b)  Options for those who have revoked drivers licenses instructing said persons in alternative means of facilitating mobility while the license is in revoked status. 
(c)  Spanish drivers under the influence program for Spanish speaking offenders convicted of driving under the influence. 
(5)  Implement and oversee screening programs for jailable offenses in order to minimize incarceration and maximize alternative treatment modalities. This includes on-site visits to referral agencies to determine curriculums and treatment by providers. 
(6)  Oversee tracking of and compliance with the community service work program and shall access the needs of recipient non-profit agencies and the community. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-13; Ord. #1988-26,  1; Ord. #1996-48,  1; Ord. #2000-44,  1; #2001-14,  1; Ord. #2008-12,  1; Ord. #2012-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-8-6 and 35-14-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-3.4 - Municipal judge; election; term; vacancy; temporary incapacity or absence. 
A.  Municipal judges shall be elected for terms of four (4) years, at a regular municipal election. 
B.  The governing body may fill vacancies by appointment of a municipal judge to serve until the next regular municipal election. 
C.  During the temporary absence or incapacity of the municipal judge, any registered voter may be appointed by the governing body to the office of municipal judge and may hear all cases that arise under the ordinance. The temporary judge must submit monthly reports in the same manner as the municipal judge. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  35-14-4 and 35-14-5 NMSA 1978. 
2-3.5 - Reporting by the municipal judge. 
A.  The municipal judge shall make monthly written reports to the governing body of all money collected: 
(1)  The reports shall be filed, and the money collected be paid to the city by the tenth of the month following collection; 
(2)  The report must include the name of the person who paid the money, the amount paid, the purpose of the payment and the date on which the payment was made; and 
(3)  Failure to turn in the required reports or money is punishable pursuant to Section 35-14-9 NMSA 1978. 
B.  The municipal judge shall make a semi-annual state of the court presentation to the governing body. Such presentation shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Impact of laws recently adopted by the governing body on court operations; 
(2)  Effectiveness of the laws adopted by the governing body; 
(3)  Summary of municipal court operations; 
(4)  Assessment of municipal court operational needs; 
(5)  Additional information as may be requested by the governing body; and 
(6)  Additional information from the municipal judge, including goals and objectives. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-15; Ord. #2006-57,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  35-14-7 and 35-14-8 NMSA 1978. 
2-3.6 - Judicial training required for municipal judge. 
    The municipal judge shall annually, as a condition of discharging the duties of the office, successfully complete a judicial training program conducted under the authority, or with the approval of, the court administrator, unless exempted from this requirement by the chief justice of the New Mexico supreme court. The municipal judge shall not receive salary until he has successfully completed, or been exempted from, the required judicial training program. 
(SFCC 1981,  1-1-16) 
2-3.7 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 2-3.7, Appointment of a Court Administrator, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1998-13 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1999-15. 
2-4 - CITY MANAGER. 

2-4.1 - Office of city manager established. 
    The office of city manager is established. The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  1; Code 1973,  2-55; Ord. #1981-15,  6; SFCC 1981,  2-1-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-14-13 and 3-14-14 NMSA 1978. 
2-4.2 - Qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be selected and appointed solely on the basis of his training, experience and other qualifications for office as hereinafter prescribed without regard for affiliation, or lack of affiliation with any political party or other organization. 
(Code 1973,  2-55.1 by Ord. #1981-15,  7; SFCC 1981,  2-1-2) 
2-4.3 - Appointment; dismissal. 
A.  The mayor, within ninety (90) days of the beginning date of the vacancy in the office of the city manager, shall submit to the city council, at least seven (7) days before the meeting at which the nomination of the appointee shall be made, the name and qualifications of the mayor's prospective appointee to serve as city manager. The governing body, at its next regular meeting shall accept or reject the nomination by a majority vote of all the members of the governing body. 
B.  The council may dismiss the city manager by a majority vote of all members of the governing body, at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
C.  The mayor may dismiss the city manager by a majority vote of all members of the governing body, at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  1; Code 1973,  2-56; Ord. #1981-15,  8; SFCC 1981,  2-1-3; Ord. #1996-18,  2) 
State Law reference- Manager's appointment,  3-13-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-4.4 - Restriction on appointment of elective officers to city manager position. 
    No elective officer of the city shall be appointed city manager during the term for which he was elected, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of his term. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  1; Code 1973,  2-58; SFCC 1981,  2-1-4) 
2-4.5 - Oath and bond requirements. 
    The city manager shall take the oath prescribed by subsection 2-7.1 and shall furnish a surety bond in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Such bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  9; Code 1973,  2-61; SFCC 1981,  2-1-5) 
2-4.6 - Powers 
and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall: 
A.  Be the chief administrator officer of the city, and be the contracting officer of the city, with the approval of the governing body. The city manager shall enter into or terminate the following types of contracts or agreements only with the express approval of the governing body. This does not change the city manager's authority already established in the city's procurement code. 
(1)  Memoranda of understanding (MOUs), joint powers agreements (JPAs), or any other agreement or contract with a value that exceeds the authority given to the city manager under the city's procurement code. For the purposes of this provision governmental entity includes but is not limited to; counties, states, federal agencies, housing authorities, tribes or intergovernmental agencies; 
(2)  Agreements on land use issued that modify the terms of land use approvals made by the governing body or any other public decision-making body to whom the governing body has delegated some of its zoning and land use authority, or agreements on land use issues that deviate from the ordinances contained in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 or any plans or agreements that have been approved under those ordinances except as may be authorized in Chapter 14 or by such agreement. 
B.  Employ and discharge all municipal employees in accordance with the city's personnel rules and regulations, collective bargaining agreements and other applicable policies and ordinances; 
C.  Coordinate and supervise the activities and operations of the various departments established by the governing body within the city government, and efficiently manage the administrative affairs of the city; 
D.  Carry out, expeditiously and efficiently, the programs and policies adopted by the governing body and cause to be enforced all ordinances and regulations adopted by the governing body; 
E.  Attend all meetings of the governing body and of committees thereof, or send a delegate, and the city manager or delegate shall participate in the discussion of all matters pertaining to the administration of city affairs coming before the governing body or such committees, but the city manager or delegate shall not have the right to vote; 
F.  Be responsible for the preparation of the annual budget; 
G.  Keep the governing body informed of the financial condition and of the needs of the city and render reports with respect thereto and with respect to all other city affairs at such times and in such forms as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the governing body, accompanied by such recommendations as the city manager may deem advisable; 
H.  Formulate and recommend to the mayor and city council the adoption of such measures as the city manager may, from time to time, deem necessary or advisable for the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, or for the improvement of administrative or departmental functions and services; 
I.  Make recommendations with respect to the purchase in behalf of the city departments of materials, supplies and equipment and supervise the making of such purchases when and in the manner authorized by the governing body; 
J.  Ensure that the city's collective bargaining management team and the governing body hold a meeting in executive session for the purpose of broadly discussing issues of collective bargaining previous to the annual collective bargaining negotiations between the city and its bargaining units so as to empower the management team with the authority to negotiate in good faith; and 
K.  May appoint a deputy city manager within sixty (60) days of being appointed city manager. Prior to the appointment of a deputy city manager, the city manager shall present a job description to the governing body for review and approval. The powers and duties designated to the deputy city manager shall not exceed the powers and duties of the city manager. 
L.  Report to the governing body every six months regarding the organization of the city's departments and divisions. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  3; Code 1973,  2-66; Ord. #1981-15,  9, SFCC 1981,  2-1-6; Ord. #1996-49,  2; Ord. #2007-10,  1; Ord. #2007-45,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-13-3 and 3-14-14 NMSA 1978. 
2-4.7 - City manager as departmental officer. 
    The city manager may, upon appointment by the mayor and confirmation by a majority of the governing body, serve as the administrative officer of one (1) or more departments. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  5; Code 1973,  2-68; SFCC 1981,  2-1-7) 
2-4.8 - Relationship of city manager with governing body. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the mayor and the city council for the efficient administration of all branches and departments of the city government. The mayor and members of the city council shall deal with department heads and employees of the city solely through the city manager. The foregoing shall not apply to requests for minutes, executed contracts and agreements, copies of ordinances, resolutions, nor any other document that would be available to the public under The Inspection of Public Records Act. The city manager shall provide clerical and photocopying assistance to the members of the governing body on an as-needed basis to facilitate the official duties of the governing body. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall give any order directly to any department head or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  2; Code 1973,  2-65; SFCC 1981,  2-1-8; Ord. #1996-17,  1) 
2-4.9 - City manager to designate employees to specific service. 
    The city manager shall designate those employees of the city to perform any service which may be authorized by the governing body. 
(Code 1953,  2-42; Code 1973,  2-52; Ord. #1981-15,  4; SFCC 1981,  2-1-9) 
2-4.10 - Political activity prohibited. 
    The city manager shall not engage, either directly or indirectly, in partisan political activity in any manner while in office. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  1; Code 1973,  2-69; SFCC 1981,  2-1-10) 
2-4.11 - Conflict of interest. 
    The city manager shall have no financial interest in any contract or financial transaction, beyond the contract terms of his or her employment with the city. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  7; Code 1973,  2-70; SFCC 1981,  2-1-11; Ord. #1996-37,  1) 
2-4.12 - Acting city manager; filling of vacancy. 
A.  During any temporary absence or disability of the city manager the city manager shall immediately appoint a city employee having the qualifications prescribed in subsection 2-4.2 to temporarily perform his or her duties until the city manager returns from his or her temporary absence or disability. 
B.  The acting city manager has the same duties and responsibilities as granted to a city manager under the Santa Fe City Code; except, that he or she shall neither employ nor discharge any person engaged in the administration service of the city except on the approval of the governing body. 
C.  During any period when the office of city manager shall be vacant for any cause other than a temporary absence or disability, as defined in paragraph A., herein, the mayor shall appoint a city employee having the qualifications prescribed in subsection 2-4.2, to temporarily perform the city manager's duties until a regularly selected city manager is appointed. This appointment shall be subject to the consent of a majority of all members of the city council and shall be made within seventy-two (72) hours, at a legally noticed special city council meeting. 
(Ord. #1954-3,  4; Ord. #1970-7,  1; Code 1973,  2-64; SFCC 1981,  2-1-12; Ord. #1996-37,  2) 
2-4.13 - Deputy city manager. 
    The office of deputy city manager may be established. The deputy city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Ord. #2007-10,  2) 
2-5 - CITY ATTORNEY. 

2-5.1 - Attendance at meetings. 
    The city attorney shall attend all regular meetings of the governing body and, upon request, special meetings of the governing body and, when required, prepare written opinions on all legal questions submitted to him by the governing body or city manager. He shall also attend, when requested, the meetings of any committee of the governing body and shall advise any such committee on all questions of law submitted to him and authorized by the governing body or city manager. He shall serve as legal counsel to all boards, committees and commissions of the city government. When so requested, he shall advise the mayor or any other city officer on all questions of law pertaining to the duties of any such officer. 
(Code 1953,  2-46; Code 1973,  2-71; SFCC 1981,  2-1-16) 
State Law reference- Appointment of city attorney, see  3-12-4 NMSA 1978. 
2-5.2 - Ordinances and contracts. 
    The city attorney shall draft all ordinances, contracts, leases, conveyances and all instruments of writing which may be required of him by the governing body or city manager. He shall act as legal adviser of the city on all matters pertaining to contracts with or by the city and shall advise on all questions of law in regard to the same. 
(Code 1953,  2-47; Code 1973,  2-72; SFCC 1981,  2-1-17) 
2-5.3 - Legality of ordinances. 
    The city attorney has the right to be heard on all questions or motions before the governing body, amending, repealing or in any manner affecting any ordinance in force or proposed to be ordained by the governing body when the legality of any such question or motion shall be called into question. 
(Code 1953,  2-48, Code 1973,  2-73; SFCC 1981,  2-1-18) 
2-5.4 - Representation of city; duty to prosecute. 
    The city attorney shall attend the sessions of the municipal court and prosecute all persons charged with a violation of the city ordinances. He shall, when required by the governing body or the city manager, appear in behalf of the city in all suits or proceedings by or against the city in any court wherein the same may be pending or about to be instituted by the city and prosecute or defend the same as the case may require. 
(Code 1953,  2-49; Code 1973,  2-74; SFCC 1981,  2-1-19) 
2-5.5 - Bonds or affidavits in suits. 
    The city attorney may make or execute any bond or affidavit in the name of the city that may be necessary in any suit or proceeding in which the city is a part and shall sign such bond or affidavit as city attorney. 
(Code 1953,  2-50; Code 1973,  2-75; SFCC 1981,  2-1-20) 
2-5.6 - Executions; judgments in favor of city. 
    The city attorney shall cause executions to be issued on all judgments in favor of the city and shall attend to their prompt collection. 
(Code 1953,  2-51; Code 1973,  2-76; SFCC 1981,  2-1-21) 
2-6 - CITY CLERK. 

2-6.1 - Establishment of office. 
    The office of city clerk is established. 
(Code 1953,  2-53; Code 1973,  2-77; SFCC 1981,  2-1-22; Ord. #2007-45,  2) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1983-33,  5 recompiled  9-1-2 to  2-1-22 SFCC 1981. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-12-4 NMSA 1978. 
2-6.2 - Office hours of the city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall maintain such office hours as required to perform the daily operations of the office or as needed to comply with city rules and regulations and applicable state law. 
(Code 1953,  2-54; Code 1973,  2-78; SFCC 1981,  2-1-23) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1983-33,  5 recompiled  9-1-3 to  2-1-23 SFCC 1981) 
2-6.3 - Duties of the city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall: 
A.  Keep in custody all minutes, ordinances and resolutions approved by the governing body; 
B.  Attend all meetings of the governing body; 
C.  Record all proceedings, ordinances and resolutions of the governing body; 
D.  Upon request, furnish copies of municipal records. The city clerk may charge a reasonable fee for the cost of furnishing copies of municipal records; 
E.  Administer the municipal election and perform other election duties required pursuant to Articles 8 and 9, Chapter 3 NMSA 1978; 
F.  Have custody of, and safely keep, all official records and documents, such as contracts, agreements, deeds, of the city, the originals of which are to stay in the office, except upon request of the city attorney for purposes of litigation; 
G.  Administer and process the filing and release of liens for the city as prescribed by Article 36, Chapter 3 NMSA 1978 or as otherwise provided by law; and 
H.  Perform other duties prescribed by law, ordinance or city rules and regulations. 
(Code 1953,  2-60; Code 1973,  2-84; SFCC 1981,  2-1-24) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1983-33,  5 recompiled  9-1-4 to  2-1-24 SFCC 1981. 
2-6.4 - Evidence of indebtedness; city clerk to record bonds and certificates. 
    The city clerk shall keep a record book of all bonds, certificates and other evidence of indebtedness of the city, which record shall contain and preserve the number, amount, date of maturity and payment of any and all such bonds, coupons and certificates. 
(Code 1953,  2-56; Code 1973,  2-80; SFCC 1981,  2-1-25) 
Editor's note- Ord. #1983-33,  5 recompiled  9-1-5 to  2-1-25 SFCC 1981. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-37-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-6.5 - Destruction of paid bonds, coupons, etc. 
    When any bond, coupon or other evidence of indebtedness of the city has been paid by the city, such bond, coupon or other evidence of indebtedness shall be destroyed after recording the payment of the same in the book provided for in subsection 2-6.4. This destruction shall be accomplished and performed by the city clerk in the presence of the mayor, who shall certify, on the record provided for in subsection 2-6.4, the destruction of the same. 
(Code 1953,  2-57; Code 1973,  2-81; SFCC 1981,  2-1-26) 
Editor's note- Ord. #1983-33,  5 recompiled  9-1-6 to  2-1-26 SFCC 1981. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-37-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-7 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 

2-7.1 - Oaths; bonds; failure to qualify. 
A.  Any elected officer, and the city manager, clerk, treasurer, finance officer and police officers, shall take an oath or affirmation to support the constitution of the United States, the constitution and laws of New Mexico, the ordinances of the city and to faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
B.  For the care and disposition of municipal funds in the employee's custody and for the faithful discharge of the employee's duties, the governing body of the municipality shall require a corporate surety bond from the mayor, municipal judge, city manager, clerk, treasurer, finance officer, police officers through their police chief and any other employee it designates. In lieu of individual corporate surety bonds, the governing body may secure a blanket corporate surety bond. The municipality shall pay for the surety bond. 
C.  The governing body may declare vacated the office of any person who fails, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of his election or appointment to office to take the oath of office, or to give bond when required, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1953,  2-43; Code 1973,  2-51; SFCC 1981,  2-1-13) 
State Law reference- Surety bonds,  3-10-2, 6-10-38 and 35-14-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-7.2 - Salaries. 
    The salaries, wages and compensation of city officers and employees shall be as provided by the governing body. 
(Code 1953,  2-44; Code 1973,  2-53; Ord. #1981-15,  5; SFCC 1981,  2-1-14) 
2-7.3 - Advances on salary prohibited. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall at any time be allowed an advance on salary or money to become due. 
(Code 1953,  2-45; Code 1973,  2-54; SFCC 1981,  2-1-15) 
2-8 - FINANCE DEPARTMENT. 

2-8.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "finance department". 
(Ord. #1983-33,  4; SFCC 1981,  9-1-1; Ord. #2007-45,  5) 
2-8.2 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 2-8.2, City Treasurer, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1953  2-55; Code 1973,  2-79; and SFCC 1981,  9-1-7, 9-1-8 and 9-1-9 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2007-45,  4. 
2-8.3 - Finance officer. 
A.  Position Established. The position of finance officer is established. The finance officer is the city treasurer and manager of the finance department of the city. The designation as finance officer shall not be considered separate employment nor occasion any additional salary. 
B.  Duties. The finance officer shall: 
(1)  Receive all money due and payable to the city; 
(2)  Keep his accounts and records in the manner prescribed by generally accepted accounting principles; 
(3)  Keep the money of the city separate from any other money in his possession; 
(4)  Expend the money only as directed by the governing body; 
(5)  Submit monthly, or more often if required by the governing body, a report of the receipts and expenditures of the city; 
(6)  Supervise the depositing and safekeeping of all money belonging to the city; 
(7)  With the advice and consent of the governing body designate banks qualified to receive or deposit money entrusted in his care; 
(8)  Prepare annually, for the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report showing the receipts, expenditures and balances for each fund. A copy of the financial report shall be filed in the finance officer; and 
(9)  Perform other duties prescribed by law, ordinance or city rules and regulations. 
C.  Reports to Governing Body. The finance officer shall be responsible and report to the governing body through the city manager. 
D.  Records Open for Inspection. The records of the finance officer shall be open to inspection by any citizen during the regular business hours of the city. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-1-10; Ord. #2007-45,  6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-37-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-9 - POLICE DEPARTMENT. 

2-9.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "police department". 
(Code 1953,  18-1; Code 1973,  25-1; SFCC 1981,  5-1-1) 
2-9.2 - Powers and duties generally. 
    Police officers shall execute and return all writs and processes directed to them by the municipal judge and, in criminal cases or cases of violations of city ordinances, they may serve the same in any part of the country. They shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, apprehend all disorderly persons within the city and shall pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice. They shall apprehend any person in the act of committing any offense against the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city, and forthwith bring such persons before a competent authority for examination and trial. They shall have, in the discharge of their proper duties, like powers and be subject to like responsibilities as sheriffs or constables in similar cases. 
(Code 1953,  18-14; Code 1973,  25-19; SFCC 1981,  5-1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-12-3 NMSA 1978. 
2-9.3 - Appointment of police officers; commissions. 
    No person shall assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident or belonging to the office of municipal policeman without first having received his appointment in writing, known as his "commission", from the governing body. The advice of the chief of police shall be obtained in the employment and commissioning of all policemen of the department. (SFCC 1981,  5-1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  29-1-9 NMSA 1978. 
2-9.4 - Training schools and examinations. 
A.  There shall be held and conducted at such times as may be prescribed by the chief of police, with the approval of the governing body, schools for training in modern police methods and practices. The schools for training and the checking of the qualifications and general fitness of applicants for positions in the police department shall be under the direction and supervision of the chief of police. 
B.  All members of the police department shall take such examinations as may be prescribed. 
C.  In the taking of all written examinations there shall be assigned to each applicant a number which shall be endorsed on his examination papers, and the grading of the examinations shall be by number only. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided, no member shall be retained in the police department and no applicant shall be appointed to the police department unless such member or applicant, after taking the prescribed training courses, has successfully passed the prescribed examinations, written and oral; provided, that the minimum educational qualifications required by the City Personnel Act shall not apply to members of the present police department who are otherwise qualified under the provisions hereof; provided further, that in passing on the qualifications of members of the present police department, consideration shall be given to: 
(1)  Length of service and faithfulness to duty; and 
(2)  General aptitude for police work as disclosed by the individual records of such members to be confirmed by oral examinations. 
(Code 1953,  18-22; Code 1973,  25-11; SFCC 1981,  5-1-4) 
2-9.5 - Extra or emergency police officers. 
    The city manager may employ on behalf of the city such extra or emergency police officers as may be required in the proper administration of municipal affairs. 
(Code 1953,  18-21; Code 1973,  25-4; SFCC 1981,  5-1-5) 
2-9.6 - Police department reserve. 
A.  Created. There is created the city "police department reserve force", hereinafter referred to as the "reserve". 
B.  Control by Chief of Police. The reserve is under the exclusive control of the chief of the city police department who shall have the sole and exclusive authority to: 
(1)  Summarily discipline or dismiss members without appeal to any body or tribunal; 
(2)  Approve or disapprove all bylaws, rules and regulations of the reserve; and 
(3)  Approve or disapprove all officers, employees or agents of the reserve. 
C.  Authority. The reserve and its individual members shall only have authority in law enforcement on specific request by the city police chief. A specific request shall be made for each individual instance of service. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
(1)  The duties of the reserve are to assist in enforcement of law by cooperating with all law enforcement agencies and regulatory bodies. 
(2)  The reserve or its members when acting upon call, and only when acting upon call, of the city police chief, for the city or for another law enforcement agency or regulatory authority, shall be possessed of the same powers and duties as a city police officer or an officer of such law enforcement agency or regulatory authority. 
E.  Call of Members. When the city police chief calls up the members of the reserve, the call shall be in writing, list the names of each member of the reserve called, the purpose of the call, and the date and time the call begins and terminates. Except when on call, reserve members shall have no more authority in law enforcement than that of any private citizen. 
F.  Requests for Assistance. Should any law enforcement agency or regulatory body desire assistance from the reserve, the request shall be made to the city police chief who may authorize it, if: 
(1)  Reserve members are fully covered by the workman's compensation insurance policy of the assisted agency or body, and this is evidenced by a writing presented to the chief; and 
(2)  Any and all liability that may arise against the city, its officers, employees or agents, the reserve, or its members as a result of such assistance, is assumed in writing by the assisted agency or body. 
G.  Workmen's Compensation. The city shall immediately take steps to provide necessary workmen's compensation insurance for the reserve and necessary liability insurance covering liability that may arise against the city, its officers, employees or agents as a result of the activities of the reserve on behalf of the city. If any or a portion of such liability is to be self-insured, the self-insurance fund shall be increased accordingly. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  25-56- 25-62 by Ord. No. 1978-34,  1- 10; SFCC 1981,  5-3-1- 5-3-7) 
2-10 - FIRE DEPARTMENT. 

2-10.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the fire department. 
(SFCC 1981,  7-2-1) 
2-10.2 - Volunteer firefighters; created. 
    There is created in the city "fire department, volunteer firefighters force", hereinafter referred to as the volunteer firefighters. 
(Code 1953,  9-1; Code 1973,  9-3; Ord. #1980-46,  1; SFCC 1981,  7-2-2; Ord. #1987-55,  1; Ord. #1989-8,  1) 
2-10.2.1   Volunteer firefighters; control by chief of fire department.
    The volunteer firefighters shall be subject to all regulations of the fire department of the city of Santa Fe and along with paid firemen be subject to the authority of the chief of city fire department who shall have sole and exclusive authority to: 
A.  Approve or disapprove of membership in the volunteer firefighters. 
B.  Discipline or dismiss member of the volunteer firefighters subject to the same grievance procedure as set out in Ordinance No. 1983-44. 
(Ord. #1987-55,  2; Ord. #1989-8,  2) 
2-10.2.2   Volunteer firefighters; authority.
    The volunteer firefighters and its individual members shall have authority in fire protection only upon request by the city fire dispatch. 
(Ord. #1987-55,  3; Ord. #1989-8,  3) 
2-10.2.3   Volunteer firefighters; powers and duties.
A.  The duties of the volunteer firefighters are to safe and efficient fire fighting by adhering to any and all city of Santa Fe standard operating procedures, as referenced herein, or as may be amended from time to time, in Exhibit "A," attached hereto. 
B.  The volunteer firefighters shall be summoned and will respond simultaneously with fire apparatus. Volunteer firefighters and paid firefighters shall possess the same powers and perform the same duties. 
(Ord. #1987-55,  4; Ord. #1989-8,  4) 
Editor's note- A copy of Exhibit "A," referred to herein, may be found in the office of the city clerk. 
2-10.2.4   Volunteer firefighters; insurance.
    The city shall provide necessary liability insurance covering liability that may arise against the city, its officers, employees, volunteer firefighters or agents as a result of activities of the volunteer firefighters on behalf of the city. If any or a portion of such liability is to be self-insured, the self-insurance fund shall be increased accordingly. 
A.  Active volunteer firefighter members are covered by an accident, sickness, or disability insurance policy which is paid by the City of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1987-55,  5; Ord. #1989-8,  5) 
2-10.3 - Department authority and powers. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 3-18-1F. and G. NMSA 1978 and 3-18-11B(1), the city may provide proper means for protection from fire and protect the property of its municipality and its inhabitants and preserve the health, safety, peace and order within the municipality. Therefore, the stated purpose of this subsection is to grant the fire department all authority necessary to protect life and property from the hazards created by fire, explosion, and similar emergencies. 
B.  The fire department shall have full and complete authority in connection with fighting, mitigating, and preventing the spread of any fire that may arise within the city, with the power to do and perform all necessary or expedient acts for the fighting of fire. When called to a fire, the fire department shall have: 
(1)  Full and complete authority of the premises to which it has been summoned until the fire has been extinguished and the premises are deemed safe by the fire department; and 
(2)  By emergency vehicle or by foot, the right of ingress and egress on all public or private streets, alleyways, roads, driveways, and thoroughfares located within the city limits or the city annexation areas. 
C.  The fire department shall have full and complete authority in connection with the provision of prehospital emergency medical services within the city, with the power to do and perform all necessary or expedient acts for the provision of these services. 
D.  The fire chief shall have full authority to sign agreements, approved by the city attorney's office, with landowners to implement fire hazard mitigation activities. 
(Code 1953,  9-2; Code 1973,  9-4; Ord. #1980-46,  2; SFCC 1981,  7-2-3; Ord. #1989-5,  1; Ord. #2013-20) 
2-10.4 - Department members designated as special police officers. 
    Every member duly enrolled and in good standing in the fire department shall be a special police officer of the city with power to act as such from the time of the sounding of any fire alarm until the apparatus and equipment for fighting fire has been returned to the fire station. 
(Code 1953,  9-3; Code 1973,  9-5; Ord. #1980-46,  3; SFCC 1981,  7-2-4) 
2-10.5 - Obstructing or interfering with firemen. 
    It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, annoy or interfere with firemen while in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1953,  9-6; Code 1973,  9-8; SFCC 1981,  7-2-5) 
2-11 - LAND USE DEPARTMENT. 

2-11.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "land use department." 
(SFCC 1981,  6-1-1; Ord. #1983-33,  1; Ord. #1990-26,  1; Ord. #1990-28,  1; Ord. #2007-45,  8) 
2-12 - HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT. 

2-12.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is hereby created a department of city government to be known as the "housing and community development department." 
(Ord. #2007-45,  10) 
2-13 - COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT. 

2-13.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "community services department." 
(Ord. #1987-26,  2; Ord. #1990-26,  3; Ord. #1990-28,  3) 
2-13.2 - Purpose; power and duties. 
A.  The community services department is established to provide certain kinds of services as determined by the city manager, either directly through city programs or in consultation with non-profit groups. 
B.  The department will assume a leadership role in assessment of needs, collection of data, and coordination and direction of educational, developmental and social services delivery for the community. 
C.  The department is responsible for developing a program of technical assistance to non-profit agencies operating in the community. This assistance will include program planning, program evaluation, data collection, evaluation of grant proposals and review of funding requests to the city. 
(Ord. #1987-26,  3; Ord. #1990-26,  3; Ord. #1990-28,  3; Ord. #1991-39,  1) 
2-14 - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT. 

2-14.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the public works department. 
(SFCC 1981,  4-1-1) 
2-15 - HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT. 

2-15.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "human resources department" also known as the "personnel office" as referenced in Chapter XIX SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2007-45,  12) 
2-16 - OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 2-16, Department of Civil Preparedness, previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code  6-22-6-24 and Ordinance No. 1974-30 and SFCC  7-6-1-7-6-4, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-57 and replaced by the Office of Emergency Management. 

2-16.1 - Established; composition. 
    There is established under the city manager's direction, in accordance with  12-10-5 NMSA 1978, the "office of emergency management" which shall consist of: 
A.  An emergency management coordinator who shall be appointed in accordance with  12-10-5 NMSA 1978, and who shall be subject to the personnel system of the city; 
B.  Additional professional and administrative personnel as may be required to effectively carry out the emergency management program; and 
C.  All other city officers and employees, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid the city during periods of long-scale disaster. 
(Ord. #2008-57,  2) 
2-16.2 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the office of emergency management is to coordinate the efforts of all municipal agencies and employees, nongovernmental agencies and private sector partners to prepare for and function in the event of long-scale disasters endangering the lives and property of the residents of the city. 
B.  The duty of the office of emergency management is to coordinate the development of plans for the effective employment of municipal resources to protect the lives and health of the residents of the city and the private and public property therein from the effects of natural or man-caused disasters, including acts of war. 
C.  The office of emergency management shall coordinate the implementation of such plans during periods of long-scale disaster. Such plans shall be coordinated with those of the county and in consonance with the state emergency management plans. 
(Ord. #2008-57,  3) 
2-16.3 - Emergency management coordinator. 
    The emergency management coordinator shall: 
A.  Be responsible to the city manager for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management program of the city. 
B.  Coordinate the emergency management activities of all municipal departments and agencies of the city, nongovernmental agencies and private sector partners. 
C.  Be the liaison and cooperate with the emergency management agencies of the federal government, the state, the county and the other political subdivisions therein. 
D.  Have the authority to act for the city of Santa Fe in all matters pertaining to emergency management, including the obligation of municipal funds as may be appropriated for emergency management purposes. 
E.  Develop an organizational structure for the office of emergency management, subject to the approval of the governing body, and is authorized to recommend appointments to fill the positions established therein subject to the city manager's authority. 
(Ord. #2008-57,  4) 
2-16.4 - Financing. 
A.  Funds for necessary expenses of the office of emergency management, including salaries for approved positions, may be made available through appropriations by the governing body in accordance with  12-10-7 NMSA 1978. 
B.  The emergency management coordinator shall prepare and submit to the governing body an annual proposed budget for emergency management expenditures and shall indicate those amounts eligible for matching funds under the federal grant programs. 
C.  Emergency management funds may be obligated by the coordinator of emergency management only in the amounts appropriated and for the purposes authorized by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2008-57,  5) 
2-17 - LIBRARY. 

2-17.1 - Library established. 
    There is established a free public library to be known as the "Santa Fe public library." The library is a proper and legitimate object of municipal expenditures and its operation shall be considered a part of the government of the city. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  1; Code 1973,  15-1; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-1; Ord. #1980-41,  2; SFCC 1981,  8-1-2) 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to establish and maintain a free public library,  3-18-14 NMSA 1978) 
2-17.2 - Creation of library fund. 
    There is created a "library fund," and this fund shall be administered as are other funds of the city. All money derived from gifts, bequests or donations to the city for the library shall be placed in the library fund. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  7; Code 1973,  15-2; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-2; Ord. #1980-41,  3; SFCC 1981,  8-1-3) 
2-17.3 - Librarian and other personnel. 
    A qualified head librarian, other librarians, or other personnel necessary for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be regularly employed by the city. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  8; Code 1973,  15-3; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-3; Ord.  1980-41,  4; SFCC 1981,  8-1-4) 
2-17.4 - Duties of librarian. 
    The duties of the librarian shall be such as are usually imposed on persons in like employment. The head librarian shall be considered the staff liaison to the library board, serve as the board's secretary, and shall have sole charge of the administration of the library under the direction and review of the department head and city manager. The librarian shall be responsible for the direction of the staff, the efficiency of the library service to the public, the operation of the library and the financial condition set forth in the annual budget. The librarian shall attend all library board meetings. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  9; Code 1973,  15-4; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-4; Ord. #1980-41,  5; SFCC 1981,  8-1-5) 
2-17.5 - Management of library. 
A.  The head librarian shall manage and operate the public library including the right to: 
(1)  Receive gifts, bequests and donations of all kinds, according to the policy set by the governing body; and 
(2)  Make bylaws, rules and regulations for the operation of the public library not in conflict with other ordinances of the city. 
B.  The rules and regulations established by the head librarian for regulating the public use of the library facilities shall be posted in conspicuous places for public inspection. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  3; Code 1973,  15-7; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-7; Ord. #1980-41,  8; SFCC 1981,  8-1-6) 
2-18 - SANTA FE FIESTA. 

2-18.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1982-37,  1; SFCC 1981,  8-5-1) 
2-18.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in the Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance: 
    Fiesta activity includes any pageant, parade, celebration, performance, carnival, ceremonial, demonstration, exposition, procession, fete, entertainment, spectacle, production, drama, display, or any other public show presented, sponsored or any other public show presented, sponsored or officially sanctioned by the fund raising organization; the term includes any food, beverage, merchandise, ride, game or amusement concession operated for the use or benefit of the general public attending the Santa Fe fiesta; and 
    Fund raising organization means an organization designated by resolution as an arm of city government, which accepts memberships, fees, assessments or contributions in excess of a total of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in any one (1) year for the purpose of promoting, maintaining or operating activities for the purpose of promoting the Santa Fe Fiesta. 
    Person means any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, joint venture, organization or corporation; 
    Santa Fe Fiesta means the annual public celebration held in this city to commemorate and celebrate the peaceful reconquest of New Mexico by General Don Diego de Vargas in September, 1692. 
(Ord. #1982-37,  2; SFCC 1981,  8-5-3) 
2-18.3 - Purpose of the Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance. 
    The purpose of the Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance is to give government of the city closer regulation and supervision over the Santa Fe Fiesta, to achieve greater participation in the various fiesta events by the civic-minded citizens of the community, and to assure fiscal and financial responsibility on the part of those who solicit and collect fees, assessments and contributions from the people of Santa Fe. The Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public safety, health and welfare of the community, and shall be liberally construed to carry out its purposes. 
(Ord. #1982-37,  3; SFCC 1981,  8-5-3) 
2-18.4 - Fiesta activities require prior approval of governing body. 
    No person is authorized to sponsor, operate or conduct a fiesta activity without the prior approval of the governing body. No fund raising organization shall solicit nor accept contributions or membership fees, assessments or other funds until such time as the governing body passes upon the qualifications of the organization and gives permission, in writing, for them to solicit and collect such funds. To be qualified under the Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance, a fund raising organization must meet the following requirements: 
A.  The organization shall have a written charter, articles of incorporation, constitution, by-laws or other rules and regulations governing the qualification of members, the method of electing of calling and conducting meetings, provision for a board of directors, an executive committee or some similar executive group to run the affairs of the organization, the method of amending the by-laws, and such other provisions as the governing body determines necessary to carry out the objects of the Santa Fe Fiesta Ordinance; such constitution, charter, articles or incorporation or by-laws shall be sufficiently broad in scope to allow membership by civic-minded business persons, organizations and individual citizens of the city, and give them full opportunity to have a voice in the government and control of the organization; 
B.  The fund raising organization shall operate wholly without profit; 
C.  The fund raising organization shall submit an annual audit of its financial affairs within ninety (90) days of the close of each fiesta, and other special audits as the governing body may demand. The cost of such audits shall be borne by the fund raising organization; 
D.  The treasurer, finance officer or other individual of the fund raising organization charged with the responsibility of handling the funds of the organization shall be bonded in an amount to be determined by the governing body, by a bonding corporation authorized to issue fidelity bonds in the state. 
(Ord. #1982-37,  4; SFCC 1981,  8-5-4) 
2-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 2-19, Administrative Services Department, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1987-36, 1990-26, 1990-28 and 2007-45 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2014-22. 

2-19.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "parks and recreation department." 
(Ord. #2014-22,  2) 
2-20 - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT. 

2-20.1 - Creation of Department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "public utilities department." 
(Ord. #1991-39,  2; Ord. #2007-45,  20) 
2-21 - TOURISM SANTA FE.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 2-21, Convention and Visitors Bureau, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2007-45, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2014-22. 

2-21.1 - Creation of department. 
    There is created a department of city government to be known as the "TOURISM Santa Fe department". 
(Ord. #2014-22,  3) 
2-22 - INTERNAL AUDIT DEPARTMENT. 

2-22.1 - Short title. 
    Section 2-22 SFCC 1987 shall be cited as the "Internal Audit Department Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2012-32,  2) 
2-22.2 - Findings; purpose; goals. 
A.  The governing body finds that good governance, transparency and accountability are critical in the public sector for the effective and credible functioning of a healthy democracy, and in fulfilling the government's responsibility to citizens and taxpayers. 
B.  Transparent and reliable reporting and effective auditing in government serve to promote accountability, enhance the effectiveness of government services to its citizens, and increase the public's confidence in their government. 
C.  The members of the governing body share a duty to insure that the actions of public officials, employees and contractors of the city are carried out in the most responsible manner possible and that city policies, budgets, goals and objectives are fully implemented. 
D.  To accomplish this, the city requires the services of an independent office to provide independent, objective assurance and review services designed to promote transparency, accountability, efficiency and effectiveness of city government. 
E.  The governing body does hereby establish the internal audit department, an independent city department of city government reporting to the city manager, which shall oversee the internal auditor and the functions hereby established. To ensure independence and compliance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards, the internal auditor: 
(1)  Shall report results to the city manager, the audit committee, the finance committee and the governing body; 
(2)  Is a city department located organizationally outside of other city departments; 
(3)  Has access to the governing body in accordance with the Open Meeting Act; and 
(4)  Is sufficiently removed from political pressures to conduct audits and report findings, opinions and conclusions objectively without fear of political reprisal. 
F.  The governing body also directs the internal audit department, in cooperation with the audit committee, to establish job descriptions and department policies and procedures based on generally accepted governmental auditing standards; and to adopt the Code of Ethics as defined by the Institute of Internal Auditors. 
(Ord. #2012-32  3; Ord. #2013-34  1) 
2-22.3 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Auditees mean the city related departments, programs, activities, agencies, vendors, contractors, employees, public officials or other city related entities affected by an audit or investigation. 
    Committee means the City of Santa Fe audit committee. 
    Contractors mean all city contractors. 
    Employee means a city employee. 
    Internal auditor means the internal auditor who is the head of the internal audit department. 
    Official means the mayor or a city councilor. 
    Report means an audit, a special audit, an investigation and/or an examination. 
    Special investigation or special audit means additional procedures or audits undertaken because the need was not previously foreseen. 
(Ord. #2012-32  4; Ord. #2013-34  2) 
2-22.4 - Creation of the internal audit department; resources; staff. 
A.  The internal audit department is created as an independent office of city government. The internal auditor is the head of the internal audit department and shall report to the city manager. 
B.  The audit committee shall review applications for and make a recommendation to the city manager for hiring of the internal auditor, a city employee. 
C.  The internal auditor shall review applications and make recommendations to the city manager for hiring other internal audit department employees; or independent contractors to be procured for assistance to the internal audit department. 
D.  In accordance with law and in consultation with the city attorney's office, the city manager shall report proposed personnel actions, such as hiring, discipline or termination, relating to the internal auditor to the audit committee in executive session, in accordance with the New Mexico Open Meetings Act. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the city manager from immediately placing the internal auditor on administrative leave due to a proposed personnel action; however, the city manager shall report the proposed personnel action to the audit committee, within seven (7) business days from the date the internal auditor is placed on administrative leave. 
E.  The internal auditor's work shall result in a complete written final report being made of each annual audit, special audit, investigation and/or examination made ("report") and shall be delivered to the city manager, except if city manager is the subject of the audit, then the report shall be delivered to the mayor. The internal auditor shall also notify the governing body in writing that the final report has been delivered. Each report, in its final form, shall set out in detail, in a separate section, any violation of law or good accounting practices found. Such reports are confidential under this section until placed on the finance committee's agenda or put in its final form, whichever occurs first. Reports shall not exist in a draft form for more than thirty (30) days without presentation to the finance committee. Final reports shall also be timely presented to the audit committee. If the draft report is not ready to be delivered to the city manager in its final form or is not ready to be presented to the finance committee after thirty (30) days, then staff shall inform the finance committee, in writing, the specific date, absent court order not exceeding twenty (20) days, when the final report will be delivered to the city manager or presented to the finance committee and the stated basis for the additional time needed. 
F.  Any final report for presentation to city committees or the governing body shall be included in the meeting packet and such meeting packets shall be posted on the city's website. 
G.  Prior to the committee meeting a final report placed on a committee agenda shall be accessible by all members of the governing body and the public, and at such time shall become a public record consistent with the Inspection of Public Records Act and its exemptions. 
H.  Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the report, the employee and/or division and/or department audited may notify the internal auditor of any errors in the report. If the internal auditor is satisfied from data or documents at hand, or by an additional investigation, that the report is erroneous, the internal auditor shall correct the report and furnish copies of the corrected report to all parties receiving the original report. 
I.  The internal auditor may disclose audit information or audit documentation that is confidential, without losing the confidentiality under this Ordinance to an independent external auditor in connection with a special audit, performance audit, attestation engagement or other existing or potential engagement regarding the financial affairs and transactions of the city. 
J.  The auditor's budget shall be reflected in the city manager's proposed budget as a separate department. The budget shall be sufficient to allow the organization to carry out its responsibilities including sufficient funding for annual continuing professional education requirements and professional certification as required by the generally accepted governmental auditing standards. The auditor's proposed budget shall be prepared and presented to the finance director and the city manager. 
(Ord. #2012-32  5; Ord. #2013-34  3) 
2-22.5 - Internal auditor's duties; responsibilities; authority; administrative subpoena power. 
A.  If the internal auditor detects instances of possible fraud, waste, or abuse or potential violations of law by an auditee, he shall report the irregularities to the city manager and the audit committee. 
(1)  In accordance with Section 12-6-6 NMSA 1978 and state auditor's Rule 2.2.2.10K(3), a notification letter regarding the possible fraud, waste or abuse shall also be sent to the state auditor's office whether or not an investigation by the internal auditor is conducted. 
(2)  If the irregularity is criminal in nature, the internal auditor shall immediately refer the irregularity to the appropriate prosecuting authority. 
(3)  If the irregularity warrants a special investigation, audit, and/or special audit, then the internal auditor shall conduct a special investigation, audit and/or special audit. The report shall be submitted to the city manager, the audit committee, the auditee, the governing body through the finance committee. 
(4)  The internal auditor shall not accept complaints related to discrimination or labor law matters. In some cases, it may be appropriate for internal audit to work with investigators or legal authorities, or withdraw from or defer further audit work on the audit or portion of the audit to avoid interfering with an ongoing investigation or legal proceeding. 
B.  The internal auditor shall adhere to generally accepted governmental auditing standards in conducting its work and will be considered independent as defined by those standards. 
C.  The internal audit department is subject to a peer review by an appropriate professional non-partisan objective group every three (3) to five (5) years. A copy of the written report shall be furnished to the city manager, audit committee, and governing body, via the finance committee. 
D.  The internal auditor shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of records subject to the New Mexico Rules of Civil Procedure. In the case of a refusal to obey a subpoena issued to any person, the internal auditor may make application to any district court in the state that shall have the jurisdiction to order the witness to appear before the internal auditor and to produce evidence if so ordered, or to give testimony touching on the matter in question. 
(Ord. #2012-32  6; Ord. #2013-34  4) 
2-22.6 - Scope of audits. 
A.  Audits, except for special audits or special investigations/examinations, will be conducted based on an annual audit plan developed in accordance with applicable professional auditing standards. This plan and any modifications thereof, are to be reviewed by the audit committee and recommended for approval. 
(1)  Within sixty (60) days before the beginning of each fiscal year, the internal auditor shall submit a one-to-five-year audit plan to the audit committee, the city manager and the governing body for review and comments, but the internal auditor shall have final authority to select the audits planned. The proposed plan shall include the rationale for the selections, for auditing departments, offices, boards, activities, subcontractors and agencies for the period. This plan may be amended after review; 
(2)  The final plan and any amendments will be presented to the audit committee, the city manager, and subject to approval of the governing body; 
(3)  In the selection of audit areas and audit objectives, the determination of audit scope and the timing of audit work, the internal auditor should consult with federal, state and other external auditors so that the desirable audit coverage is provided and audit effort is properly coordinated. 
B.  The internal auditor is authorized to conduct the following audits as defined in generally accepted governmental auditing standards: 
(1)  Performance/Management Audits. Performance audits are defined as engagements that provide assurance or conclusions based on an evaluation of sufficient and appropriate evidence against stated criteria, such as specific requirements, measures, or defined business practices. 
(2)  Financial Audits. 
(3)  Attestation Engagements. Attestation engagements result in an examination, a review, or agreed upon procedures about a subject matter that is the responsibility of another party. This includes special audits. 
(4)  Advisory (Non-Audit) Services. This includes special investigations. The issued report shall not include an opinion statement or a statement indicating the investigation was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. These services are subject to applicable professional standards. 
C.  The auditor shall have the authority to conduct performance and financial audits, attestation engagements or to provide advisory (non-audit) services to independently and objectively determine whether: 
(1)  The city, state or federal law authorizes the implemented activities and programs that are the subject of the audit; 
(2)  The objectives intended by city, state or federal law are efficiently and effectively accomplished in the implementation of activities and programs; 
(3)  The expenditure of funds was or is in compliance with applicable laws; 
(4)  The revenues were or are properly collected, deposited and accounted for; 
(5)  The entity, programs, activities, functions, or policies are effective, including the identification of any causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices; 
(6)  The desired result or benefits are being achieved; 
(7)  Resources, including funds, property and personnel, were or are adequately safeguarded, controlled and used in a faithful, effective and efficient manner; 
(8)  Financial and other reports fairly and fully disclosed all information as required by law necessary to evaluate and ascertain the nature and scope of programs and activities; 
(9)  Management established operating and administrative procedures and practices, accounting internal control systems and internal management controls were and are adequate and functioning as intended; 
(10)  City policies, budgets, goals and objectives were and are fully implemented; and 
(11)  Indications of fraud, waste, abuse or illegal acts are valid and need further investigation. 
(Ord. #2012-32  7; Ord. #2013-34  5) 
2-22.7 - Reports. 
A.  The internal auditor shall report results of all types of audits, investigations and/or engagements in their final report form to the audit committee, the city manager, the auditees, and the governing body via the finance committee. 
B.  All types of audit reports, investigations and/or engagements, in their final report form, are public records, available for public inspection. 
C.  The internal auditor's reports, including attestation engagements, shall follow the guidelines as specified in generally accepted governmental auditing standards, or in the case of a non-audit service applicable professional auditing standards. 
D.  At a minimum audit and attestation engagement reports should include: 
(1)  Statements describing the objectives, scope and methodology of the audit; 
(2)  A statement that the audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards; 
(3)  Background information, audit results, and findings as appropriate; 
(4)  A conclusion based on the audit objectives and the audit findings. 
(5)  The findings in the audit report should present sufficient, appropriate evidence to support the conclusion in relation to the audit objectives. 
E.  Responses submitted by the city manager relevant to the audit findings must include a remediation plan specifying dates and corrective action to be taken to resolve the issue. 
(1)  A response is required within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a final report; 
(2)  If no response is received, the internal auditor will note that fact in the transmittal letter and will release the report without a remediation plan. 
F.  The internal auditor shall submit an annual report to the audit committee, city manager, and governing body via the finance committee within sixty (60) days after fiscal year end indicating all audits, investigations and/or engagements completed, major findings, corrective actions taken by administrative managers, and significant issues which have not been fully addressed by management. 
(Ord. #2012-32  8; Ord. #2013-34  6) 
2-22.8 - Reporting. 
    The internal auditor shall follow the internal audit plan, report to the governing body via the finance committee, the auditees, the city manager, and the audit committee regarding all audit activities, results, and conclusions. Depending on the type of audit, the internal auditor shall report more frequently when requested. 
(Ord. #2012-32,  9) 
2-22.9 - Contract auditors, consultants, and experts. 
    Within budgetary constraints, the internal auditor may obtain the services of certified public accountants, qualified management consultants, certified fraud examiners, forensic auditors or other professional experts necessary to perform the functions of the internal audit department. Contractors performing an audit shall not have any financial interest in the affairs of the auditees, officials or employees. The internal auditor shall coordinate and monitor auditing performed by persons under contract to the internal auditor. 
(Ord. #2012-32  10; Ord. #2013-34  7) 
2-22.10 - Penalty; cooperation; retaliation prohibited. 
A.  All city officials, employees and contractors shall provide the internal auditor full and unrestricted access to all city offices, employees, records, information, data, reports, plans, projections, matters, contracts, memoranda, correspondence, electronic data, property, equipment and facilities and any other materials within their custody. At the internal auditor's request, an official, employee or contractor shall prepare reports and provide interviews. If an auditee, official, employee, vendor or contractor fails to produce the requested information, the internal auditor shall notify the city manager requesting his assistance in causing a search to be made and germane exhibits to be taken from any book, paper or record, written or electronic, excepting personal property. The city manager shall require the officials, employees, vendors or contractors to produce the requested information. Further, all contracts with outside contractors and subcontractors shall contain a "right-to-audit" clause providing the internal auditor access to the contractor's employees and to all financial and performance related records, property, and equipment purchased in whole or in part with governmental funds. 
B.  No person shall retaliate against, punish or penalize any other person for complaining to, cooperating with or assisting the internal auditor in the performance of his office. The internal auditor, all city employees and public officials and any person cooperating with the internal auditor in performance of duties has the same protections as provided for in the Federal Whistle Blower Protection Act and the New Mexico Whistleblower Protection Act, Sections 10-16C-1 et seq. NMSA 1978. 
C.  Any official or employee who violates this section may be subject to discipline as may be specified in applicable city ordinances or any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(Ord. #2012-32  11; Ord. #2013-34  8) 
2-22.11 - Audits and the Inspection of Public Records Act. 
A.  This subsection is adopted pursuant to the general welfare and police powers conferred upon the City of Santa Fe by  3-17-1 et seq. and  3-18-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, pursuant to the powers conferred upon the City of Santa Fe by the New Mexico Constitution, Article X  6(D) and 6(E) and the Municipal Charter Act  3-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, which have been exercised by the city's adoption of the Santa Fe Municipal Charter. The purpose of this subsection is within both the city's home rule powers and the delegated powers that all municipalities have to provide for the general welfare of their residents by the general welfare clause in Section 3-17-1(B) NMSA 1978 and police power to "protect generally the property of its municipality and its inhabitants" and to "preserve peace and order within the municipality" by Section 3-18-1(F) and (G) NMSA 1978. 
B.  At all times during the audit process and after the report becomes a public record; the internal auditor shall follow applicable standards and 2.2.2 NMAC regarding the release of any information relating to the audit. Applicable standards include but are not limited to the AICPA Code of Ethics Rule 301 and related interpretations and guidance, Institute for Internal Auditors interpretations and guidance and GAGAS 4.30 to 4.32 and GAGAS 4.40 to 4.44. 
(Ord. #2013-34  9) 
CHAPTER III - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-17,  1, adopted May 30, 2018, amended Chapter III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter III,  3-1.1-3-1.3, 3-2.1-3-2.3, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. #1986-28, 1; Ord. #1986-41,  1-3; Ord. #2002-28, 1. 

3-1 - SANTA FE REGIONAL AIRPORT. 

3-1.1 - Short Title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Santa Fe Regional Airport Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  1) 
3-1.2 - Nature of Operation. 
A.  As used in this code, the term "Santa Fe Regional Airport" or "Airport" shall mean all facilities of whatsoever nature relating to or otherwise used in connection with the foregoing or their replacements, including without limitation buildings, structures, terminals, parking and ground transportation facilities, roadways, land, hangers, warehouses, runways, shops, and administrative offices. 
B.  The Santa Fe Regional Airport System shall be a proprietary facility of the city for the development, promotion and accommodation of air commerce, air travel and air transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  1) 
3-1.3 - Reserved. 
3-2 - AIRPORT MASTERPLAN. 
    A copy of The Santa Fe Regional Airport Master Plan and any subsequent amendments shall be kept on file in the office of the airport manager and city clerk's office and shall be at all reasonable times available and subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  2) 
3-3 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 
A.  The airport manager shall have authority, to prepare and present to the governing body for approval and adoption rules and regulations for the management, operation and control of the Santa Fe Regional Airport, and for the use and occupancy, management, control, operation, care, repair and maintenance of all structures and facilities thereon, and all land on which Santa Fe Regional Airport is located and operated. 
B.  The airport manager shall have the authority, and is hereby empowered and authorized, upon the basis of traffic engineering or other investigations and studies or where necessitated by the peculiar character of the Santa Fe Regional Airport to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of automobile and vehicular traffic and parking facilities at the Santa Fe Regional Airport. By way of example, but not by way of limitation, such rules and regulations may provide for the following: 
1.  Establishment of zones for special parking; 
2.  Establishment of zones for the loading and unloading of passengers and for the deliveries of goods, and time limitations thereon; 
3.  Designation of bus stops; 
4.  Setting speed limits; 
5.  Installation of traffic-control signs, signals and devices for the regulation of traffic; 
6.  Establishment of accident reporting procedures; 
7.  Establishment of right-of-way regulations; 
8.  Prescribing methods of parking; and 
9.  Designation of one-way and through traffic roadways, driveways and thoroughfares. 
C.  The city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe Regional Airport, reserves the right to enforce these rules and regulations through an enforcement and civil administrative process that will be followed for any alleged violation of these rules and regulations. 
D.  The city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe Regional Airport, reserves the right to levy monetary fines up to five-hundred dollars ($500.00) in accordance with Section 1-3 SFCC 1987 for each violation of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  3) 
3-4 - AIRPORT SECURITY PROGRAM. 
A.  The Santa Fe Regional Airport has the responsibility to designate an airport security coordinator(s) in accordance with 49 CFR  1542.3 to develop and maintain an airport security program, in accordance with 49 CFR  1542, Subpart B. This program shall be considered Sensitive Security Information (SSI) that is controlled under 49 CFR parts 15 and 1520. No part of this record may be disclosed to persons without a "need to know", as defined in 49 CFR parts 15 and 1520, except with the written permission of the administrator of the Transportation Security Administration or the secretary of the Department of Transportation. Unauthorized release may result in civil penalty or other action. 
B.  Any person who has been issued identification media by the airport authorizing access to the security identification display area (SIDA), air operations area (AOA), public area, or sterile area shall comply with the Airport Security Program and Airport Security Rules and Regulations. 
C.  If a penalty is assessed against the City of Santa Fe by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or Transportation Security Administration (TSA) because a person who has been issued airport identification media has failed to comply with the airport security program, the airport manager shall assess the same penalty against the tenant or person who committed the violation. 
D.  The airport security coordinator(s) of the Santa Fe Regional Airport have primary responsibility for enforcement of the airport security program. The city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe Regional Airport, reserves the right to levy monetary fines up to five-hundred dollars ($500.00) in accordance with city of Santa Fe Code Section 1-3 for each violation of this Section or of airport security rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  4) 
3-5 - AIRPORT USER FEES. 
A.  Airport user fees as set forth in Schedule A shall be administered by the airport manager. 
B.  The airport user fees set forth in Schedule A may be adjusted or expanded from time to time by the airport manager with the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  5) 
3-6 - MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS. 

3-6.1 - Short Title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Santa Fe Regional Airport Minimum Standards Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  6) 
3-6.2 - Purpose. 
    The Santa Fe Regional Airport Minimum Standards shall be developed consistent with FAA Advisory Circular 150/5190-7, and all applicable Federal Aviation Regulations, and shall be adopted by ordinance and be kept on file at the airport manager's office and the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  6) 
3-6.3 - Minimum Standards and Requirements for Commercial Aeronautical Operations. 
A.  Minimum standards and requirements for commercial aeronautical operations shall be administered by the airport manager. 
B.  The standards and requirements shall apply to a person or persons, firm or corporation based upon and engaging in one (1) or more commercial aeronautical operations at the Santa Fe Regional Airport. 
C.  A copy of the minimum standards shall be kept on file in the office of the airport manager and city clerk's office and shall be at all reasonable times available and subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17 ,  6) 
CHAPTER IV - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- See Chapter XX, Police Regulations, for regulations concerning Mandatory Sentencing of Persons Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs and regulations prohibiting the Possession of Open Containers in a Motor Vehicle. 

4-1 - Definitions. 
    The definitions used in the Liquor Excise Tax Act, Chapter 7, Article 17 NMSA 1978 and the Liquor Control Act, Chapter 60, Articles 3A, 5A, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6E, 7A, 7B and 8A NMSA 1978 are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  2; Code 1973,  3-1; Code 1975-11,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-2-1; Ord. No. 2016-23  1) 
4-2 - REGULATIONS CONCERNING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. 

4-2.1 - Compliance with Liquor Control Act. 
A.  The sale or the possession for the purpose of sale or offering for sale, manufacture or transportation of alcoholic liquors is hereby prohibited within the city except on the terms and conditions specified in this article or on the terms and conditions specified in the Liquor Control Act. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to deliver any alcoholic liquors for resale in the city unless such person has complied with the provisions of the laws of this state in every respect as to permits, quantity, shipper and consignee and all other provisions of the Liquor Control Act. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  2; Code 1973,  3-2; Ord. #1975-11,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-2-2) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate sales,  60-6-1 NMSA 1978. 
4-2.2 - Alcoholic liquors in unlicensed public places. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume or possess an open container of alcoholic liquors or for any person who is the owner, proprietor, operator or agent of the owner, proprietor or operator to sell, serve, furnish or permit the drinking or consumption of alcoholic liquors in any public place or any public or private club, whether operated for profit or not, except in those establishments having a license to dispense alcoholic liquors. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  2; Code 1973,  3-3; Ord. #1975-11,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-2-3; Ord. #2012-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  60-10-12 NMSA 1978. 
4-3 - REGULATIONS CONCERNING MINORS. 

4-3.1 - Employment of minors. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee knowingly to employ any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age in the sale and service of alcoholic liquors. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  2; Code 1973,  3-4; Ord. #1975-11,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-2-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  60-10-37 NMSA 1978. 
4-3.2 - Selling or giving alcoholic liquors to minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for any club, retailer, dispenser or any other person except the parent, guardian, adult spouse of any minor or adult person into whose custody any court has committed the minor for the time, outside of the actual visible personal presence of the minor's parent, guardian, adult spouse or the adult person into whose custody any court has committed the minor for the time to do any of the following: 
(1)  Sell, serve or give any alcoholic liquors to a minor, to permit a minor to consume alcoholic liquors on the licensed premises; 
(2)  Buy alcoholic liquors for or procure the sale or service of alcoholic liquor to a minor; 
(3)  Deliver alcoholic liquors to a minor; 
(4)  Aid or assist a minor to buy, procure or be served with alcoholic liquors. 
B.  It is unlawful for any minor to consume, buy, attempt to buy, receive, possess or permit himself to be served with any alcoholic liquor except when accompanied by his parent, guardian, adult spouse or an adult person into whose custody he has been committed for the time by a court, who is actually, visibly and personally present at the time the alcoholic liquor is bought or received by him or served or delivered to him. 
C.  If any person not a minor deceives another person to believe that a minor is legally entitled to be sold, served or delivered alcoholic liquors, he and not the person deceived shall have committed an unlawful act. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to give, loan, sell or deliver an identity card to a minor with the knowledge that the minor intends to use the identity for the purpose of procuring or attempting to procure any alcoholic liquors. 
E.  As used in this article, the word "minor" means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  2; Code 1973,  3-5; Ord. #1975-11,  2, SFCC 1981,  9-2-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  60-10-16 NMSA 1978. 
4-4 - LICENSES AND LICENSE TAX. 

4-4.1 - Licenses; required sales and shipment. 
    It is unlawful for any person, on his own behalf or as agent for another person, except a duly licensed wholesaler, rectifier, brewer or winer, directly or indirectly to sell or offer for sale or ship or transport into the city for resale any alcoholic liquors, except to a duly licensed retailer, dispenser or club. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  3; Code 1973,  3-6; Ord. #1975-11,  3; SFCC 1981,  9-2-6) 
4-4.2 - State license prerequisite to issuance of city license. 
    Licenses shall be issued under this chapter only to persons holding a valid license issued by the state under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  3; Code 1973,  3-7; Ord. #1975-11,  3; SFCC 1981,  9-2-7) 
State Law reference- Issuance of local license to those holding state license,  7-24-1 NMSA 1978. 
4-4.3 - Issuance or transfer of liquor licenses. 
A.  Duties of City Clerk. Upon receipt of a letter of preliminary approval or conditional preliminary approval of the issuance or transfer of a liquor license by the director of the New Mexico alcohol and gaming division (hereinafter "AGD") the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Set the tentative public hearing date and if necessary, request a waiver or extension from AGD, if the city is unable to meet either the forty-five-day public hearing date requirement or the thirty-day publication date requirement. 
(2)  Notify city staff, including, geographic information system mapping (GIS), code enforcement, fire department and traffic engineering of the request for a city liquor license, for preparation of reports related to litter, noise and traffic, and ensure that applicant is in compliance with city fire and land use codes. GIS staff will provide a map indicating whether the proposed licensed premise is within three hundred (300) feet of a church or school. This information shall be provided to the hearing officer. 
(3)  Notify a hearing officer, designated by the governing body in accordance with Paragraph B., below, of the receipt of the letter of preliminary approval or conditional preliminary approval for a liquor license issuance or transfer. If the hearing officer is unable to serve, the city clerk shall notify another hearing officer until a hearing officer has agreed to conduct the meeting. The city clerk shall also notify the hearing officer of any related request for a waiver of the three hundred-foot location restriction between the proposed licensed premise and any church or school (hereinafter "waiver"). 
(4)  Prepare the legal notice of the public hearing in the manner provided by the New Mexico Liquor Control Act (hereinafter "Liquor Control Act"). The applicant shall pay the cost of the publication. 
B.  Designation of Hearing Officer. 
(1)  As authorized by Section 60-6B-4(E) NMSA 1978, the governing body may designate, from a list provided by the city manager, two or more hearing officers to conduct public hearings. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a hearing officer shall be a licensed member of the New Mexico Bar. The city manager shall advertise for the position of hearing officer. The term of a hearing officer shall be four (4) years. 
(3)  The city clerk shall keep the list of hearing officers designated by the governing body. 
C.  Duties of Hearing Officer. The hearing officer shall notify the city clerk within two (2) business days if the hearing officer can serve and shall, within forty-five (45) days of receipt by the city of the AGD letter of preliminary approval or conditional preliminary approval of a liquor license issuance or transfer, hold a public hearing regarding the applicant's request. 
D.  Waivers. The hearing officer may recommend to the governing body that it grant or deny a waiver pursuant to Section 60-6B-10 NMSA 1978. 
E.  Procedure at Public Hearing. 
(1)  The applicant may be represented by an attorney at the public hearing. 
(2)  Rules of evidence shall not be followed. The hearing officer may consider evidence, oral or written, which may be presented if such evidence is relevant. 
(3)  The grounds for approval or denial are set forth in the Liquor Control Act. 
(4)  Prior to allowing for oral testimony, the hearing officer shall swear in every person who will provide testimony. 
F.  Recommendation of Hearing Officer. The hearing officer shall, no later than the seventh calendar day following any hearing, forward to the city clerk their recommendation of approval or denial, which shall be supported by findings and conclusions, together with a record, which shall be made of such hearing as provided by law. The city manager may, upon email request from the hearing officer, and a showing of good cause and determination that the request can still be voted on by the governing body in a timely manner, send an email to the hearing officer granting additional time to provide such recommendation. The city clerk, upon receipt of the recommendation, shall place it on the next governing body consent calendar agenda. 
G.  Duties of Governing Body. The governing body, within thirty (30) days after the public hearing before the hearing officer, shall consider, at a public meeting of the governing body, the recommendations of the hearing officer, which shall be on the consent calendar. 
(1)  If the item is not removed from the consent calendar, the governing body's vote to approve the consent calendar shall constitute its concurrence with the hearing officer's recommendation. The city clerk shall notify AGD, on a form prescribed by AGD, of the governing body's decision, no later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing before the hearing officer. 
(2)  Any member of the governing body may remove the hearing officer's recommendation from the consent calendar for discussion. The governing body shall not take additional evidence or testimony and shall only conduct deliberations of the request based on the record provided. The governing body shall then vote on the request. 
(a)  If the governing body votes to approve the request, the city clerk shall notify AGD, on a form prescribed by AGD, of the governing body's decision, no later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing before the hearing officer. 
(b)  If the governing body, based on the preponderance of the evidence, votes to disapprove the request, it shall set forth the reasons for the disapproval as required under the Liquor Control Act. The city clerk shall send to AGD, no later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing before the hearing officer, a copy of the record of the public hearing, the minutes of the governing body meeting and the notice of disapproval on a form prescribed by AGD. 
(3)  If the governing body remands the request back to the hearing officer beyond the time required in the Liquor Control Act, or does not reach a decision within thirty (30) days after the public hearing before the hearing officer, the governing body is aware that AGD, pursuant to the Liquor Control Act, may approve the request prior to the governing body's final decision on the matter. 
H.  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the governing body may appeal in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. # 2018-22 ,  1) 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2018-22 ,  1, adopted September 12, 2018, repealed the former Section 4-4.3, and enacted a new Section 4-4.3 as set out herein. The former Section 4-4.3 pertained to application for city license. See Ordinance List for complete derivation. 
4-4.4 - City liquor license tax; staggered liquor license renewal dates. 
A.  Pursuant to Sections 7-24-1 and 60-6B-5 NMSA 1978, annual city liquor license taxes on the privileges of persons holding dispenser, retailer and canopy liquor licenses issued by the state are imposed an annual fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), payable on or before July 1 of each year. The license year for dispenser, retailer and canopy liquor licenses shall expire on June 30, unless renewed. The city may reissue the licenses annually, on or before July 1, upon payment of the annual license fee. 
B.  Pursuant to Sections 7-24-1 and 60-6B-5 NMSA 1978, city liquor license taxes on the privileges of persons holding restaurant, club, wholesaler and manufacturer liquor licenses issued by the state are imposed a fee of eighty-five dollars ($85.00), payable on or before July 1, 2016. The license for restaurant, club, wholesaler and manufacturer liquor licenses shall expire on October 31, 2016, unless renewed. The city may reissue the licenses, on or before November 1, 2016, upon payment of the annual license fee referenced in paragraph C, below. 
C.  Pursuant to Sections 7-24-1 and 60-6B-5 NMSA 1978, annual city liquor license taxes on the privileges of persons holding restaurant, club, wholesaler and manufacturer liquor licenses issued by the state are imposed an annual fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), payable on or before November 1 of each year. The license year for restaurant, club, wholesaler and manufacturer liquor licenses shall expire on October 31, unless renewed. The city may reissue the licenses annually, on or before November 1, upon payment of the annual license fee. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  3; Code 1973,  3-9; Ord. #1975-11,  3; SFCC 1981,  9-2.9; Ord. 1981-41,  1; Ord. #1983-32,  1; Ord. #1986-13,  1; Ord. #1993-11,  1; Ord. No. 2016-23  2) 
4-4.5 - Special dispenser and public celebration permits. 
A.  Any person granted a special permit under the provisions of Section 60-6A-12 NMSA 1978 for use within the city, shall pay in advance a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day that the permittee is to dispense liquor. 
B.  If the location of the event is within three hundred (300) feet of a church or school, then a designated hearing officer shall conduct a public hearing, for a waiver, pursuant to the applicable provisions of Subsection 4-4.3 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2018-22,  2) 
4-5 - PENALTY. 
    As provided in the Liquor Control Act, the failure to pay the city license tax imposed by this chapter, in addition to any penalty imposed under Section 1-3 of this Code, shall be grounds for closing forthwith the place of business of any defaulting licensee. 
(Ord. #1968-6,  3; Code 1973,  3-11; Ord. #1975-11,  3; SFCC 1981,  9-2-11) 
State Law reference- Closing of establishment for failure to pay tax,  7-24-3 NMSA 1978. 
CHAPTER V - ANIMAL SERVICES 
5-1 - SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE. 
A.  This section may be cited as the "Animal Services Ordinance". 
B.  It is the intent of the governing body that this chapter will protect animals from cruelty, neglect and abuse; protect residents from annoyance and injury, assist in providing housing for animals in a control center, finance and support the functions of licensing and recovery, and to establish regulations for the neutering of animals. The neutering of animals is necessary to eliminate the excessive number of unwanted animals, thereby reducing the number of animals that must be euthanized each year. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-1 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-1; SFCC 1981,  6-2-1; Ord. #2004-20,  2; Ord. #2014-7, 1) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ordinance 2004-20 amended Chapter V by changing all references to "animal control" to read "animal services." 
5-2 - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    Administrator means the person responsible for the operations of the animal services division. 
    Animal means any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom excluding human beings. 
    Animal services center means the facility maintained and operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal services officer means an employee of the city, designated as such by the administrator, who has the authority of a peace officer to issue citations for violations of this chapter and performs such other duties relating to animal services as prescribed by the city manager. 
    Anti-escape provision means any housing, fencing or device which a guard dog cannot go over, under, through or around. 
    Bite means an actual puncture or tear of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal. 
    Breeder means any person involved in controlled breeding of animals except those complying with subsection 5-9.5 SFCC 1987 for litter fees. Breeders are subject to the professional animal care permit requirements set forth in subsection 5-6.2 SFCC 1987. 
    Commercial property means: 
A.  A portion of land, buildings, or land and buildings in the city, zoned for, or utilized for commercial or business uses, including temporary sites; and 
B.  Any vehicle utilized for commercial or business purposes in the city. 
    Cruelty means an overt act committed with the intent to harm or needlessly kill an animal or committed out of depraved indifference for the animal's wellbeing, including but not limited to torture, maiming, beating or otherwise committing violence that causes injury or death. 
    Dangerous animal means: 
A.  An animal which, when unprovoked, engages in behavior that requires a defensive action by a person to prevent great bodily harm to a person or domesticated animal provided that the person or the second animal are not on the premises of the owner or person having custody of the first animal; or 
B.  An animal which, when unprovoked, injures a person but the injury does not result in great bodily harm; or 
C.  An animal which, because of its poisonous bite or sting, constitutes a significant hazard to the public. 
    Dog park means an official city designated park or portion thereof where dogs can exercise and run off leash in a safe, secure environment within the established limits and boundaries of an official city designated dog park. 
    Domestic animal means an animal that is sufficiently tame to live with humans, such as a dog or cat, or one (1) that can be used to contribute to a family's support, such as a cow, chicken, or horse. 
    Establishment means a place of business together with its grounds and equipment. 
    Feces means excrement and other waste matter discharged from the bowels of an animal. 
    Great bodily harm means an injury to a person or domesticated animal which: 
A.  Creates a high probability of death; or 
B.  Results in serious disfigurement; or 
C.  Results in loss of any member or organ of the body; or 
D.  Results in permanent or prolonged impairment of the use of any member or organ of the body. 
    Grooming parlor means any establishment, or part thereof, or premises maintained for the purpose of offering animals cosmetic services for profit. 
    Guard dog means any dog that is utilized to protect commercial property, as defined above. 
    Guard dog site means any premises utilizing a guard dog, and which has a current guard dog permit. 
    Handler means a person who trains dogs for socialization or dog shows or trials or a security person capable of controlling guard dogs. 
    Handler breeder or hobby breeder means any person involved in controlled breeding of animals which are approved by a nationally recognized animal breeding organization, and are eligible to be so registered. Animals under the age of three (3) months are not required to be registered. Handler breeders or hobby breeders are subject to the professional animal permit requirements. 
    Heat or season means a regularly recurring state of estrus during which the female animal is capable of attracting or accepting the male for breeding or is capable of conceiving. 
    Hybrid means an animal created by breeding animals of different species. For purposes of this article, it includes, but is not limited to, the hybrid offspring of domesticated dogs and wolves, or domesticated dogs and coyotes. 
    Impound means to take-up and confine an animal in a humane manner. 
    Inspection officer means an animal services officer and is authorized by ordinance to conduct inspectorial searches. 
    Inspection order means an order issued by a municipal or district court judge. 
    Inspectorial search means an entry into and examination of premises for the purpose of ascertaining the existence or nonexistence of conditions dangerous to health or safety or otherwise relevant to the public interest, in accordance with inspection prescribed by this chapter enacted for the promotion of public well-being. 
    Kennel means any commercial establishment or premises where ten (10) or more dogs or cats, over three (3) months of age, are boarded, kept or maintained for any purpose whatsoever, with the exception of state-inspected veterinary hospitals and shelters. 
    Licensed veterinarian means a person with a doctor of veterinary medicine degree, licensed to practice in the state. 
    Livestock means cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, swine, sheep or goats. 
    Neglect means an overt act involving failure to provide for animal health or safety, including but not limited to failure to provide adequate food, water, shelter, exercise, or necessary veterinary care to an animal or to adequately confine an animal in a manner appropriate to its species, breed, age and condition. 
    Nuisance means, but is not limited to defecation, urination, disturbing the peace, emitting noxious or offensive odors or otherwise endangering or offending the well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
    Owner of animal means a person who owns, harbors or keeps, or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
    Person means any individual, household, firm, partnership, corporation, company, society, association, and every officer, agent or employee thereof. 
    Person in charge means for the purpose of inspection, the individual present in an establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present shall be considered the person in charge. 
    Pet shop means any commercial establishment or premises or part thereof maintained for the purchase, sale, exchange of animals of any type, except that the term shall not include livestock auctions. 
    Playground means an area where outdoor equipment is placed for children to play on, athletic fields such as baseball, football, soccer fields, handball courts, tennis courts, skateboard parks, etc. 
    Police dog means any dog owned by a public agency and used in law enforcement activities under the direction of a handler. 
    Premises means a parcel of land and the structures thereon. 
    Professional animal care business means a business operated by a person or persons that involves live animals, and includes, but is not limited to, animal rescue, animal shelter, boarding kennel, breeder, grooming parlor, grooming service, commercial kennel, pet day care facility, pet day care service, pet sitting service, pet store, training facility, dog walking service and circus acts. 
    Professional animal care permit means a permit issued by the city of Santa Fe animal services administrator to a person or persons which involves live animals, and includes, but is not limited to animal rescue, animal shelter, boarding kennel, breeder, grooming parlor, grooming service, commercial kennel, pet day care facility, pet day care service, pet sitting service, pet store, training facility, dog walking service and circus acts. 
    Quarantine means to detain or isolate an animal suspected of having a contagious disease. 
    Restraint means: 
A.  Confinement within the real property limits of an animal owner where the animal is secured by a leash or lead or is otherwise under the control of a responsible person; or 
B.  Confinement within a vehicle in a manner that prevents an animal from escaping. 
    Running at large means not to be confined within a building, shelter, walled or fenced area or secured by a leash, rope, chain or other restraining device, unless under the direct control of the owner/handler or keeper. 
    Service animal means a dog or miniature horse that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for a person with a disability. 
    Shelter means any establishment owned and operated by a non-profit humane organization licensed to do business in the state. 
    Stray animal means any animal found running at large beyond the boundaries of the premises of the owner except within the established limits and boundaries of an official city designated dog park. 
    Trolley system means a method to confine a dog by tethering the dog to a cable that is ten (10) feet or longer with a free moving pulley device attached that will allow the lead to roll across it, permitting maximum space for a single dog to move around. See illustration of a trolley system, Exhibit A. 
EXHIBIT A
Trolley System Illustration 

    Unaltered means not neutered or spayed. 
    Vaccination means protection provided against rabies by inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine recognized and approved by the state. 
    Vermin means small insects and animals (such as fleas, mice, rats or gophers) that are sometimes harmful to plants or other animals and that are difficult to get rid of. 
    Vicious animal means an animal which kills or causes great bodily harm. It does not include an animal that bites, attacks or injures a person or second animal, which is unlawfully upon the premises of the owner or person having custody of the first animal. Any animal that has previously been found to be a dangerous animal may thereafter be deemed vicious upon a second or subsequent offense. 
    Wild or exotic animal means any animal not normally considered domesticated and shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Class reptilia; order phidia, such as racers, boas, water snakes and pythons, and order loricata, such as alligators, caymans and crocodiles; 
B.  The following members of the class aves; order falconiforms, such as hawks, eagles and vultures, and subdivision ratitae, such as ostriches, rheas, cassowaries and emus; 
C.  Class mammalia; order carnivora; family felidae, such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars, except commonly accepted domesticated cats; family canidae, such as wolves, dingos, coyotes and jackals, except commonly accepted domesticated dogs; family mustelidae, such as weasels, martins, mink, badgers, except ferrets, family procynnidae, such as raccoons; family ursidae, such as bears; family pinnipedia such as seals, sea lions and walruses; order marsupialia, such as kangaroos and common opossums; order edentata, such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos; order proboscidea, such as elephants; order primata, such as monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas; order rodenta, such as porcupines; order ungulata, such as hippopotamuses, giraffes, llamas, antelope, deer, bison and camels but excluding cattle, swine, sheep and goats; and order euungulata such as rhinoceroses, tapirs and zebras but excluding horses, ponies, donkeys, burros and mules; 
D.  Class chondrichthyes, subclass elasmobranchii such as sharks, stingrays and skates; and 
E.  Hybrids, which includes the offspring of two (2) animals of different races, breeds, species, varieties or genera involving any one or more of the animals mentioned in Subsections A-D above. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-2 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-2; Ord. #1980-39,  1; Ord. #1984-70,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-2-2; Ord. #1989-27,  1; Ord. #1999-26,  1; Ord. #2002-14,  1; Ord. #2004-20,  1, 3-5; Ord. #2014-7,  2; Ord. #2015-2  1; Ord. # 2017-19  1) 
5-3 - ADMINISTRATION. 

5-3.1 - Administration of chapter. 
    The administrator is responsible for the administration of this chapter. Reasonable rules and regulations shall be prescribed by the administrator to carry out the intent and purpose of the Animal Services Chapter. The administrator may delegate authority to his duly appointed animal services officers as he/she deems expedient to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-3 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-3; SFCC 1981,  6-3-1; Ord. #2004-20,  6; Ord. #2014-7, 3) 
5-3.2 - Animal services officers to issue citations. 
    The city police, the administrator and animal services officers have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter and to perform such other duties as are prescribed by the city manager. An animal services officer shall wear a uniform, and a badge, and a name tag identifying him/her as an animal services officer. The badge shall be returned to the administrator upon the termination of his employment. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-4 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-4; SFCC 1981,  6-3-2; Ord. #2004-20,  7; Ord. #2014-7,  4) 
5-3.3 - Right of entry of animal services officers for apprehending animals at large or stray animals. 
    Animal services officers, in the performance of their duties, may enter upon private property, except a private residence, for the purpose of apprehending animals running at large and stray animals. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-5 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-5; SFCC 1981,  6-3-3; Ord. #2004-20,  8) 
5-3.4 - Resisting or obstructing an animal services officer. 
A.  Whoever commits resisting or obstructing an animal services officer is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
B.  Resisting or obstructing any animal services officer consists of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any animal services officer of the city or any other duly authorized person serving or attempting to serve or execute any process or any rule or order of any of the courts of this state or any other judicial writ or process regarding the enforcement of this chapter; or 
(2)  Resisting or abusing any animal services officer in the lawful discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. #2004-20,  9) 
5-4 - ANIMAL SERVICES CENTERS. 

5-4.1 - Established. 
    There are established one (1) or more animal services centers in such numbers and locations as designated by the city. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-6 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-6; SFCC 1981,  6-4-1; Ord. #2004-20,  1) 
5-4.2 - Hours of business. 
    The animal services center shall be kept open to the public for the transaction of business during the hours set by the administrator. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-8 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-8; SFCC 1981,  6-4-3; Ord. #2004-20,  1; Ord. #2014-7,  5) 
5-4.3 - Impoundment. 
    It is the duty of the animal services officers to take-up and impound in the animal services center any stray or any animal kept or maintained contrary to this chapter. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-9 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-9; SFCC 1981,  6-4-4; Ord. #2004-20,  1) 
5-4.4 - Records. 
    The animal services center shall maintain records of all animals impounded in the center for a period of time that is deemed reasonable by the city. The records shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  A complete description of the animal; 
(2)  The manner and date of its acquisition by the center; 
(3)  The date and manner of its disposal; 
(4)  The name and address of the purchaser of any animal; and 
(5)  All fees received. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-10 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-10; Ord. #1984-64,  2; SFCC 1981,  6-4-5; Ord. #2004-20,  10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  77-1-9 NMSA 1978. 
5-5 - OWNER'S DUTIES. 

5-5.1 - Rabies vaccinations. 
A.  It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping a dog, cat, ferret or dog hybrid over the age of three (3) months to have such animals vaccinated against rabies unless the pet owner obtains written verification from a licensed veterinarian that the animal should not be vaccinated for health reasons. The rabies vaccination shall be given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for three (3) years and shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be evidence of vaccination. 
B.  The veterinarian administering anti-rabies vaccine to any animal shall issue to the owner or keeper of the animal a numbered vaccination certificate. The certificate shall contain the name and address of the owner or keeper of the animal, a description of the animal vaccinated, the date of vaccination and the expiration date of the period of immunity. 
C.  It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, cat or ferret to fail to exhibit its certificate of vaccination upon demand by the administrator or by any animal services officer. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-11 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-11; SFCC 1981,  6-5-1; Ord. #2004-20,  11; Ord. No. 2014-7,  6) 
5-5.2 - Rabid animal. 
    An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies and every animal bitten by another animal afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed to rabies shall be confined at once in a secure place by the owner. A person who knows or who has reason to know that an animal is infected with rabies or has been exposed to rabies shall, immediately upon learning of the infection, notify the animal services center and the state health and environment department as to the place where the animal is confined and shall surrender the animal to the animal services center upon demand. The animal services center shall then deal with the rabid animal pursuant to state law. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-12 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-12; Ord. #1980-39,  2; SFCC 1981,  6-5-2; Ord. #2004-20,  1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  77-1-6 and 77-1-10 NMSA 1978. 
5-5.3 - Biting dogs or other biting animals. 
A.  The owner of an animal that bites a person, and a person bitten by an animal, shall report that occurrence to the animal services center and to the state health and environment department within twenty-four (24) hours. The owner of an animal that bites a person shall surrender the animal to the animal services center if the administrator deems it necessary to impound the animal for a period of observation. 
B.  A physician who renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report that fact to the animal services center and to the state health and environment department within twenty-four (24) hours of his first professional attendance. The physician shall report the name, sex and address of the person bitten, as well as the type and location of the bite. The physician shall give the name and address of the owner of the animal that inflicted the bite, if known, and any other facts or details that may assist the administrator in ascertaining the immunization status of the animal. 
C.  An animal that bites a person shall be confined securely at a place for a period of time deemed necessary by the administrator. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement. The administrator may consent to confinement on the owner's premises but only if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted. The premises where the home confinement is to occur shall be inspected and approved for such purposes by an animal services officer. The owner of the animal shall be required to enter into an indemnity agreement on a form approved and prescribed by the administrator before consent may be given for such home confinement. 
D.  A person who has custody of an animal that has bitten a person shall immediately notify the administrator if the animal shows any signs of sickness, abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. If the animal dies while it is in confinement, the person having custody of the animal shall notify the administrator or an animal services officer and relinquish any claims to the animal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-13 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-13; Ord. #1980-39,  3; SFCC 1981,  6-5-3; Ord. #2004-20,  1; Ord. #2014-7,  7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  77-1-6 NMSA 1978. 
5-5.4 - Restraint of animals. 
A.  Voice command is not an acceptable form of restraint. 
B.  Except for city permitted events that allow for animals to be present, animals which are not service animals shall not be allowed upon playgrounds or upon the grounds of swimming pools, or within a building, any of which are owned, operated or maintained by the city, nor shall they be allowed upon the premises of public schools, preschool through high school unless permission is obtained from the school official. All animals which are not service animals shall be prohibited in Cathedral Park. 
C.  Animals shall not be allowed upon a public street, alley, easement, city property or other place open to the public or upon any property other than that of the owner of the animal unless properly restrained. Dogs shall be on a secure leash no longer than eight (8) feet in length and under the immediate effective physical control of the person having custody thereof. The person having custody shall be a person of such age and maturity to be reasonably responsible therefor. A person inside an enclosed structure shall not be considered to be in the physical control of a dog not in the enclosed structure. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply when an animal is participating in a bona fide animal show or training program which has been authorized by the animal services division or is in a city park designated by the governing body as an exercise ground for dogs. The provisions also do not apply to police canine units unleashed while on public property while acting in a law enforcement activity. 
D.  Animals located upon the property of the owner of the animal shall be restrained in such a manner as to secure the animal, using devices such as a trolley system, kennel, invisible fencing, or inescapable walled or fenced area. Voice command is not an acceptable form of restraint. The animal shall be restrained in such a way as to prevent the animal from reaching outside the perimeter of the property. 
E.  Animals shall not be carried in or upon any vehicle in a cruel, inhumane or unsafe manner. An animal carried in the bed of a truck shall be crated or restrained upon a non-metal mat so it cannot fall or jump from the truck or be strangled. 
F.  A trolley system may be used to restrain an animal upon the owner's property, provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The device shall be affixed to the animal by use of a non-abrasive, comfortably fitted collar or harness. 
(2)  The device shall be at least ten (10) feet long unless such length would allow the animal to reach outside the owner's property, in which case it shall be no less than eight (8) feet long and elevated four (4) to seven (7) feet off the ground. The device shall be fastened so the animal can sit, walk and lie down comfortably and shall be unobstructed by objects that may cause the device or animal to become entangled or strangled. 
(3)  The animal shall have easy access to adequate shade, shelter, food and potable water. 
(4)  The area where the animal is confined shall be kept free of garbage and other debris that might endanger the animal's health or safety. Feces shall be cleaned up regularly, but no less frequently than twice weekly. 
(5)  The area where the animal is confined shall be kept free of insect infestations such as ant hills, wasp nests, or flea, tick and maggot infestations. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-14 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-14; SFCC 1981,  6-5-4; Ord. #1999-26,  2; Ord. #2004-20,  12; Ord. #2004-44,  1; Ord. #2014-7,  8) 
5-5.5 - Confinement during estrus (heat). 
    Any female animal in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined to a well-ventilated building, escape-proof kennel or a boarding facility so that contact with a male animal will be prevented except for intentional breeding purpose, with required permits. Owners who do not comply with this section may be required upon direction of an animal services officer to place such animal in a boarding kennel or veterinary hospital at the owner's expense. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-15 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-15; SFCC 1981,  6-5-5; Ord. #2004-20,  13; Ord. #2014-7,  9) 
5-5.6 - Licenses for dogs and cats. 
A.  Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog or cat three (3) months of age or over shall obtain a license for such animal. Licenses valid for one (1) year, two (2) years or three (3) years may be obtained from the animal services center or Santa Fe animal shelter. A current rabies vaccination certificate shall be presented at the time of the license purchase. In the event a tag is lost, replacement tags shall be purchased. 
B.  A current license tag shall be affixed to the licensed dog or cat at all times in a reasonable manner, unless the licensed dog or cat is being kept in an approved kennel, veterinary hospital, grooming parlor, is appearing in an approved show or is being trained; provided, that the person who is training the dog or cat shall have in his personal possession the valid license tag for each dog or cat and shall immediately display such upon request by an animal services officer, or other law enforcement officers. 
C.  Dogs or cats belonging to nonresidents who do not keep the animals within the corporate limits of the city for thirty (30) consecutive days shall be exempt from this section; provided, however, that all the other provisions of this chapter must be complied with. 
D.  The license fees shall not apply to a service animal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-16 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-16; Ord. #1980-39,  4; SFCC 1981,  6-5-6; Ord. #1981-65,  1; Ord. #2004-20,  14) 
5-6 - PROFESSIONAL ANIMAL CARE. 

5-6.1 - Purpose. 
    The city declares it to be conducive to the promotion of the health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city to require a professional animal care permit to operate a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, animal training, dog walking or animal sitting business or shelter, and to impose certain regulations and inspection fees on those engaged in operating, maintaining or owning such professional animal care entities. 
(Code 1973, Art. V, Ch. 4; SFCC 1981,  6-6-1; Ord. #2014-7,  10) 
5-6.2 - Professional animal care permits required; general provisions. 
A.  Breeders and persons operating kennels, grooming parlors, pet shops, animal training, dog walking service, pet sitting service, circus acts or shelters shall obtain a professional animal care permit from the administrator. It shall be unlawful to operate such a business without a current valid professional animal care permit. A current city business license shall be presented at the time of application for a professional animal care permit. 
B.  When a permit is applied for, an inspection of the breeders location or the kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop animal training, dog walking service, pet sitting service, circus acts or shelter shall be conducted by the administrator to determine compliance with this chapter. If inspection reveals that the operation complies with the law and regulations, a professional animal care permit will be issued. The permit is only valid for the approved operation. Permittees who keep animals confined, shall, at the option of the permittee, be exempt from the animal license requirements of this chapter and will not be issued any license tags unless the required animal license fee is paid. 
C.  A permit is issued to a person for use at a single location. A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, animal training, dog walking service, pet sitting service, shelter, or breeder's business location. 
D.  A breeder shall not advertise, sell, barter, exchange or give away any dog or cat within the municipal boundaries unless the professional animal care permit fee is paid. Any advertisement for the sale, barter, exchange or give away shall include the permit fee receipt number. A breeder shall furnish the permit fee receipt number to any prospective recipient requesting the number. 
E.  A permit holder shall notify the administrator of any change in his operations which may affect the status of his permit and shall keep the administrator informed of any change in name or location of his business. 
F.  Breeders or persons in charge of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, animal training, dog walking service, pet sitting service, circus acts or shelter shall be responsible for complying with this chapter. There shall be kept at each kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, shelter, or breeder's location a record of all animals received and of their final disposition. 
G.  The professional animal care permit shall expire December 31 of each calendar year, and shall be renewed by February 1 of the following year. Professional animal care fees shall be established by the administrator and approved by the governing body of the city. 
H.  Any individual, breeder or business that provides animals for sale or adoption shall purchase and display a professional animal care permit issued by the administrator. Any individual, breeder or business that is discovered representing another entity's animals as their own shall be in violation of this Chapter and shall be cited and may be required to forfeit their current professional care permit, except that individuals may purchase a litter permit in accordance with subsection 5-9.5. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-17 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-17; Ord. #1980-39,  5; SFCC 1981,  6-6-2; Ord. #2004-20,  15; Ord. #2014-7,  11) 
5-6.3 - Specifications and maintenance of facilities. 
A.  Animal housing facilities shall be constructed of nontoxic materials and in a structurally sound design. Interior floors shall be smooth, easily cleanable construction and impervious to water. The facility shall be kept in good repair and kept clean and sanitary at all times, so as to protect the animals from disease and injury. 
B.  Animals maintained in pens, cages or runs for periods exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, shall be provided with adequate space to prevent overcrowding and to maintain normal exercise, according to species. 
C.  Indoor housing shall be provided for in all pet shops, grooming parlors, shelters and commercial kennels. These facilities shall be sufficiently temperature-controlled and ventilated to provide for the animal's comfort and health. 
D.  Sufficient lighting shall be provided by either artificial or natural means. 
E.  Outside housing shall be sufficient to protect animals from sunlight, rain, snow or cold weather that may be detrimental to the animals' health. 
F.  Provisions shall be made for the removal and proper disposal of animal and food waste, bedding, dead animals and debris. 
G.  Adult animals shall be segregated by sex, except where otherwise indicated for health, welfare or breeding purposes and any vicious or quarantined animals shall be removed and caged by themselves. 
H.  Animals shall be provided with clean, fresh, sufficient and wholesome food and water. Food and water containers shall be kept clean. 
I.  Each animal shall be observed daily by the animal caretaker in charge or his representative. Sick, diseased, injured, lame or blind animals shall be provided with proper veterinary care. Any person operating or employed at a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter who observes an animal which he suspects of being rabid shall at once notify the administrator and the state department of health and environment and segregate such animal for a period of ten (10) days, unless examined and released by written statement of a veterinarian and then only at the discretion of the administrator. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-18 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-18; Ord. #1980-39,  6; SFCC 1981,  6-6-3; Ord. #2014-7,  11) 
5-6.4 - Inspections; emergency inspectoral searches. 
A.  Inspections. 
(1)  Animal services officers shall conduct inspections of any facility or parcel of land to which this section applies. 
(2)  The animal services officer shall notify the occupants, custodians or owners of the premises, seven (7) days prior to the inspection, of the nature and purpose of the inspection. 
(3)  The notice required by the preceding subsection may be dispensed with because of the nature of the inspection to be undertaken, the conduct of the occupants, custodians or property owners, other circumstances or there is a reasonable basis for belief that such notice would obstruct, or seriously diminish the utility of the inspection in question. 
(4)  Upon sufficient showing the consent to an inspectorial search has been refused or is otherwise unobtainable within a reasonable period of time, the officer may make application for an inspection order. Such application shall be made to the municipal or district court judge having jurisdiction over the premises to be inspected. 
(5)  The application shall be granted and the inspection order issued upon a sufficient showing that inspection of the premises or property, is in accordance with the intent of this chapter, and that the circumstances of the particular inspection for which application is made are otherwise reasonable. The issuing authority shall make and keep a record of the proceeding on the application, and enter thereon his findings in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(6)  The officer executing the order shall, if the premises or property in question are unoccupied at the time of execution, be authorized to use such force as is reasonably necessary to gain entry and make the inspection. 
(7)  The inspection officer conducting the search shall, if authorized by the issuing authority on proper showing, be accompanied by one (1) or more law enforcement officers who are authorized to serve search warrants. The law enforcement officer(s) shall assist the inspection officer in executing the order at his direction. 
B.  Emergency Inspectorial Searches. 
(1)  Whenever it reasonably appears to an inspection officer that there may be a condition, arising under the ordinance he is authorized to enforce, and imminently dangerous to health and safety, the detection or correction of which requires immediate access, without prior notice to the premises or property for purposes of inspectorial search and if consent to such search is refused or cannot be promptly obtained, the inspection officer may make an emergency inspectorial search of the premises without an inspection order. 
(2)  Upon completion of the emergency inspectorial search, the inspection officer shall make prompt report of the circumstances to the municipal judge to whom application for an inspection order would otherwise have been made. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-19 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-19; Ord. #1980-39,  7; SFCC 1981,  6-6-4; Ord. #2004-20,  16, 17; Ord. #2014-7,  12) 
5-6.5 - Permit violations; suspensions and revocations; hearing. 
A.  Permit Violation. If the animal services officer makes an inspection of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop animal training, dog walking service, pet sitting service, circus acts or shelter and discovers a violation of this chapter, he shall notify the permit holder, or operator, of the violation by means of written notice. The notice of violation shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific violation found; 
(2)  Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation found; 
(3)  State that failure to comply with any notice may result in a citation and referral to municipal court for prosecution and/or immediate suspension of the permit; and 
(4)  Be hand delivered to the permit holder or operator or mailed registered mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the permit holder. 
B.  Suspension of Permit in an Emergency. If the violation described above has not been corrected within the specific time period and the animal services officer determines that an emergency exists that for the welfare, safety of the animal or the general public requires suspension of a permit, the animal services officer shall notify the permit holder, or operator that the permit shall be suspended. The notification of suspension shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific violation found or describe the emergency situation which exists requiring suspension of the permit; 
(2)  State that the permit is suspended until a hearing in compliance with paragraph E. below is held. The hearing shall be held within five (5) days of the receipt of the notice of suspension; 
(3)  State that the suspension shall be lifted if the violation or emergency situation is corrected in compliance with this chapter and approved by the animal services center before the hearing; and 
(4)  State that at the hearing a decision will be made regarding whether the permit shall be reinstated or revoked permanently; 
(5)  Be hand delivered to the permit holder or operator; 
C.  Revocation of Permit in an Emergency. If the animal services officer determines that there are serious or repeated violations of this chapter and the animal services officer determines that an emergency exists that for the welfare, safety of the animal or the general public requires suspension of a permit, the officer shall notify the permit holder or operator that the permit is revoked. The notification of revocation shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific repeated violations found or describe the emergency situation which exists requiring revocation of the permit; 
(2)  State that the permit is revoked; 
(3)  Inform the permit holder that he or she may request a hearing as set forth in paragraph E. below. The hearing shall determine whether the revocation should remain or that the permit should be reinstated. A request for a hearing shall be submitted to the animal services center within ten (10) days of receipt of the notification of revocation; and 
(4)  Be hand delivered to the permit holder or operator. 
D.  Suspension or Revocation of Permit not in an Emergency. In situations not deemed to be an emergency described in paragraphs B. and C. above, a hearing as set forth in paragraph E. below shall be conducted prior to suspension or revocation of the permit. 
E.  Hearing. A hearing required as set forth in paragraphs B., C. and D. above shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the city; 
(2)  Notice of the hearing shall: 
(a)  State the time, place and nature of the hearing; 
(b)  State the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; 
(c)  Include a short and plain statement of the matters of fact and law asserted so that all have sufficient notice of the issues involved to afford them reasonable opportunity to prepare; and 
(d)  Be hand delivered to the permit holder or operator. If the party cannot be located a certified letter shall be sent to their last known address. 
(3)  All parties shall be allowed to respond and present evidence and argument on all issues involved; 
(4)  A record of the hearing shall include the following: 
(a)  All pleadings, motions, and intermediate rulings; 
(b)  Evidence received or considered; 
(c)  A statement of matters officially noticed; 
(d)  Questions and offers of proof, objections and rulings herein; 
(e)  Findings and conclusions; and 
(f)  Any decision, opinion or report by the hearing officer. 
(5)  Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence presented and on matters officially noticed; 
(6)  Notice of the final decision shall be in writing and hand delivered to the permit holder or operator or mailed certified mail return receipt requested within five (5) days of the hearing. 
F.  Decisions made by the hearing officer to revoke a permit shall be final. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-20 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-20; Ord. #1981-64,  27; SFCC 1981,  6-6-5; Ord. #2004-20,  18, 19; Ord. #2014-7,  13) 
5-6.6 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 5-6.6, Hearing; Review, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1973,  4-21 by Ord. No. 1979-2,  4-21 and SFCC 1981,  6-6-6 was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 2004-20. See subsection 5-6.5F for provisions pertaining to hearings and review. 
5-6.7 - Additional pet shop requirements. 
A.  Prior to offering a dog or cat for sale and thereafter at intervals of fifteen (15) days until such dog or cat is sold, pet shops shall provide for examination of such dog or cat by a licensed veterinarian. The pet shop shall maintain a record of the veterinary services rendered for each dog or cat offered for sale. 
B.  If within fifteen (15) days of sale, any such dog or cat becomes ill or dies of any illness which existed in such dog or cat at the time of the sale, the pet shop shall, at the option of the purchaser, replace the dog or cat or refund in full the purchase price of such dog or cat provided that in the case of illness, upon return of the dog or cat to the pet shop and the receipt of a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, stating that the dog or cat is ill from a condition which existed at the time of sale or in the case of death, the receipt of a certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that the dog or cat died from an illness which existed at the time of sale. The presentation of such certificate shall be sufficient proof to claim reimbursement or replacement and the return of such deceased dog or cat to the pet shop shall not be required. No such refund or replacement shall be made if such illness or death resulted from maltreatment or neglect by a person other than the pet shop owner or his agent or employee. 
C.  A sign measuring not less than three (3) inches in height and not less than five (5) inches in width shall be posted on the crate of each dog offered for sale in a pet shop. The sign shall contain information printed in black lettering on a white background listing the breed of such dog, the locality and state in which such dog was born, and any individual identification number of such dog as listed on the official certificate of veterinary inspection from the state of origin. 
D.  A sign shall be posted stating the following "THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS ALWAYS AVAILABLE ON ALL OUR PUPPIES: DATE OF BIRTH, THE STATE OF BIRTH, BREED, SEX AND COLOR, THE DATE THE PET SHOP RECEIVED THE PUPPY, THE NAMES AND REGISTRATION NUMBERS OF THE PARENTS (FOR AKC REGISTERABLE PUPPIES), RECORD OF INOCULATIONS AND WORMING TREATMENTS AND ANY RECORD OF ANY VETERINARY TREATMENT OR MEDICATIONS RECEIVED TO DATE." Such sign shall include a telephone number at the animal services center through which information may be obtained regarding complaints about diseased or disabled animals offered for sale. Such sign shall be posted in a place readily visible to the consumer where dogs are offered for sale and printed in black lettering not less than thirty-eight (38) point size upon a white background. 
(Ord. #2004-20,  21; Ord. #2014-7,  14) 
5-7 - GENERAL REGULATIONS. 

5-7.1 - Possession, confinement and impoundment of animals. 
A.  No person shall hold or retain possession of any animal of which he is not the owner, without the knowledge or consent of the owner, for more than twenty-four (24) hours without first reporting the possession to the administrator or his designee, giving his name and address, a true and complete statement of the circumstances, a description of the animal and the precise location where such animal is confined. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person taking up an animal to fail to give the notice required in paragraph A. of this section, and for any person having such animal in his possession to fail or refuse to immediately surrender such animal to the administrator or his designee upon demand. 
C.  A licensed stray animal shall be confined at the animal services center for a period of at least seven (7) days during which time the owner shall be notified. If identification or notification of the owner is not possible, the animal services center may dispose of the animal, without notice, one (1) day after the required impoundment period and may either place the animal in an adoptive home, or may destroy the animal in a humane fashion, as the administrator may deem proper. 
D.  An unlicensed stray animal shall be confined at the animal services center for a period of at least five (5) days. One (1) day after the required impoundment period, the administrator may either place the animal in an adoptive home, or may destroy the animal, in a humane fashion, as the administrator may deem proper. 
E.  The animal services officers have the right to impound animals that are destroying public or private property or endangering the welfare of any person or animal that is lawfully on public or private rights-of-way. Any animal in violation of this subsection is declared to be a nuisance, a menace to the public health and safety and shall be impounded. 
F.  A notice of impoundment shall be left when an animal is impounded from private property. An attempt shall be made by the animal services officers to contact the owner. 
G.  No animal that has been impounded by the animal services center shall be adopted-out for the purpose of breeding or sale. Every dog and cat adopted from the center shall be neutered by a licensed veterinarian. A fee for the operation shall be paid to the animal services center or its designee by the person purchasing the dog or cat, prior to the release of the animal. 
H.  In the event of a stray avian, bovine, equine, ovine, porcine or caprine animal services shall turn the animal over to the state livestock board. 
I.  In the event of sickness or injury of the animal upon the advice of a licensed veterinarian, the administrator may take such action as called for to prevent undue pain and suffering including immediate humane euthanasia of the animal. 
J.  It is the responsibility of an owner of an animal legally impounded to pay for boarding and other costs. The city shall establish appropriate fees and procedures for their collection. In addition, the owner shall pay any license fees due, cost of vaccinations, fines imposed or other costs incurred in the care and maintenance of the animal. The animal services center shall not release any animal impounded at the center until all such fees, fines and costs are paid. 
K.  Dogs or cats shall not be released unless properly vaccinated and licensed as set forth in subsections 5-5.1 and 5-5.6 SFCC 1987. Dogs and cats shall be spayed or neutered before the animal is released unless the animal is licensed as an unaltered animal; however, upon the third impoundment the animal shall be neutered before it is released. The owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred and shall pay in full before the animal is released. 
L.  If the administrator determines that an animal is a threat to public safety or that an animal's safety is in jeopardy, the administrator may impound the animal, at the owner's expense, for the time necessary to seek a court order to hold the animal until the case against the owner or caretaker of the animal is heard in municipal court. Any attempt to obtain such a court order shall be made expeditiously. The owner or caretaker of the animal shall be responsible for any and all boarding and medical costs that accrue as a result of such impoundment. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-22 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-22; Ord. #1980-39,  8; Ord. #1984-71,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-7-1; Ord. #1999-26,  3; Ord. #2004-20,  22; Ord. #2014-7,  15) 
5-7.2 - Enclosure for breeding animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to let any female animal to any male animal, except within an enclosure so arranged as to obstruct the animals completely from the view of all who have no proprietary interest in the breeding of the animals. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-23 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-23; SFCC 1981  6-7-2) 
5-7.3 - Animals on unenclosed premises. 
    It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake-out, graze or herd any animal on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the property line. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-24 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-24; SFCC 1981  6-7-3) 
5-7.4 - Vicious animals; dangerous animals. 
A.  Vicious Animals. No person shall keep or harbor a vicious animal. An animal whose bite or attack results in or causes great bodily harm to a person or an animal may be deemed vicious by a court of law. Any person attacked by a vicious animal while on public property may use reasonable force to repel the attack. An animal deemed vicious by a court of law shall be surrendered to the animal services center for humane euthanasia, at the owner's expense, or the owner shall provide acceptable proof to the animal services center that the animal has been destroyed. 
B.  Dangerous Animals. No person shall keep or harbor a dangerous animal in a manner that constitutes a threat to a person or other domesticated animal. An animal deemed dangerous by a court of law shall be muzzled, on a leash no longer than three (3) feet, and under the immediate physical control of the owner or person having custody whenever the animal is not on the premises of the owner or person having custody. If an animal is found to be dangerous and the owner or person having custody of the animal has been found to not be in compliance with this section, then the animal may be deemed vicious by a court of law. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-25 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-25; SFCC 1981,  6-7-4; Ord. #2002-14,  2; Ord. #2004-20,  1; Ord. #2014-7,  16) 
5-7.5 - Animals disturbing the peace. 
A.  It is unlawful for anyone to own, keep, or harbor any animal which habitually howls, yelps, whines, barks or makes other noises in a manner which tends to disturb the public peace unreasonably. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with the terms of the city code. 
C.  All complaints filed pursuant to this section shall be made at the animal services office, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. or to an animal services officer in the field. Complaints shall be in writing on forms provided by animal services, including the complainant's name, address, phone number and signature as well as the animal owner's name and address. All complainants shall be willing to testify and provide documentation regarding the complaint in municipal court. 
D.  Upon receipt of the complaint, animal services shall notify the pet owner in person and/or in writing of the complaint filed. The complainant may contact animal services a second time and animal services shall notify the pet owner again. If no progress is made in resolving the complaint and the complainant contacts animal services a third time, animal services shall submit the written complaint to municipal court. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-26 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-26; Ord. 1980-39,  9; SFCC 1981,  6-7-5; Ord. #2004-20,  23) 
5-7.6 - Animal nuisances. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such animal to create any nuisance upon a sidewalk, public park, alley or other place open to the public or upon any property other than that of the owner of the animal. The term nuisance shall include any defecation, destruction of property or disturbing the property of another, including the rubbish or trash of a resident. When an animal defecates in such place, the owner shall remove the feces and dispose of it in a sanitary manner. Anyone walking an animal in a public area shall have in his or her possession a sanitary and disposable means of removing the animal's feces which must be placed in a refuse container for sanitary removal. The person shall be able to present such means upon request of an animal services officer. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to a service animal accompanying any person with a disability. 
B.  Any person keeping animals shall provide adequate and sanitary housing facilities for such animals, and no stagnant water shall be permitted to accumulate. All structures used for the housing of such animals and all yards, cages and runs provided for them shall be cleaned in a timely manner so as not to cause noxious or offensive odors and to prevent the breeding of insects. Such areas shall be cleaned often enough so as not to cause a health hazard for the animal or interfere with the animal's well-being. Failure to so keep any such animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. 
C.  Violations of this section shall constitute a nuisance and shall subject the owner or person having care or control of the animal to the penalties set forth in Section 5-12 SFCC 1987. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-27 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-27; SFCC 1981,  6-7-7; Ord. #2004-20,  24; Ord. #2014-7,  17) 
5-7.7 - Unlawful use of license tags. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove any license tag from one animal to another or to remove a license tag from a stray without lawful permission. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture or cause to be manufactured or to have in his possession or under his control, a stolen, counterfeit or forged animal license tag, rabies vaccination certificate or other form of animal or premises license. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-28 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-28; SFCC 1981,  6-7-7) 
5-7.8 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 5-7.8, Breaking into Center, Shelter or Vehicles, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1973,  4-29 by Ord. No. 1979-2 and SFCC 1981,  6-7-8 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-20. 
5-7.9 - Service animals in public places. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning, operating or maintaining any public place of business or conveyance into which the general public is invited for any purpose to debar or exclude therefrom any dog or miniature horse designated as a service animal that has been individually trained to work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability whom it was trained to assist in conformance with the law. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-30 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-30; SFCC 1981,  6-7-9; Ord. #1989-27,  2; Ord. #2014-7,  18) 
5-7.10 - Slaughterhouses and slaughtering. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep a slaughterhouse or to slaughter any cattle, sheep or swine. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-31 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-31; SFCC 1981,  6-7-10) 
5-7.11 - Confining animals in or upon motor vehicles. 
    No person shall confine any animal in or upon a motor vehicle that would place the animal in a life or health threatening situation because of exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from the heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, an animal services officer or law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have the authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. #1984-66,  1-2; SFCC 1981,  6-7-11 and 6-7-12; Ord. #2004-20,  26; Ord. #2014-7,  19) 
5-7.12 - Transportation of animals. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the transportation of horses, cattle, sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers or other vehicles designed and constructed for such purpose. 
(Ord. #1984-66,  3; SFCC 1981,  6-7-13) 
5-7.13 - Removal of animals from motor vehicles by animal services officer or peace officer. 
    An animal services or peace officer who finds an animal in a motor vehicle in violation of this chapter may enter the motor vehicle if necessary to remove the animal. The officer removing the animal shall take the animal to an animal services center or other place of safe keeping. If a vehicle is entered, left unsecured and cannot be resecured, an animal services or peace officer shall stay with the vehicle until the owner arrives. In the event the person having custody cannot be contacted, the officer shall leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle a written notice bearing his name and office and the address where the animal may be claimed by the owner. The animal will be surrendered to the owner if the owner claims the animal within five (5) days from the time the animal was impounded. The owner shall pay all charges that have accrued for the maintenance of the animal. If the owner fails to claim the animal within five (5) days after its removal from the motor vehicle, the animal services center will make reasonable effort to contact the owner and give notice that the animal is in their custody. In the event the owner cannot be contacted or expresses no interest in reclaiming the animal within five (5) days after contact or efforts to contact, the animal services center may dispose of the animal in any reasonably humane manner. 
(Ord. #1984-66,  4; SFCC 1981,  6-7-14; Ord. #2004-20,  1; Ord. #2014-7,  20) 
5-7.14 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 5-7.14, Removal of Canine Waste, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1991-32 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-20. 
5-7.15 - Spaying and neutering. 
A.  No person shall own or harbor within the city municipal boundaries any dog or cat over the age of six (6) months that has not been spayed or neutered unless that person obtains an annual permit from the animal services division to keep an unaltered dog or cat or obtains written verification from a licensed veterinarian that the dog or cat should not be neutered for health reasons. 
B.  Proof of neutering, if not apparent upon visual inspection, may be made by certificate or receipt from a licensed veterinarian. 
C.  Proof of unaltered dog or cat permit shall be available upon reasonable demand of an animal services officer or the owner of said animal will be cited for violation of the ordinance and the animal may be impounded. 
D.  A vasectomy is not an acceptable form of neutering. 
(Ord. #2004-20,  28) 
5-7.16 - Special events on the Plaza. 
    The city of Santa Fe declared it to be conducive to the protection, health, and general welfare of the people to ban all animals from the Plaza during the Challenge New Mexico Arts and Crafts Show; Fourth of July Pancake Breakfast; Spanish Market; the Contemporary Hispanic Market; Santa Fe Girls' Inc. Arts and Crafts Show; Indian Market; Santa Fe Fiesta Labor Day Arts and Crafts Market; and Santa Fe Fiesta described in subsection 23-5.2 SFCC 1987, except as set forth in this subsection. Service animals and animals in city-approved parades or other animal events shall be exempt from this ban. For the purposes of this restriction, the Plaza shall include the center park and those areas surrounding the center park designated for those events as described in subsection 23-5.2 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2004-20,  29; Ord. #2014-17,  21) 
5-8 - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED. 

5-8.1 - Generally. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, kick, beat with a stick, chain, club or other object, mutilate, burn or scald with any substance any animal, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-32 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-32; SFCC 1981,  6-8-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-18-3 and 30-18-1 through 30-18-8 NMSA 1978. 
5-8.2 - Work cruelty. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive or work any animal cruelly. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-33 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-33; SFCC 1981,  6-8-2) 
5-8.3 - Neglect. 
    No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to provide an animal in his or her charge or custody with proper food, clean water, shade, ventilation, necessary medical care, basic grooming which is necessary for the health of the animal, or shelter which shall be a weatherproof and structurally sound enclosure large enough to accommodate the animal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-34 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-34; SFCC 1981,  6-8-4; Ord. #2004-20,  30) 
5-8.4 - Abandonment. 
    It is unlawful for any person having charge, custody or ownership to abandon any animal. All animals which are to be abandoned may be turned over to the animal services center or the animal shelter for adoption. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-35 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-35; SFCC 1981,  6-8-4; Ord. #2004-20,  1) 
5-8.5 - Poisoning. 
    It is unlawful for any person by any means to make accessible to any animal, with the intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous substance. It is not the intent of this subsection to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin of significance to the public health. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-36 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-36; SFCC 1981,  6-8-5) 
5-8.6 - Protective care. 
    When the administrator finds that any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or absence of the owner or person responsible for the care of the animal, the administrator may take up the animal for protective care. In the event of sickness or injury of the animal, upon the advice of a licensed veterinarian, the administrator may take such action as called for to prevent undue pain and suffering including immediate humane euthanasia of the animal. The animal will be held free of charge for seventy-two (72) hours. If the animal is not claimed during that period, daily boarding fees shall be charged. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-37 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-37; SFCC 1981,  6-8-6; Ord. #2004-20,  31; Ord. #2014-7,  22) 
5-8.7 - Injury by motorists. 
A.  Every operator of a motor or other self-propelled vehicle upon the streets and ways shall immediately, upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down any animal, give aid as is reasonably able to be rendered. In the absence of the owner, he shall immediately notify the administrator, furnishing sufficient facts relative to the injury. 
B.  Every such operator shall remain at or near the scene until the appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the arrival of the appropriate authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself to them. Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give aid by taking the animal to a veterinary hospital or the animal services center and notifying the administrator. The animal shall be deemed an abandoned animal within the meaning of subsection 5-8.4 of this chapter. This provision does not apply to operators of emergency vehicles. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-38 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-38; SFCC 1981,  6-8-7; Ord. #2004-20,  1; Ord. No. 2014-7,  23) 
5-8.8 - Hobbling livestock. 
    It is unlawful to hobble livestock or other animals by any means which may cause injury or damage to any animal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-39 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-39; SFCC 1981,  6-8-8) 
5-8.9 - Keeping of diseased or painfully crippled animals. 
    It is unlawful to have, keep or harbor any animal which is infected with any dangerous or incurable or painfully crippling condition except as provided in this chapter. The administrator may impound the diseased or painfully crippled animal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All such animals impounded, following examination and approval by a veterinarian may be destroyed humanely as soon thereafter as is conveniently possible. In the case of humane euthanasia of an animal, the administrator shall not be required to give any of the notices provided in this chapter. This subsection shall not be construed to include veterinary hospitals or animals under active veterinary care. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-40 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-40; SFCC 1981,  6-8-9; Ord. #2014-7,  23) 
5-8.10 - Animal fights. 
    It is unlawful for any person to promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on or attend any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one (1) or more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming or destroying themselves or any other animal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-41 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-41; SFCC 1981,  6-8-10) 
5-8.11 - Confining or crating of fowl. 
    It is unlawful for any person to confine any wild or domestic fowl or bird unless provisions are made for the proper feeding and the furnishing of water to the fowl or bird at intervals not longer than twelve (12) hours; and unless provisions are made that the crate, box or other enclosure in which the fowl or bird is confined or impounded permits the fowl or bird to stand in a naturally erect position. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-42 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-42; SFCC 1981,  6-8-11; Ord. #2014-7,  24) 
5-8.12 - Birds. 
    It is unlawful to willfully kill any bird, or to molest or rob the nest of a bird. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-43 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-43; Ord. #1980-39,  10; SFCC 1981,  6-8-12) 
5-8.13 - Trapping. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to trap animals on city property. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, within the municipal boundaries of the City of Santa Fe, to trap any animal using strangulation snares, steel jaw traps, other body gripping traps or any trap with the potential to injure, maim or kill any domestic or wild animal. This provision does not apply to the trapping of vermin. 
C.  This subsection does not apply to trapping performed by government officials carrying out their official duties. 
(Ord. #2015-2  2) 
5-9 - SALE OF ANIMALS. 

5-9.1 - Use of public property. 
    It is unlawful to display, sell or offer for sale, barter, give away or otherwise dispose of any animal upon any street, sidewalk or public park. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-44 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-44; SFCC 1981,  6-9-1) 
5-9.2 - Rabbits or fowl. 
    It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any unweaned baby rabbits or fowl under four (4) weeks of age. Raising of such rabbits and fowl by an individual for his personal use and consumption is not prohibited provided that he shall maintain proper brooders and other facilities for the care and containment of the animals and fowl while they are in his possession. The sale of young fowl by commercial breeders is not prohibited. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-45 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-45; SFCC 1981,  6-9-2) 
5-9.3 - Use of animals as premiums or novelties. 
    No person shall offer as a premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any live animal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-46 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-46; SFCC 1981,  6-9-3) 
5-9.4 - Turtles. 
    No person shall offer for sale, sell, barter or give away turtles except in conformance with appropriate federal regulations. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-47 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-47; SFCC 1981,  6-9-4) 
5-9.5 - Litter permit required. 
    The owner who unintentionally breeds dogs or cats and does not have a current professional animal care permit for breeding, as required in subsection 5-6.2 SFCC 1987, shall pay a litter fee for each litter. An owner shall not advertise, sell, barter, exchange or give away any dog or cat within the municipal boundaries unless the litter fee is paid. Any advertisement for the sale, barter, exchange or give away shall include the litter fee receipt number. An owner shall furnish the litter fee receipt number to any prospective recipient requesting the number. If the owner purchases a breeder permit or provides proof of sterilization of the female animal within thirty (30) days of being cited for violation of this section, such charge shall be dropped. If the owner takes all or part of the litter to the Santa Fe animal shelter to surrender, a litter permit shall not be required provided that the animal that produced the litter is neutered. 
(Ord. #2004-20,  32; Ord. #2014-7, 25) 
5-10 - EXOTIC ANIMALS AND GUARD DOGS. 

5-10.1 - Wild or exotic animals. 
A.  It is unlawful to be in charge of, possess or own: 
(1)  Any wild or exotic animal or species prohibited by federal or state law; 
(2)  Any wild or exotic animal or species when kept in such numbers or in such a way as to constitute likelihood of harm to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings, or which constitutes a public or private nuisance; 
(3)  Bats; or 
(4)  Skunks, except those owned by individuals on the effective date of this chapter and provided that any wild or exotic animal permit is obtained for the skunks within sixty (60) days of the effective date. 
B.  It is unlawful to receive, purchase, own or keep any wild or exotic animal without first applying to and receiving from the administrator a permit to do so. Notwithstanding, those persons in possession of a wild or exotic animal when they become residents of the city in the future or who possess the animal on the effective date of this chapter have a sixty (60) day period in which to apply for the permit before the penalty provisions of this chapter become enforceable. 
C.  No person shall apply for a wild or exotic animal permit without first obtaining any required state or federal permits. 
D.  The application for a permit shall contain the name of the applicant; their address, the address of the proposed location of the wild or exotic animal if different from the applicant's; a brief description of the applicant's plan for keeping the wild or exotic animal which shall include the species of animal, the number of individuals of each species, and a description of the housing facilities; a list of individuals qualified to care for the animal desired or that have agreed to advise or assist the applicant in the proper care and treatment of the animal and who would be willing to recommend the person applying for the permit; and the list of publications which the applicant has studied in order to qualify for a permit for the animal. 
E.  Upon receipt of the application, the administrator shall inspect the facilities where the animal is to be housed and shall make whatever other investigations they deem necessary. The administrator may deny a permit if the inspection or investigation determines that the provisions of this section are not met. 
F.  Whenever, in any given permit year, there are new wild or exotic animals in a collection due to the reproduction of members of the collection or to replacement in the same number and zoological species as the members replaced, the new animals do not require an additional permit during the year, provided the administrator is notified in writing of the new exotic animals within thirty (30) days of acquisition. When a new or wild exotic animal or collection is added, a new permit must be secured and a new fee shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of the permit and shall be a prerequisite of the issuance. 
G.  The wild or exotic animal permit shall be valid for one (1) year, and shall be reviewed within sixty (60) days after expiration and an inspection is required prior to the renewal of the permit. If, during the preceding year, more than one (1) renewal permit has been issued an applicant, the former permits may be consolidated so that only one (1) renewal permit is required; provided, however, that the renewal date for the consolidated permit shall be the date of the issuance of the earliest permit. The animal services center may deny the application for renewal for cause. 
H.  Individuals authorized to acquire a wild or exotic animal shall, within fourteen (14) days of acquisition, submit to the animal services center, a health certificate from a qualified veterinarian stating that the animal is in good health and has been vaccinated in accordance with applicable time schedules. 
I.  It is unlawful to receive, purchase, own or keep any wild or exotic animal unless: 
(1)  Housing is sufficiently spacious, ventilated and temperature-controlled, clean and sanitary at all times; 
(2)  The wild or exotic animal is provided with proper food, water and attention; 
(3)  The wild or exotic animal is kept and cared for in such a way as not to endanger the safety of any person or property; and 
(4)  The wild or exotic animal permittee notifies the administrator when changing their residence or location of the wild or exotic animal, or selling or otherwise disposing of the wild or exotic animal for which the permit was issued. 
J.  Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be surrendered for inspection upon the request of the administrator. The premises on which a wild or exotic animal is maintained shall be open at any reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner for inspection by the administrator. 
K.  For failure to have a permit in advance of obtaining a wild or exotic animal or to renew the permit within sixty (60) days of the expiration date, or upon suspension of a wild or exotic animal permit, the administrator shall have the authority to enter the premises where the wild or exotic animal is kept, at any reasonable hour, and to impound the animal. The animal shall be surrendered upon the demand of the administrator. Procedures for the reclamation and humane euthanasia of impounded wild or exotic animals shall be followed pursuant to subsection 5-4.4 of this chapter, and for penalties, pursuant to Section 5-12. The wild or exotic animal may be returned to its owner if the problem for which it was impounded is corrected within the time period allotted by the administrator and all penalties are paid. 
L.  Notwithstanding the above, the valid zoological park, veterinary hospital, humane society, shelter, public laboratory, educational or scientific facility, provided protective devices adequate to prevent the animal from escaping and/or injuring the public are provided, are excluded from the above portions of this subsection. 
M.  Upon application to the administrator, the keeping of these prohibited animals may be permitted for educational or scientific purposes; provided there is no conflict with state or federal regulations. In lieu of licensing each animal, a wild or exotic animal permit may be issued in accordance with this subsection. 
N.  No person shall keep, conduct or operate any traveling animal show, petting zoos, circus, animal acts or miscellaneous animal or reptile exhibits that include any wild or exotic animal, as defined, unless for exclusively public educational purposes. 
O.  Special animal permits as referenced in subsections B-M above shall be obtained from the administrator as follows: 
(1)  Each application for a special animal permit shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the administrator and shall contain such information as the administrator shall require; 
(2)  All special permits issued by the administrator shall be for a specified period of time but not to exceed one (1) year unless revoked or suspended, or unless the holder of the permit changes the location of his place of business, or sells, assigns, transfers or otherwise disposes of his business or his interests therein; and 
(3)  Upon the filing of each application, either for an original permit or renewal, the administrator shall make an investigation as he deems proper. The administrator shall then issue a permit to the applicant if it is found that: 
(a)  The animals, or the conduct or operation of the business for which the permit is requested will not constitute a menace to the health, peace or safety of the citizens; and 
(b)  The premises and establishment where the animals are to be kept are maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and that the animals will not be subject to needless suffering, unnecessary cruelty or abuse and that the applicant has not had a permit revoked within one (1) year prior to the date of application. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-48 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-48; SFCC 1981,  6-10-1; Ord. #2004-20,  33; Ord. #2014-7,  26; Ord. # 2017-19 ,  2) 
5-10.2 - Permits and housing of guard dogs. 
A.  It is conducive to the promotion of the health and general welfare of the inhabitants of this city to require permits for guard dogs, used on commercial property, and to establish regulations for the proper and safe use of guard dogs used for protecting commercial property. 
B.  Permits: 
(1)  Unless a guard dog permit is in effect for each commercial property where guard dogs are to be used, they shall not be used. Procedures for permit application, inspection of guard dog facilities, and issuance of dog identification tags will be established by the administrator. Permits for both permanent and temporary locations may be transferred to a new location operated by the same business firm during the license year. However, such transfers shall not be effective until the administrator or his designee has inspected and approved required facilities at the new location and the information required below for permit applications has been recorded. Applicants must provide five (5) working days' advance notice to the animal services center for permit transfers. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the following information: 
(a)  The business name, address and telephone number of the commercial property where guard dogs are to be used; 
(b)  The name, address and telephone number of the handler who can be reached at any time during the day or night; 
(c)  The number of dogs to be used and a general description of their use; 
(d)  The location where dogs are to be housed; and 
(e)  Any other information that the administrator deems necessary by rule and regulation. Permit holders shall notify the animal services center if any information recorded as part of the permit application is changed during the course of the period for which the permit is issued. 
(3)  The administrator or his designee shall inspect the facilities where the guard dog is to be used and housed when the guard dog permit is applied for and when it is renewed. 
(4)  If the inspection reveals that all the requirements of law and regulation are met, a guard dog permit for the approved commercial property shall be issued by the animal services center. The permit shall be displayed at the approved commercial property and an identification tag shall be affixed to the collar of each dog used. Holders of the guard dog permits shall be exempt for the guard dogs from the license fee requirements of subsection 5-5.6 of this chapter. 
(5)  The guard dog permit shall be valid for one (1) year and shall be renewed annually within thirty (30) days after the renewal date. 
(6)  The guard dog permit must be obtained prior to housing or utilizing guard dogs at the commercial property; provided that for those commercial properties where guard dogs were in use when this regulation became effective, there shall be a ninety-day period in which to obtain the permit without penalty. 
C.  Whenever there is a guard dog on the premises, the standards of this subsection, in addition to the other requirements of law and regulations, shall be complied with, as follows: 
(1)  Housing shall have anti-escape fences completely surrounding it or be an anti-escape building sufficient to house guard dogs. 
(2)  All gates and entrances to the area where the guard dog is housed, used or trained shall be locked when not in use. 
(3)  Additional measures found necessary by the administrator shall be taken to protect the public from accidental contact with any guard dog. 
(4)  Where guard dogs are used outside buildings, the area must be enclosed by at least a six-foot chain link fence or other fence of equal security, wall or adequate wood fence, to which anti-escape devices have been added. The adequacy of the fencing shall be subject to the approval of the administrator. 
(5)  In order to control noise, the administrator may require a sight barrier which breaks the dog's line-of-sight. 
(6)  In buildings where guard dogs are housed, exterior glass shall be adequate, or additional protective measures shall be taken by the owner, as required by the administrator, to prevent the dog from jumping through it. 
(7)  The building and yard in which a guard dog is housed shall be posted with bilingual, English and Spanish, or visual guard dog signs, approved by the administrator that shall not be more than two hundred (200) feet apart, and shall be at all property corners and at every entrance into the area. 
(8)  For guard dogs either transported or used in vehicles, measures prescribed by rule and regulation of the administrator must be taken to protect the public from accidental contact with a guard dog. 
(9)  A handler is required to be physically present while guard dogs are being used at temporary sites which do not comply with this subsection. 
D.  Dogs which are used as private guard dogs on the property of their owner's private residence, shall be excluded from the provisions of this subsection unless the residence is located on premises used for commercial purposes. Guard dogs kept in a kennel with a valid professional animal permit are also excluded. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-49 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-49; Ord. #1980-39,  11; SFCC 1981,  6-10-2; Ord. #2004-20,  34; Ord. #2014-7,  27) 
5-10.3 - Violations, suspensions and revocations under professional animal care permit, the exotic animal permit and the guard dog permit; appeal procedure. 
A.  If the administrator makes an inspection of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, shelter, facility for exotic animals or commercial property where guard dogs are used, and discovers a violation of law or regulations, he shall notify the permit holder, or operator, of such violations by means of an inspection report form or other written notice. The notice shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific violation found; 
(2)  Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for correction of the violation found; 
(3)  State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may result in immediate suspension of the permit; and 
(4)  State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the administrator within five (5) days of the receipt of the notification. 
B.  Notices provided for under this subsection shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally or mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder, person in charge, or alleged violator. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the administrator. 
C.  Hearings provided for in this subsection shall be conducted by the administrator at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the record of such hearing, the administrator shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the administrator. This paragraph shall not be intended to preclude the institution of court action as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
D.  Permits may be suspended by the administrator for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of law or regulations. The administrator may notify a permit holder in writing that the permit or license is, upon receipt of the notice, immediately suspended, and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the administrator within five (5) days of receipt. 
E.  Notwithstanding the notice requirements herein, when the administrator finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, shelter, exotic animal facility, or site where guard dogs are used, which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to public health, he may, without notice or opportunity to be heard, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such condition and stating the corrective action to be taken. If deemed necessary, the permit shall be immediately suspended and all operations immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply forthwith. 
F.  For repeated violations of any of the requirements of law or regulations or for interference with the administrator in the performance of his duties, the violator's permits may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the administrator. The individual whose professional animal, exotic animal or guard dog permit is revoked shall not apply for another permit or license for the period of one (1) year. Prior to such action, the administrator shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is proposed to be revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the administrator by the permit holder or licensee, within such five (5) day period. 
G.  If the exotic animal permit is revoked, the owner of the exotic animal shall surrender the animal to the animal services center within five (5) days of the effective date of revocation. 
H.  Any person whose professional animal or guard dog permit has been suspended, shall cease the previously permitted activity. The person may, at any time, make application for an inspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within five (5) days of a request for reinstatement, the administrator shall make an inspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of law and regulations, the permit may be reinstated. 
I.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the administrator may, within five (5) days of receipt of his decision, file written notice of appeal to the governing body. The hearing of the governing body shall be conducted within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-50 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-50; Ord. #1980-39,  12; SFCC 1981,  6-10-3; Ord. #2004-20,  1; Ord. #2014-7,  28) 
5-11 - NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SHELTER CONTRACT. 

5-11.1 - Shelter run by nonprofit organization. 
A.  In lieu of or until the establishment and maintenance of a city-owned animal services center facility, the city may contract for operation and maintenance of such facility with any responsible nonprofit organization, incorporated under the laws of the state, having for its object, the care of animals and the prevention of cruelty to animals. 
B.  In the event that the city shall enter into any such contract, all the provisions of law and regulations shall apply to and be part of the contract. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-52 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-52; SFCC 1981, 6-11-1; Ord. #2004-20,  1) 
5-12 - LICENSES AND PERMIT FEES; FINES AND PENALTIES; AND OTHER CHARGES. 
A.  The governing body shall adopt by passage of a resolution a schedule of licensing and permit fees, mandatory fines and penalties for violation of this chapter and other charges. The animal services center may establish alternatives to the mandatory fines and penalties for first offenses in order to encourage responsible pet ownership. The fines and penalties may not be deferred or suspended on second or subsequent offenses. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter other than those listed in paragraph A. of this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-3 of this Code. Each day this chapter is violated shall be considered a separate offense. If any person is convicted of cruelty or mistreatment of an animal, that animal shall be removed from his custody and placed with the administrator. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  4-53 by Ord. #1979-2,  4-53; SFCC 1981,  6-12-1; Ord. #1984-71,  2; Ord. #2004-20,  35; Ord. #2014-7,  29) 
5-13 - DOG PARKS. 

5-13.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Dog Park Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1999-26,  4) 
5-13.2 - Purpose. 
    Except as provided in subsections 5-5.4 and 5-7.1 SFCC 1987, dog parks within the city shall be defined and dedicated for the running of dogs at large or off-leash. 
(Ord. #1999-26,  5) 
5-13.3 - Applicability. 
A.  All persons wishing to run their dogs off-leash (except on their own premises) must do so within the established limits and boundaries of an official city designated dog park. It is the intent of this section for the city to designate enough dog parks that dog owners may walk to them and to not unduly impact any one (1) dog park. 
B.  Protocol for the users of dog parks or areas shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  People must clean up after their pets and dispose of all feces left by their dog in accordance with subsection 5-7.14 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  No aggressive dogs shall be allowed. Dogs showing aggression towards people or other dogs must be immediately leashed and removed from the dog park. If a person continues to bring an aggressive dog to a dog park, such individual shall be cited in accordance with subsection 5-5.3 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  Dogs must be wearing up-to-date rabies vaccination and city license tags at all times. 
(4)  Dog owners or those having charge or custody of a dog are legally responsible for their dogs and any injuries caused by their dogs. Under no circumstances shall the city assume any liability for the actions of dogs or their owners. 
(5)  People must remain with their dogs in the dog park, and must keep their dog in sight and must carry a leash at all times. 
(6)  Leaving dogs unattended is absolutely prohibited. Dogs must be leashed before entering and leaving the dog park. 
(7)  With the exception of puppies under five (5) months of age, all dogs using the dog park should be spayed or neutered. No dogs in heat are allowed in the dog park. 
(8)  A limit of three (3) dogs per person per visit. 
(9)  Young children must be closely supervised. 
(10)  People must not permit their dogs to dig or to unduly disturb the terrain or vegetation. Any holes created by an individual's dog must be filled by that person. 
(11)  Professional dog trainers may not use this facility for the conduct of their business. 
C.  The governing body is authorized to designate a dog park or to rescind such designation. 
(Ord. #1999-26,  6) 
5-13.4 - Dog park maintenance and volunteer organizations. 
A.  The success of a dog park is based in part on having volunteers assist with maintenance and clean-up. 
B.  Any persons or organizations wishing to aid in the maintenance and operations of a dog park or portions thereof are required to sign a waiver of liability form, record it with the city clerk's office and file it with the parks division. 
(Ord. #1999-26,  7; Ord. #2007-45, 24) 
CHAPTER VI - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 
6-1 - ARTS COMMISSION. 

6-1.1 - Creation; duties and powers. 
A.  There is created the "Santa Fe Arts Commission," hereinafter referred to as the "commission." The commission shall be advisory to the governing body and shall initiate, sponsor or conduct, alone or in cooperation with other public or private agencies, public programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in the fine and performing arts and cultural properties. The commission shall organize and adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purposes. 
    In carrying out its duties and powers, the commission shall: survey and assess the needs of the arts, both visual and performing within the city of Santa Fe; identify existing legislation, policies and programs which affect the arts and evaluate their effectiveness; encourage the use of local resources for the development and support of the arts; accept offers or gifts or grants from the United States, the state of New Mexico, their agencies or officers including without limitations the National Endowment of the Arts; and from any person, firm or corporation, of services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds, and may make grants in accordance with the law; advise the city concerning the receipt of or purchase of works of art to be placed on municipal property; advise and assist the city and the occupancy tax advisory board in connection with the administration of those occupancy tax revenues which are designated for the nonprofit performing arts and attractions; utilize the services of the executive director and such other staff as are available to said commission; advise and assist the city in connection with such other artistic activities as may be referred to it by the city. 
    The commission shall formulate and submit, annually, a budget request and a proposal for utilization of its funds. 
(Ord. #1987-39,  1) 
6-1.2 - Members. 
A.  The commission shall consist of nine (9) members. On the first commission, four (4) of the members shall be appointed for one (1) year terms and five (5) shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. Subsequent terms shall be for two (2) years to maintain staggering of terms. Vacancies, other than by expiration of terms, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint the commission members and the commission chairperson. All terms expire in October. 
B.  All members of the commission shall reside in the County of Santa Fe and shall be actively involved in the arts. Members of the commission shall be broadly representative of all fields of the fine and performing arts. They shall include knowledgeable lay persons and persons who are widely known for their professional competence and experience in the arts. It is recommended that the following disciplines and activities be represented on the commission: the performing arts, the visual arts, the communication arts, arts education, the literary arts, the occupancy tax advisory board, private sector development, citizen at-large, and persons with fundraising expertise. 
C.  After three (3) consecutive unexcused absences a commission member shall be automatically removed thereof by the chairman. 
(Ord. #1987-39,  2) 
6-1.3 - Staff. 
    The commission shall have a full-time paid executive director who shall be appointed by the city manager. The executive director shall have a paid staff the amount and type of which shall be determined by the city manager. 
    The executive director shall: administer city art programs; seek and apply for grants in the area of the arts and humanities from any source, public or private; do research, conduct educational programs and disseminate information to the public regarding the fine and performing arts; administer grants to benefit the arts and individual artists; coordinate with public and private agencies the development of the arts in the city of Santa Fe; serve as liaison with all other local, state and federal departments and public and private agencies connected with the arts; coordinate with the arts commission the promotion of new and the restoration of existing public art. 
(Ord. #1987-39,  3) 
6-1.4 - Art in public places. 
A.  Title. This subsection shall be known as the "Art in Public Places Ordinance." 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to promote and encourage private and public programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in, the fine arts and cultural properties, to increase employment opportunities in the arts, and to encourage the integration of art into the architecture of municipal structures, or other public property, if approved by the governing body. 
C.  Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, 
(1)  Administrative costs means program management, facilitation of public planning and art/artist selection processes, project coordination, and related operating expenses. 
(2)  Arts Commission means the arts commission of the city of Santa Fe as set forth in subsection 6-1.1 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  Capital improvement project means a facility with a life expectancy of ten (10) or more years and is owned and operated by, or on behalf of, the city including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Buildings and related structures; 
(b)  Roadway facilities, including roads, bridges, bike and pedestrian trails, bus bays, rights-of-way, landscaping; or 
(c)  Parks and related areas and facilities, open space and trails. 
(4)  Revenue bond means special limited obligations of the city, whether designated as bonds or loans, that are payable from general gross receipts tax revenues, lodgers' tax or convention center fees, or project revenues. Revenue bond does not include conduit bonds issued by the city or bonds that are payable from utility system revenues, gross receipts tax revenues that are restricted as to use or other specific revenues that may not be legally expended for works of art. 
(5)  Work of art means any work of visual art including, but not limited to, a drawing, painting, mural, fresco, sculpture, mosaic, photograph, work of calligraphy, work of graphic art (including an etching), works in clay, textile, fiber, wood, metal, plastic, glass, and like materials, or mixed media (including a collage, assemblage, or a combination of the forgoing art media). Work of art may include a combination of landscaping and landscape design, including some natural and manufactured materials such as rocks, fountains, reflecting pools, sculpture, screens, benches, and other types of street furniture. Except as provided herein, work of art does not include environmental landscaping or ephemeral arts such as dance, voice, music or poetry unless expressed in a manner defined above. 
D.  Funds for the Acquisition of Works of Art in Public Places. 
(1)  Except as set forth in this paragraph, the governing body shall designate two (2) percent of the total of each revenue bond net proceeds authorized after February 20, 2006, (effective date of this subsection) for capital improvement projects to be paid by the collection of gross receipts tax or lodgers' tax to a fund for the acquisition of works of art in public places. Provided, however, that if the bond ordinance, other appropriate laws or regulations, or an official interpretation by another governmental entity regarding allowable uses for funds which it is providing for the project precludes works of art as an expenditure of funds, the amount of funds restricted shall be excluded from the total bond in calculating the amount to be committed to works of art. The governing body shall designate one (1) percent of the total of the revenue bond net proceeds authorized in 2006 for the civic center to be paid by the collection of lodgers' tax to a fund for the acquisition of works of art. 
(2)  All works of art acquired by the funds generated in paragraph (1) shall be located in a public place. All works of art acquired by funds generated by bonds to be paid by the lodgers' tax or convention center fee revenue shall be located within or nearby the capital improvement project funded by the bonds. Otherwise, the nature of the revenue bond providing the funding does not restrict the location of the work of art to be acquired with such funding. The location of any work of art shall be approved by the governing body upon recommendation of the arts commission. 
(3)  At least one-half (1/2) of the funds from bonds payable from gross receipts tax revenues less administrative costs shall be used for projects integrated in new or renovated structures, and in projects that are part of new or renovated infrastructure unless otherwise approved by the governing body upon recommendation of the arts commission. 
(4)  Funds generated as described in paragraph (1) above shall be budgeted as part of the city's annual budget. Additional private or public contributions for works of art may be added to these funds. Such contributions may be earmarked for particular projects. 
(5)  Up to twenty (20) percent of the total amount designated for works of art may be expended for the administrative costs of the program. 
(6)  Progress payments may be made to the artist for works of art which have been approved by the governing body. Such payments may reimburse the artist for the cost of materials or for services which have already been performed. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount to be paid to the artist shall not be disbursed to the artist until the work of art is formally accepted by the arts commission. 
(7)  Nothing contained herein shall preclude funding the acquisition of works of art in public places in other ways. 
E.  Selection of Works of Art to be Acquired. 
(1)  The arts commission may establish guidelines and timetables for the selection of works of art and the location of the art as they deem appropriate. 
(2)  The arts commission may recommend acquisition of completed works of art, commissioning works of art, holding a competition to select works of art, or create some other timely and appropriate mode of selection. The arts commission may consult with the user agency and the project architect, engineer or manager, if any, and involve them in the selection process in the manner that appears most feasible beginning with the planning stage. The governing body may accept or reject the recommendations of the arts commission. If the governing body rejects the recommendations, the arts commission shall make other recommendations in accordance with the guidelines. 
(3)  The arts commission shall make its recommendations in a timely manner in accordance with the project schedule and timetable which may be provided by the governing body. If the arts commission fails to make its recommendations within the timetable, the governing body may extend the timetable or may choose an artist or work of art without a recommendation from the arts commission. 
(Ord. #2005-05,  2) 
6-2 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. 
    See Chapter XIV, Land Development, subsection 14-2.5. 
6-3 - CIVIL DEFENSE COUNCIL. 

6-3.1 - Creation; organization; appointment. 
    There is created the "civil defense council", to be composed of the mayor as chairman and such other persons, not exceeding fifteen (15) in number, as the mayor may appoint. The mayor shall designate one (1) of the appointees as civil defense director for the civil defense council, and the civil defense director shall act as vice-chairman of the civil defense council. Each member of the civil defense council shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor or until repeal of this section. 
(Ord. #1962-16,  1; Code 1973,  6-11; SFCC 1981,  7-5-1) 
6-3.2 - Employment of additional persons. 
    The civil defense council shall employ such persons as may be necessary to carry out its functions, at no salary, unless a salary is authorized by the governing body. Any such person shall be subject to all regulations now provided by law governing the city. 
(Ord. #1962-16,  2; Code 1973,  6-12; SFCC 1981,  7-5-2) 
6-3.3 - Duties and functions. 
    The civil defense council shall be charged with the duty of coordinating all civil defense activities of the city and shall: 
A.  Coordinate the activities of municipal and private agencies cooperating in the defense program; 
B.  Keep in contact with the state office of military affairs to the end that all requests and suggestions from that office shall receive prompt and efficient response; 
C.  Coordinate defense activities of the city with any joint program between this city and other cities in the county or area; 
D.  Conduct studies regarding civil defense problems of the city to the end that the municipal government of the city will at all times be informed of the problems of civil defense, and information as to the local problems will be readily available to the state and federal agencies; 
E.  Act as a clearing house on civil defense information for all governmental and private agencies cooperating in the civil defense program; 
F.  Survey existing facilities, proffers of facilities, services and ideas originating within the city and make appropriate disposition thereof; 
G.  Direct information regarding the civil defense program to all municipal departments or agencies which are or may be affected; 
H.  Make recommendations for improvements in the handling of civil defense problems affecting the city; 
I.  Perform such advisory functions as may be requested by agencies or departments of the state and federal government in connection with the national defense program; and 
J.  Do whatever is necessary and proper to carry out the intent and purpose of this section, tending to protect life and property in natural man-made or war-time disasters. 
(Ord. #1962-16,  3; Code 1973,  6-13; SFCC 1981,  7-5-3) 
6-3.4 - Subcommittees; training regulations; dismissal of voluntary workers. 
    The civil defense council may expedite procedure by organizing itself into subcommittees and may subdivide its work and prescribe such rules and regulations as are not in conflict with the provisions of this section or any ordinance of the city. The civil defense council shall prescribe training regulations and may delegate the authority of preliminary hearings for dismissal of voluntary workers to the heads of departments. 
(Ord. #1962-16,  4; Code 1973,  6-14; SFCC 1981,  7-5-4) 
6-3.5 - Appointment of additional committees. 
    The civil defense council may appoint additional committees to meet any emergency that may arise, the members thereof not being required to be members of such council, but the council shall report such additional committees promptly to the governing body, which shall have the authority at its discretion to order the discontinuance of any such committees. Any person appointed to a position created under this section may be removed by the appointing authority for any reason deemed by it to be sufficient. 
(Ord. #1962-16;  5; Code 1973,  6-15; SFCC 1981,  7-5-5) 
6-4 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION. 

6-4.1 - Creation; purpose. 
    There is created the community development commission. (Secs. 3-60-1 through 3-60-37 NMSA 1978). 
(Ord. #1984-19,  2; SFCC 1981,  3-34-2; Ord. #1998-3,  1) 
6-4.2 - Appointment; terms. 
A.  The mayor, with the consent of the city council shall appoint seven (7) commissioners to the commission. Of the original appointees two (2) commissioners shall serve terms of one (1) year; two (2) shall serve terms of two (2) years; and three (3) shall serve terms of three (3) years; thereafter, commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Commissioners may be removed with or without cause at any time by the mayor. 
B.  The appointees to the community development commission shall reside in Santa Fe County. 
C.  The mayor shall designate a chairman and vice-chairman from among the commissioners. 
(Ord. #1984-19,  3; SFCC 1981,  3-34-3; Ord. #1998-3; Ord. #2014-14) 
6-4.3 - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall advise the governing body of the city in: 
A.  Administration of the community development block grant program in accordance with the city's adopted consolidated plan; 
B.  Administration of the Santa Fe Homes Program in accordance with adopted ordinances and administrative guidelines; 
C.  Establishing a general plan for the city relating to economic and other community development issues; and 
D.  Allocating loans and housing assistance grants according to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund Ordinance as set forth in Section 26-3 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1984-19,  4; SFCC 1981,  3-34-4; Ord. #1998-3,  1; Ord. #2003-6,  1; Ord. #2005-30(A),  1; Ord. #2006-33,  1; Ord. #2007-23,  1; Ord. #2007-40,  1) 
6-5 - AUDIT COMMITTEE. 

6-5.1 - Creation; purpose. 
A.  There is created pursuant to the city of Santa Fe Municipal Charter the city of Santa Fe audit committee, an independent advisory committee. 
B.  The purpose of the audit committee is to provide an independent body to review such internal and external audits, assessments and investigations of the city's finances and financial systems as may be conducted from time to time and to advise the city manager, the finance committee and the governing body regarding such audits, assessments and investigations, and to recommend the adoption of policies and procedures with respect thereto as will promote the transparency, accountability, efficiency and effectiveness of city government for the citizens of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2013-35; Ord. # 2018-9 ,  1) 
6-5.2 - Powers and duties. 
    The audit committee shall, to the extent possible under the city charter: 
A.  Participate in the selection of the internal auditor, of any independent contractor charged with performing any internal audit functions for the city, and of any external auditors; 
B.  Review and recommend for approval by the finance committee any internal audit plan proposed by the internal auditor or any contractor performing internal audit functions for the city, and any modifications thereto; 
C.  Independently review all internal and external audits, assessments and investigations of the city as may be conducted from time to time, including audits and reviews conducted by federal and state agencies and make recommendations to the city manager, the finance committee and the governing body regarding actions which may be necessary or appropriate in light of any findings, corrective action plans or issues identified in such audits, assessments or investigations; 
D.  Review and make recommendations to the finance committee regarding the city's comprehensive annual financial report; 
E.  Assure that all audits certify that they conform to generally accepted governmental auditing standards; 
F.  Assure that the internal audit functions are independent in accordance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards, whether performed by city staff or outside contractors, or any combination thereof; 
G.  Receive a presentation of and review the city's financial reports, periodically, but not less than twice per fiscal year; 
H.  Advise, review and make recommendations for other matters as requested by the city manager, the finance committee or governing body. 
(Ord. #2013-35; Ord. # 2018-9 ,  1) 
6-5.3 - Membership; chairperson; terms; vacancies. 
A.  Membership. The audit committee shall consist of five (5) individuals appointed by the governing body based upon the recommendation of the municipal judge. The members of the audit committee shall include individuals that have experience and knowledge that would assist the governing body in completing the audit committee's purpose and who are qualified by training, experience, and ability to exercise sound and practical judgment regarding the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee. Of the five (5) members no less than two (2) members shall be certified public accountants, at least one of whom has extensive audit experience; no less than one (1) member shall be a lawyer; and one (1) member shall have business management experience. Members shall reside in the State of New Mexico. 
B.  Chairperson. The initial chairperson shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the governing body. The chairperson shall designate the vice chairperson. The chairperson shall serve as chairperson for a period of one (1) year. Following one (1) year of service, the chairperson shall be elected (or reelected) by the members of the committee. The chairperson may appoint subcommittees and sub-committee chairpersons as needed. 
C.  Terms. Two (2) of the members shall be initially appointed for two (2) year terms and three (3) shall be appointed for three (3) year terms. Subsequent terms shall be for three (3) years to maintain staggering of terms; limited to no more than four (4) terms. The members shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body and may be removed at any time with or without cause. 
D.  Vacancies. Vacancies on the audit committee shall be filled in the same manner as initial appointments and shall be for the remainder of the term of the vacant position. 
(Ord. #2013-35; Ord. # 2018-9 ,  1) 
6-5.4 - Meetings; staff. 
A.  Meetings. A quorum of the audit committee shall be at least three (3) members. The audit committee shall conduct all meetings in accordance with adopted city policies and procedures. The audit committee shall meet at least quarterly or as needed to accomplish the duties and responsibilities of the committee. 
B.  Staff. The city manager shall designate appropriate staff to serve as the primary liaison to the committee. Depending upon the issue, other city staff may also be required to assist the committee. 
(Ord. #2013-35; Ord. # 2018-9 ,  1) 
Editor's note- Former  6-5, Design Review Board, previously codified herein, was removed at the direction of the city. 
6-5.5 - Administrative procedures. 
    The audit committee shall recommend to the governing body for adoption administrative procedures for the exercise of the audit committee's power and duties hereunder. 
(Ord. # 2018-9 ,  1) 
6-6 - BUSINESS CAPITAL DISTRICT DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. 
    See Chapter XIV, Land Development, subsection 14-2.6. 
6-7 - PLANNING COMMISSION. 
    See Chapter XIV, Land Development, subsection 14-2.3. 
(Ord. #1994-30,  22) 
6-8 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2018-27 ,  5, adopted December 12, 2018, repealed  6-8, which pertained to Grievance Review Board. 
6-9 - HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW BOARD. 
    See Chapter XIV, Land Development, subsection 14-2.7. 
6-10 - CHILDREN AND YOUTH COMMISSION.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 6-10, "Industrial Park Authority," previously contained herein, has been repealed in entirety by Ordinance #1987-37,  1, 2. 

6-10.1 - Creation; duties and powers. 
A.  There is created the "children and youth commission", hereinafter referred to as the "commission." The commission shall be advisory to the governing body and shall initiate, sponsor or otherwise create, along or in cooperation with other public or private agencies, programs that enhance and further the development and education of Santa Fe's children. 
B.  In accomplishing it's tasks, the commission shall survey and assess the needs of the children and youth within the city of Santa Fe; identify and recommend to the governing body existing legislation, policies and programs that promote the healthy development of young people; determine priorities for program development; advocate in the community on behalf of children and youth; and plan short and long range improvements for young people by applying a results-based framework, from birth through the age of twenty-one (21). 
C.  The commission shall conduct an annual strategic planning process that recommends funding priorities. Upon completion of the annual strategic planning process, the recommended funding priorities shall be presented to the governing body for review and approval. 
D.  The commission shall make a recommendation to the governing body for the use of the children and youth fund for children and youth programs as set forth in Section 18-14 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1998-7,  1; Ord. #2001-7,  1; Ord. # 2018-3 ,  2) 
6-10.2 - Appointment; terms. 
A.  The mayor, with the consent of the city council shall appoint seven (7) members to the commission. Of the original appointees two (2) commissioners shall serve terms of one (1) year; two (2) shall serve terms of two (2) years; and three (3) shall serve terms of three (3) years; thereafter, commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. After three (3) consecutive unexcused absences, a commission member shall be automatically removed by the chairperson. 
B.  The commission shall elect the chairperson, organize and adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purpose. 
C.  All members of the commission shall reside in the county of Santa Fe and shall be actively involved with children or youth issues. Members of the commission shall broadly represent all areas concerned with the healthy development of children and youth from birth through the age of twenty-one (21), and shall be representative of the city's general demographics. 
(Ord. #1998-7,  2; Ord. # 2018-3 ,  2) 
6-10.3 - Staff. 
    The commission shall have a full-time paid children and youth professional to administer the program and other staff as deemed necessary. The children and youth staff shall manage the children and youth fund, staff the commission, award, and track and administer the grants to children and youth programs, and work with others in the community to plan, coordinate and fund activities, programs and services that promote the healthy development of children and youth. 
(Ord. #1998-7,  3; Ord. #2012-15; Ord. # 2018-3 ,  2) 
6-11 - LIBRARY BOARD. 

6-11.1 - Library board created; duties. 
    There is hereby created a "public library board" as an advisory board to the governing body. The board is charged with recommending, in consultation with the head librarian and staff, policies on the use of the library, book selection, acceptance of gifts and bequests, and such other matters as a public library board may properly recommend policy on. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  2; Code 1973,  15-6; Ord. No. 1979-34,  15.1-6; Ord. #1980-41,  7; SFCC 1981,  8-2-1) 
6-11.2 - Membership; appointment; terms; compensation and officers. 
    The board shall consist of seven (7) members, five (5) of whom shall be residents of the city, and two (2) of whom shall be residents of Santa Fe County outside the incorporated boundaries of the city. City resident members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the majority of the city council. County residents shall be appointed by the mayor on the advice of the county commission and with approval of a majority of the city council. Members shall serve without compensation. The mayor, with the consent of the city council may also designate from the city council an ex-officio member of the library board. Board members shall serve three (3) year staggered terms. Members shall be appointed to and shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive full terms, provided, however, that such limitations shall not apply to any partial terms to which members may from time to time be appointed because of vacancies occurring as a result of resignation, death or removal of members. Terms of ex-officio members from the city council shall be for two (2) years, with no regard for terms of office of regular members and with no limitations as to number of consecutive terms an ex-officio may serve. At the board's first regular meeting in July of each even-numbered year, members shall elect a president, vice-president, and such other officers as may be necessary and proper to carry out the functions of a public library board. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  4; Code 1973,  15-8; Ord. #1976-20,  2; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-8; Ord. #1980-41,  9; SFCC 1981,  8-2-2) 
6-11.3 - Removal of members. 
    Members of the library board shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body and may be removed at any time by the governing body. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  5; Code 1973,  15-9; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-9; Ord. #1980-41,  10; SFCC 1981,  8-2-3) 
6-11.4 - Filling of vacancies. 
    On the death, removal, resignation, change of residence from the city or inability of a member of the board to act, a vacancy on the board shall exist. This vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the consent and approval of the city council for the unexpired portion of the term of such member. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  6; Code 1973,  15-10; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-10; Ord. #1980-41,  11; SFCC 1981,  8-2-4) 
6-11.5 - Violation of rules; punishment. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 1-3 of Chapter I, SFCC 1987, or any of the rules and regulations posted in the library, or carrying away without authority, misusing, cutting, writing on, damaging, defacing, tearing or destroying any book, periodical, map, newspaper, audio-visual materials, or any property devoted to the public library use shall be assessed a fine for replacement or repair of any damaged property. Any person who refuses to pay the fine shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-3, SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1962-13,  10; Code 1973,  15-5; Ord. #1979-34,  15.1-5; Ord. #1980-41,  6; SFCC 1971,  8-2-5) 
6-12 - RESERVED.[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 6-12, Metropolitan Water Board, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1980-1B, 1986-38 and 1989-35, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance #1995-22. 

6-13 - METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY. 

6-13.1 - Governing body; delegation of authority. 
    The governing body hereby delegates its authority for the creation of the metropolitan redevelopment agency pursuant to Article 3-60A-16 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1987-33,  1) 
6-13.2 - Creation; purpose. 
    The governing body hereby creates a metropolitan redevelopment agency which shall be an official body for making advisory recommendations to the governing body regarding the planning, preservation, rehabilitation, redevelopment, development, or management of properties designated by the governing body and consistent with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. #1987-33,  2; Ord. #1977-11,  1) 
6-13.3 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The metropolitan redevelopment agency shall be the sole agency reviewing and recommending to the governing body a metropolitan redevelopment plan, as required by 3-60A-9 NMSA 1978, or any redevelopment subdistrict plan of city owned or controlled land within business capitol district (BCD) redevelopment subdistricts and such adjoining lands as are reasonably necessary to carry out the plans. The metropolitan redevelopment agency shall also have sole authority to recommend general design guidelines or revisions to either the metropolitan redevelopment plan or redevelopment subdistrict plan or the general design guidelines. Upon final approval by the governing body of said metropolitan redevelopment plan, redevelopment subdistrict plan, general design guidelines or revisions thereof, the role of the business capitol district design review committee shall resume. Plans for minor or major projects in the BCD redevelopment subdistrict shall be reviewed by the business capitol district design review committee as set forth in Section 14-26 SFCC 1987. 
B.  A metropolitan redevelopment plan, redevelopment subdistrict plan or revisions thereof shall address the following factors: 
(1)  Financial impact on average taxpayer; 
(2)  Financial feasibility of any proposal; 
(3)  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic/circulation issues including, without limitation, to avoidance of conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular circulation; safe and convenient access by children, disabled and elderly persons to and from facilities, parks, schools and religious centers; provisions of parking and the relationship of parking facilities with major activity centers and major streets; pedestrian linkages to major activity centers and off-site parking; integration of vehicular circulation with the area-wide street system; and pedestrian and vehicular access to public lands or areas (i.e., does the plan realign the flow of people or traffic in the surrounding areas); 
(4)  Utility infrastructure; 
(5)  Impacts on adjacent established neighborhoods including, without limitations to transitions to adjacent properties; preservation of and compatibility with the physical character, appearance and/or scale of the surrounding neighborhoods; sustainability of the local economy and land values; the effect on property taxes in the affected neighborhoods (i.e., does the plan or design guideline enhance residences or locally-owned businesses); relationship to existing density and zoning within the surrounding area; and stability and existing character of surrounding neighborhoods including the environment for religious centers, schools, recreation areas, livestock and open spaces; 
(6)  Social issues including, without limitations to retention of jobs in the surrounding neighborhoods; and types of jobs to be created; 
(7)  Potential loss of employment due to relocation of current property lessees; 
(8)  Overall fiscal impact; 
(9)  Phasing and staging considerations; 
(10)  Potential impacts on rail service and regional transportation; 
(11)  Feasibility of a relocation assistance program; 
(12)  Review of all potential sources of redevelopment financing; 
(13)  The undertaking of a needs assessment; 
(14)  Design elements including, but not limited to preservation of landmark buildings; general building styles, colors, heights, scales and placements; open space, landscaping, preservation of scenic vistas; lighting; and signage; 
(15)  Community impacts including, but not limited to retention and enhancement of access by the local population, including persons living on fixed or low incomes, to affordable local goods and services; retention of the vitality of downtown areas; accessibility of downtown to the local population; availability of affordable housing and affordable business space; effect on public services such as fire, police protection, school services, and other public service or infrastructure elements such as water, power, sewer, communications, commuter or other services or facilities; and provision of activities which make use of the property at different times of the day and during different seasons; 
(16)  Environmental elements, including but not limited to, air and water quality, noise, aesthetic, public and private transportation access, stormwater run-off, scenic vistas and other views open to the community, tree cover and open areas, shadow lines and any other relevant factors relating to applicable design elements in the city ordinance; and prehistoric, historic, archaeological or cultural site or structure; unique or locally important geological or other special land features of the site and surrounding neighborhoods and their landscapes; preservation of non-renewable natural resources; locally unique, rare or endangered plant or animal species; and energy use, water use and conservation methods, toxicity of soils and water; and 
(17)  Other criteria that the governing body may, from time to time, direct the metropolitan redevelopment agency to consider. 
C.  Based upon evaluation of the factors outlined above, metropolitan redevelopment agency staff shall make a recommendation to the metropolitan redevelopment commission at a public meeting for favorable recommendation, unfavorable recommendation, or recommendation with modification, of a metropolitan redevelopment plan, redevelopment subdistrict plan, general design guidelines or revisions thereof. The metropolitan redevelopment commission shall consider the staff's recommendation, public comment as required by paragraph E. below and, as appropriate shall make its own further review with respect to factors outlined above. The metropolitan redevelopment commission may also at this time consider alternative concepts, designs or methods to minimize impacts upon affected neighborhoods. The recommendation by the metropolitan redevelopment commission to the governing body of a metropolitan redevelopment plan, redevelopment subdistrict plan, general design guidelines or revisions thereof shall include a separate written statement containing an evaluation of public comment, the cumulative impact of the factors set forth above and a determination whether such factors will have a potentially significant impact upon the areas described under the metropolitan redevelopment agency's powers and duties, including character, stability, economic, social, or cultural well-being of the surrounding neighborhoods or the community at large. 
D.  Notification and advertisement procedures for revisions to a metropolitan redevelopment plan, redevelopment subdistrict plan or general design guidelines to be considered by the metropolitan redevelopment agency for recommendation to the governing body shall conform to the requirements of subsections 14-9.14 and 14-9.16 SFCC 1987, with the added requirement that notification by mail to property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet and the adjacent neighborhood association shall specify a date, time and location that the plan proponent(s) will be available to meet with property owners, neighborhood associations and city staff to discuss the project prior to the review by the metropolitan redevelopment agency. The notice shall include a description of the proposed revision or any proposed changes to the established design guidelines. 
E.  The agency procedures shall be governed by rules of order adopted by the governing body and Section 3-60A-17 NMSA 1978. All meetings of the metropolitan redevelopment agency shall be open to the public, and public comment shall be encouraged. 
F.  The metropolitan redevelopment agency shall annually draft and submit to the governing body a budget for its operations and, as it deems appropriate and consistent with its budget, shall carry out studies and analyses of financial and structuring options for the planning, preservation, rehabilitation, redevelopment, development or management of the properties under its purview and may recommend to the governing body proposals for creation of or contracting with public-private partnerships, public or private agencies to carry out metropolitan redevelopment plans or redevelopment subdistrict plans. The metropolitan redevelopment agency shall make reports and recommendations relating to the city owned or controlled lands within BCD redevelopment subdistricts and such adjoining lands as are reasonably necessary to carry out the plans to the governing body not less than on a quarterly basis. 
G.  The metropolitan redevelopment agency shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Approve short-term (less than one (1) year) temporary leases on the railyard conservation easement as indicated in Exhibit "A," but in no case shall the metropolitan redevelopment agency grant multiple leaseholds to any individual party for a period of time with a cumulative duration of greater than three hundred sixty-four (364) days nor shall it grant any temporary lease that conflicts with any lease already in place with the city of Santa Fe; and 
(2)  Any decision by the metropolitan redevelopment agency concerning the award of a lease that has a term of greater than thirty (30) days may be appealed to the governing body within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
(3)  Approve, oversee, and manage activities, minor improvement projects, and enter into contracts with activity providers and planners on the railyard conservation easement. 
(4)  Activities on the railyard conservation easement shall include a variety of experimental and innovative events and programs of limited duration including, without limitation, local music and theater events, art installations, youth dances, outdoor films, demonstration programs, recreational and sporting activities, and other projects of similar nature, with emphasis on the railyard park. 
(Ord. #1987-33,  3; Ord. #1997-11,  2; Ord. #2000-31,  1) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" referred to herein can be found on file at the office of the city clerk. 
6-13.4 - Appointment of board of commissioners. 
    The mayor with the advice and consent of the governing body shall appoint a board of commissioners of the metropolitan redevelopment agency which shall be known as the metropolitan redevelopment commission. Upon appointment of each commissioner a certificate of appointment or reappointment shall be filed with the city clerk. Commissioners may be removed pursuant to Section 3-60A-16(c) NMSA 1978. All powers granted to the metropolitan redevelopment agency shall be exercised by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. #1987-33,  4; Ord. #1997-11,  3) 
6-14 - METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION. 

6-14.1 - Composition; qualifications. 
A.  The metropolitan redevelopment commission shall consist of five (5) commissioners. 
B.  The commissioners shall be initially appointed to serve staggered terms as follows from the date of their appointment: 
(1)  Two (2) members for three-year terms; 
(2)  Two (2) members for two-year terms; and 
(3)  One (1) member for a one-year term. 
    Thereafter, commissioners shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each. 
C.  A commissioner shall receive no compensation for his services but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the discharge of his duties. Each commissioner shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and qualified. A certificate of the appointment of any commissioner shall be filed with the city clerk and the certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of the commissioner. A commissioner may be removed from office at any time by the mayor. 
D.  The powers of the metropolitan redevelopment agency shall be exercised by the commissioners. A majority of the appointed commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the agency and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the agency upon a vote of a majority of the commissioners present at a lawful meeting, unless in any case the bylaws shall require a larger number. Any person may be appointed as commissioner if he resides within the area of operation of the agency, which shall be coterminous with the area of operation of the city, and is otherwise eligible for such appointment under the Redevelopment Law (3-60A-5 to 3-60A-18 NMSA 1978). 
E.  The mayor shall designate a chairman and vice-chairman from among the commissioners. The commission may employ and determine the qualifications, duties and compensation of an executive director, technical experts and such other agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as the metropolitan redevelopment agency may require subject to the express authorization of the governing body. A metropolitan redevelopment agency shall file annually with the city a report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year, which report shall include a complete financial statement setting forth its assets, liabilities, income and operating expenses as of the end of such fiscal year. 
(Ord. #1987-33,  5) 
6-15 - CITIZENS' POLICE INCIDENT REVIEW BOARD. 

6-15.1 - Purpose. 
    The citizens' police incident review board is necessary to: 
A.  Serve the interests of the community at large, and promote the professionalism of the Santa Fe police department. 
B.  Foster trust and enhance community/police relations by increasing police accountability and credibility. 
C.  Improve community/police relations through the citizens' police incident review board process. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  1) 
6-15.2 - Creation of citizens' police incident review board. 
    There is hereby created the "citizens' police incident review board" hereinafter referred to as the "review board." 
(Ord. 1997-21,  2) 
6-15.3 - Membership status. 
A.  Appointment. The review board shall be composed of five (5) members. At least one (1) member shall be selected and appointed from each district by the mayor with approval of the city council. 
B.  Term. Members shall serve terms of three (3) years with the initial terms of one (1), two (2), and three (3) years being decided by lot so as to provide for staggered terms. Two (2) members shall serve three (3) years, two (2) members shall serve two (2) years, and one (1) member shall serve one (1) year. 
C.  Removal for Just Cause. During the member's unexpired term, a member may only be removed for just cause by a majority vote of the governing body. 
D.  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the initial appointments and shall continue for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
E.  Conflict of Interest. Should a matter come before the review board in which a member has a conflict of interest or appears to have a conflict of interest which may influence his or her ability to hear an issue or case in an impartial manner, that member shall abstain from participating therein, including hearing and/or discussing the particular matter. The member shall indicate to the chairperson the existence of the conflict, and thereafter the member shall be excused from hearing and/or participating in the matter. In a case of an apparent conflict of interest, any member shall bring the possible conflict to the attention of the review board if this member seeks to participate in the deliberations on the case. The remaining members of the review board shall then vote to determine whether that member may participate. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  3) 
6-15.4 - Qualifications and training. 
A.  Qualifications. Members shall be a minimum of twenty-one (21) years of age and residents of the city of Santa Fe. Members shall not have a felony conviction, a significant misdemeanor criminal record or have been a commissioned law enforcement officer within the last five (5) years, or a member of the immediate family of a current police officer. Immediate family is defined as a spouse, mother, father, sister, brother or child. 
B.  Training. 
(1)  Once appointed, members shall undergo mandatory training in police operations prior to reviewing any police misconduct cases. The review board shall develop a formal training program with the assistance of the police chief, internal affairs department, and the Santa Fe training unit as well as any other consultant the review board may deem appropriate. Mandatory training shall include methods for reviewing internal affairs investigative reports on police, confidentiality requirements, search and seizure law, felony or high risk encounters, and police use of force guidelines. Training in other areas may include but is not limited to: 
(a)  New Mexico open meeting laws; 
(b)  General information about review boards and their history; 
(c)  Officer's rights in relation to citizen complaints; 
(d)  Ride-along program; 
(e)  Information on police training programs offered by the Santa Fe police department and law enforcement academy; 
(f)  Police culture and its impact on citizen review; 
(g)  Sensitivity training involving diverse groups living in Santa Fe, especially with whom police interact more frequently; 
(h)  Civil rights and human rights of suspects and complainants. 
(2)  The review board and the police chief shall conduct an annual review of the review board's training regime. At the time of the annual review the review board may request additional training, as may be necessary to carry out the review board's powers and duties. 
(3)  The city shall assume the cost of training subject to funding appropriated by the governing body. 
(4)  The police chief shall provide information regarding the review board process to the members of the police department. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  4) 
6-15.5 - Officers. 
A.  Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The review board shall elect the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the review board. 
B.  Ex-Officio Advisor. A non-voting police department liaison shall be selected by the police chief with the approval of the president of the police officer's union and the review board. The advisor shall consult with the review board on police matters and shall attend all review board meetings pertaining to the review of an internal affairs investigation. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  5) 
6-15.6 - Powers and duties. 
A.  Citizen Interaction. The review board shall: 
(1)  Provide necessary information and support to citizens who are filing complaints. 
(2)  At the option of the complainant, accept formal written complaints by acquiring only the following information: the name of the complainant, address, phone number and the general nature of the complaint. Such complaints shall be forwarded to internal affairs for initial investigation. 
B.  Review Board Interaction with Police Chief, City Manager and Governing Body. The review board shall: 
(1)  Present an annual report to the police chief, city manager and the governing body regarding the activities of the review board. 
(2)  On an as needed basis, make recommendations to the governing body for amendments to the rules and procedures of the review board process. 
(3)  Recommend procedures, programs and legislation to the police chief or governing body to minimize the circumstances which give rise to incidents of police misconduct. 
C.  Internal Affairs. The review board may: 
(1)  Review police officer incidents, after the police department completes its own internal affairs investigation, involving allegations or concerns regarding the excessive or unnecessary use or display of force; false arrest; ethical violations, racial, or sexual insults, slurs or gestures; police high speed pursuits or any other incident which diminishes the community's confidence and trust in police officers and creates controversy, concern or distress in the community. 
(2)  Review the internal affairs file related to the incident the review board is examining: 
(a)  Each member of the review board shall also have access to the findings of internal affairs investigations of similar incidents for the employee being investigated; 
(b)  The internal affairs files are confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public. In order to ensure confidentiality, the internal affairs files shall only be viewed by the review board at the police department under the supervision of the internal affairs records custodian and any notes taken by the review board shall remain in the review board's confidential files secured in the police department; 
(c)  An internal affairs officer familiar with the investigation shall present to the review board all findings of fact and a review of all evidence collected and received. 
(3)  Report to the police chief and the city manager the review board's findings and state one (1) of the following conclusions: 
(a)  Concur with findings of internal affairs investigation (with or without comment); 
(b)  Disagree with the internal affairs findings with recommendations; 
(c)  Advise that the findings of the internal affairs investigation are not supported by the information available to the review board; 
(d)  Advise that the internal affairs investigation is incomplete. In this instance, the review board may request through the police chief that the city manager appoint an independent investigator for further investigation, or request that internal affairs supplement the investigation in those areas determined to be deficient by the review board. The independent investigator shall be a licensed New Mexico attorney. The city manager shall maintain a pool of such investigators who shall be selected on a rotational basis, if appropriate under the circumstances. 
(e)  Make recommendations concerning further action it deems the police department should take in light of the circumstances. 
D.  Notification of Outcome to Complaint. A citizen whose complaint has been investigated and the investigation is complete, may request and shall receive in writing from the internal affairs' designee, within forty-five (45) days, all information permitted by law. 
E.  Public Inspection of Records. The inspection of the review board's records will be governed by the New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act, NMSA  14-2-1 (1994 Cum. Supp.). 
F.  Procedural Rules. The review board shall follow Robert's Rules of Order as the procedural rules for carrying out the review board's duties. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  6) 
6-15.7 - Meetings. 
    The review board shall meet at least once a month or on an as-needed basis. Any deliberations of the review board which do not address alleged improper conduct or performance of duties of a specific police officer and which are therefore excepted under the Open Meeting Act pursuant to NMSA  10-15-1(E)(2) shall be open to the public and conducted pursuant to the Open Meetings Act and the city's open meetings policy. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  7) 
6-15.8 - Compensation. 
    Members of the review board shall not receive any salary or compensation for services. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  8) 
6-15.9 - Penalty. 
    A violation of the confidentiality provisions of this section by any person, is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. The provisions of Section 1-3 SFCC 1987 shall apply. 
(Ord. #1997-21,  9) 
6-16 - ETHICS AND CAMPAIGN REVIEW BOARD. 

6-16.1 - Ethics and campaign review board. 
A.  Creation. There is created an "ethics and campaign review board" ("the board"). 
B.  Appointment. 
(1)  The board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, in the following manner: 
(a)  Four (4) members appointed from a list of eight (8) attorneys licensed to practice in New Mexico submitted by the First Judicial District Bar Association. 
(b)  Three (3) members at large. 
(2)  Members shall be qualified by training and experience and have the ability to exercise sound and practical judgment regarding those powers and duties of the board. 
(3)  Each member of the board shall be a resident of the city. 
(4)  No member of the board shall be a member of the governing body, the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk or a "public employee" or a member of the "family" of any of these persons (the quoted terms used as defined in subsection 1-7.5 SFCC 1987). No member of the board shall make a contribution to or participate in the campaign of any candidate for an elected municipal office. 
C.  Chair and Subcommittees. The board shall elect a chair and a vice-chair from among its members, and may organize subcommittees or panels to conduct hearings, recommend advisory opinions or perform other delegated tasks. The board may at any time act directly on any pending matter without subcommittee action or recommendations. 
D.  Term. Members shall be appointed for staggered terms of four (4) years beginning July 1, 2011. The initial members shall draw lots to determine which three (3) members serve an initial term of four (4) years, which two (2) members serve an initial term of three (3) years and which two (2) members serve an initial term of two (2) years; thereafter all members shall serve four-year terms. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members may be reappointed. A member who has participated in any hearing on a pending case involving an alleged violation of the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code shall continue to serve as a board member for purposes of that case until that case is concluded, regardless of the expiration of that board member's term. Newly appointed board members shall not serve on cases in which hearings have already been held at the time of their appointment. 
E.  Removal for Just Cause. During a member's term, he or she may be removed only for just cause by a majority vote of the governing body. 
F.  Vacancies. A vacancy on the board shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. If the vacant position was originally filled by appointment from a list of nominees submitted by a particular group or organization, the appointment to fill the vacancy shall be made in the same manner. 
G.  Compensation. Members of the board shall not receive any salary or compensation for services. 
H.  Meetings. The board shall meet at least four (4) times yearly and on an as-needed basis. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  17; Ord. #2007-11,  1; Ord. #2007-21,  1; Ord. #2010-32,  1; Ord. #2011-8,  7) 
6-16.2 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The board shall enforce the provisions of the Code of Ethics (Section 1-7 SFCC 1987), the Campaign Code (Section 9-2 SFCC 1987) and the Public Campaign Finance Code (Section 9-3 SFCC 1987) in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this section and such rules as the board may adopt. 
B.  The board shall establish reasonable rules of practice and procedure which are not in conflict with the provisions of city code or other city rules of practice and procedure, timetables and explanatory materials designed to educate the public, to encourage voluntary compliance and to ensure fair and prompt disposition of alleged violations. All such rules of practice and procedure shall be available to the public in the city clerk's office and on the city's website. 
C.  The board may give advisory opinions to any person requesting an opinion as to whether his or her own future conduct would violate the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code. An advisory opinion rendered by the board shall be binding on the board in any subsequent proceeding on a complaint against the person or entity who requested the opinion and acted in good faith in reliance thereon, unless the person or entity omitted or misstated a material fact in requesting the advisory opinion. Advisory opinions shall be indexed and maintained on file with the city clerk and placed on the city's web site. 
D.  In the exercise of its responsibilities, the board may audit campaign or other records. After each election campaign the board may contract for professional reviews or audits of campaign finance statements and shall file their results with the city clerk's office. 
E.  The board shall periodically review and recommend changes to the governing body for improving the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code, particularly following a municipal election. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  The board shall review and make recommendations to the governing body regarding the governing body procedural rules and other procedural matters including, but not limited to, the city's annual open meetings act compliance resolution. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  18; Ord. #2007-11,  2; Ord. No. 2009-45,  1; Ord. #2011-8,  8) 
6-16.3 - Complaints. 
    Any person may make a sworn written complaint, under penalty of perjury, of a violation of the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code. The complaint shall state the specific provision which has allegedly been violated and the facts which the complainant believes support the complaint. The sworn complaint shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall promptly refer the complaint to the board and furnish a copy of the complaint and any supporting documentation to each respondent who is alleged therein to have violated the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code. The complaint shall be filed within one (1) year after the complainant first discovered or reasonably should have discovered the facts on which the complaint is based. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  19; Ord. #2009-45,  2) 
6-16.4 - Determination of legal sufficiency; setting a hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of the complaint, the board shall determine the following: 
(1)  If the face of the complaint sets forth legally sufficient facts which, if true, show probable cause to believe that there was a violation; 
(2)  If the complaint was filed within one (1) year after the complainant first discovered or reasonably should have discovered the facts on which the complaint is based; 
(3)  If the complaint is frivolous or intended solely to harass or intimidate; and 
(4)  If the board lacks jurisdiction to adjudicate the complaint. 
B.  The city attorney, or a qualified attorney designated by the city attorney, may file a complaint with the board on the basis of information referred by the board or obtained otherwise, upon the city attorney's independent determination that probable cause exists of a violation of the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code. 
C.  To promote public participation, and to preserve the board's transparency, credibility, and stature, all final board determinations, including board decisions on complaints, advisory opinions, and settlements, shall be made during public meetings in compliance with the Open Meetings Act. No complaint shall be dismissed without a prior evidentiary hearing or prior board discussion in a public meeting of the reasons for the determination. 
D.  If the board determines that the complaint is legally sufficient, was filed timely and is not frivolous, and that the board has jurisdiction to adjudicate the complaint, the board shall at the same meeting set a schedule for hearing the complaint. The board shall conduct a public hearing regarding the complaint in accordance with due process of law. The chair of the board has authority to order appropriate discovery and issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents. Any decision of the chair with respect to discovery or with respect to the issuance of subpoenas shall be reviewable by the board upon request of any affected person. The board may seek enforcement of administrative subpoenas or discovery requests in district court. 
E.  The city clerk may require electronic posting of all documents generated pursuant to the Code of Ethics Code, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code, in an accessible and searchable format, including the proceedings of the ethics and campaign review board. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  20; Ord. #2007-11,  3; Ord. #2009-10,  1; Ord. #2009-45,  3; Ord. #2011-8,  9) 
6-16.5 - Reserved. 
6-16.6 - Investigations. 
    The board may conduct an investigation of allegations brought before it rather than simply hearing charges; to do this, it shall temporarily contract with qualified investigators. No such investigation shall be undertaken unless it is specifically authorized and defined by the board. All public officials and public employees shall promptly furnish the board or its investigator with requested information and records within their custody which are germane to an investigation authorized by the board. Public officials and public employees may be required to appear as witnesses in hearings concerning charges of Ethics Code, Campaign Code or Public Campaign Finance Code violations heard by the board. 
(Ord. #2009-14,  21; Ord. #2009-45,  4) 
6-16.7 - Sanctions. 
A.  To encourage compliance and deter Campaign Code violations, the city clerk shall assess such fines as provided for in subsection 9-2.10 SFCC 1987 and subsection 9-2.15 SFCC 1987. The fine shall be payable within thirty (30) calendar days to the city of Santa Fe. Respondents may contest the validity of such fine by filing a written appeal to the board within five (5) calendar days of its assessment, which the board shall promptly affirm or reject. 
B.  Except as set forth in paragraph C. below, if the board following a hearing determines that there has been a violation of the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code, it may: 
(1)  Issue a public reprimand; 
(2)  Impose a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day of a continuing or repetitive violation may be deemed a separate offense. The board may seek enforcement of fines in district court; 
(3)  Recommend removal or suspension from office of a public official by the governing body; 
(4)  Refer complaints against public officials, where appropriate, to the district attorney's office for investigation and prosecution; and 
(5)  In the case of a violation of the Public Campaign Finance Code, revoke a candidate's certification as a participating candidate or order repayment or refund by a candidate of any money received by the candidate from the Public Campaign Finance Fund pursuant to subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987. 
C.  Although public employees are subject to and bound by the provisions of the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code and the Public Campaign Finance Code, the sanctions authorized by this subsection may not be imposed on public employees unless they are public officials or exempt employees. All other public employees found to have violated the Code of Ethics, the Campaign Code or the Public Campaign Finance Code shall be subject to discipline only in accordance with the personnel rules and regulations of the city of Santa Fe and applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
D.  The sanctions set forth in paragraphs A., B. and C. do not preclude the enforcement of applicable existing state and federal statutes. 
E.  A respondent may submit a written waiver of hearing. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  22; Ord. #2007-11,  4; Ord. #2009-45,  5; Ord. #2011-8,  10; Ord. #2011-28,  25) 
6-16.8 - Appeals. 
    An appeal from any final action may be taken to district court. Recommendations or advisory opinions by the board are not final actions and may not be appealed. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  23) 
6-17 - CITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2017-7 ,  1, adopted April 12, 2017, amended  6-17 title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such title pertained to city business and quality of life advisory committee. 

6-17.1 - Creation; purpose. 
    There is created the city economic development advisory committee for the following purposes: 
A.  Implementing the city's economic development plan (Resolution No. 2004-42 as may be amended), including adopting a more business friendly attitude within city government and making recommendations to the governing body on applications for assistance for economic development projects and for industrial revenue bonds; 
B.  Assisting the governing body in understanding the potential impacts, including benefits, of proposed actions, ordinances and regulations; 
C.  Preventing unanticipated impacts from city actions, ordinances and regulations; and 
D.  Providing businesses and the community with the opportunity to review and comment on proposed actions, ordinances and regulations at an early stage. 
(Ord. #2005-5,  2; Ord. #2008-16,  1; Ord. # 2017-7 ,  1) 
6-17.2 - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the committee shall include (without limitation): 
A.  At the discretion of the economic development advisory committee, reviewing and making a recommendation to the governing body on proposed ordinances amending the city code, resolutions or other city regulations which may have a potential impact on businesses in the community. The committee shall conduct a public meeting regarding such proposed ordinances, resolutions or regulations as early as possible in their development. Items under consideration by the committee may be moved to another committee or to the governing body for appropriate consideration upon a majority vote of the governing body at any time. 
B.  Providing timely information to businesses regarding those proposed ordinances, resolutions and regulations. 
C.  Informing the governing body, in a timely manner, as to the potential impacts of proposed ordinances, resolutions or regulations on the business community. 
D.  Initiating proposals, through an annual work plan, which would improve the business climate and the quality of life in the community as a whole including, but not limited to, modifications to city regulations and operations and staff responsibilities for the governing body's consideration. 
E.  Advising the governing body on matters of importance to the business community and the community as a whole including, but not limited to, impacts on the business community and the community as a whole due to city regulations and operations and suggesting improvements for city services. 
F.  Reviewing and making recommendations to the governing body on implementing the economic development plan and the annual budget for implementing the economic development plan. The committee, in coordination with public groups, shall appoint working groups or advisory subcommittees of the economic development committee, as needed, to implement the economic development plan. 
G.  Making recommendations to the governing body regarding: 
(1)  Applications for assistance for economic development projects; and 
(2)  Reviewing and making recommendations to the governing body on applications for industrial revenue bonds (IRBs) as set forth in Resolution No. 1995-83 as may be amended. 
H.  Adopting procedures, schedules and administrative policies for matters within the committee's powers and duties in order to provide information and assistance to city staff, the public and the governing body. 
(Ord. #2005-5,  3; Ord. #2008-16,  2; Ord. # 2018-27 ,  1) 
6-17.3 - Membership; terms. 
A.  Membership. The city economic development advisory committee shall be composed of ten (10) members residing in the city of Santa Fe and qualified by training, experience, and ability to exercise sound and practical judgment regarding those responsibilities and duties of the committee. The members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of a majority vote of all the members of the governing body. The members shall include one (1) member of the governing body; and nine (9) other members representing a broad range of business interests, including small and large businesses, within the city including, but not limited to: arts and culture industries; development, design, and construction; hospitality; technology; retail trade and services; workforce development representatives; and healthcare. The member of the governing body shall serve as chairperson. The chairperson shall appoint a vice chairperson. A quorum shall be at least six (6) members. Members shall serve without compensation. 
B.  Terms. Of the initial appointments, five (5) of the members shall be appointed for one (1) year terms and five (5) shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. Subsequent terms shall be for two (2) years to maintain staggering of terms. There shall be no limitation to the number of consecutive terms a member may serve. Failing to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings or failing to attend thirty-three (33) percent or more of the regular meetings in any year shall constitute an automatic tender of resignation by such member, which the governing body may accept or reject at its discretion. Vacancies, other than by expiration of terms, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. 
(Ord. #2005-5,  4; Ord. #2010-16,  1; Ord. # 2017-7 ,  2) 
6-17.4 - Meetings; agendas; minutes; staff. 
A.  Meetings. The committee shall meet at least once per month as needed and shall conduct all meetings in accordance with adopted city policy and procedures. 
B.  Agendas. At least five (5) days prior to the meeting, staff shall post the tentative meeting agenda in city hall as well as on the city's website and shall e-mail the tentative agenda to any associations or individuals that have been listed with the economic development division. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the meeting, staff shall place the tentative agenda in the business section of a local daily newspaper. 
C.  Minutes of the Meeting. The committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or indicating absence or failure to vote and shall keep records of its review and official actions, all of which shall be filed in the city clerk's office. For each proposed ordinance or resolution reviewed by the committee, the minutes shall be attached to the fiscal impact report prepared, as required by subsection 2-2.10 SFCC 1987. 
D.  Staff. The economic development division shall administer the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #2005-5,  5; Ord. #2007-45,  25) 
6-17.5 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2017-7 ,  3, adopted April 12, 2017, repealed  6-17.5, which pertained to review and derived from Ord. #2005-5,  6. 
6-17.6 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2018-27 ,  2, adopted December 12, 2018, repealed  6-17.6, which pertained to economic development review subcommittee and derived from Ord. #2008-16,  3; Ord. # 2017-7 ,  4. 
6-18 - INDEPENDENT CITIZENS' REDISTRICTING COMMISSION. 

6-18.1 - Creation; purpose. 
A.  The creation of an independent citizens' redistricting commission ("commission") was approved by the electorate of the city of Santa Fe on March 4, 2014 when the electorate approved an amendment to Section 6.03 of the Santa Fe Municipal Charter ("Charter"). 
B.  As required by the Charter, the purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for the appointment and deliberations of the commission. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-18.2 - Independent districting consultant. 
A.  Prior to the establishment of the first commission and every commission thereafter, an independent districting consultant shall be acquired through the city procurement process. The consultant shall be experienced and competent in the skills necessary for the districting work to assist the commission in developing the districting plans detailed in this section. 
B.  The consultant shall provide professional and technical assistance to the commission by using data, including census data. 
C.  The consultant, along with the city attorney, shall ensure that the districting plans comply with state, federal and local laws including the Federal Voting Rights Act of 1965 and the city of Santa Fe Municipal Charter. The creation of districts shall be done in such a way as to avoid splitting precincts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-37  1) 
6-18.3 - Powers and duties of commission. 
A.  The first commission established under this section shall adopt a final districting plan for adjusting the boundaries of the four (4) city council districts in a timely manner, but no later than June 1, 2015, for use in the 2016 regular municipal election. 
B.  Future commissions shall establish a districting plan, if necessary, for adjusting the boundaries of the four (4) city council districts: 
(1)  Within one (1) year of receipt by the city of the final federal decennial census information for use commencing with the next scheduled general municipal election occurring at least three (3) months after adoption of the final districting plan; or 
(2)  When the governing body adopts a resolution expressing the need for convening a commission to establish a districting plan. 
C.  Pursuant to subsection 6-18.2 SFCC 1987, the commission shall rely on the professional and technical assistance of the independent districting consultant when considering and establishing the final districting plan. 
D.  In establishing the district boundaries, the commission will, to the maximum practicable extent, ensure that the commission's decisions will be based exclusively on the following principles in the following order of priority: 
(1)  Each district shall contain as nearly as possible substantially the same population based upon the most recent federal census; 
(2)  Districting plans must avoid dilution of minority voting strength; 
(3)  Communities of interest, including those based upon ethnic and economic factors, shall be preserved within a single district whenever reasonable; 
(4)  Each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territories. The total length of all district boundary lines shall be as short as possible; 
(5)  Districting plans shall compensate for U.S. Census undercount of minorities. 
E.  The commission may assign appropriate weight to: 
(1)  Geographical boundaries; 
(2)  Minimizing the splitting of precincts; 
(3)  Minimizing the splitting of political boundaries; 
(4)  Minimizing the need for additional polling locations; 
(5)  Minimizing voter confusion in switching elected officials into different districts; and 
(6)  Establishing districts that have a fairly regular shape. 
F.  The commission shall conduct a series of public hearings. 
(1)  The commission shall conduct a minimum of one (1) public hearing for organizational purposes in order to select a chairperson and a vice-chairperson and to coordinate with the independent consultant. 
(2)  The commission shall conduct a minimum of one (1) public hearing to provide instruction to the consultant for the development of a preliminary districting plan or plans. 
(3)  The commission shall conduct a minimum of four (4) public hearings to receive oral and written comments on the preliminary districting plan or plans. 
(4)  The commission shall conduct a minimum of one (1) public hearing to vote to adopt a final districting plan. 
G.  In addition to considering districting plans prepared by the commission in coordination with the independent consultant, the commission shall consider districting plans, including maps, submitted by the general public that are consistent with the requirements of the laws of the city of Santa Fe and the state of New Mexico. 
H.  Districting plans prepared by the consultant shall be made immediately available for public review on the city website or by request to city staff. 
I.  The commission shall conduct the public hearings in an open and transparent manner, in accordance with the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, Sections 10-15-1 through 10-15-4 NMSA 1978. 
J.  Any member of the commission shall not communicate with any interested parties outside of the public meeting and hearing concerning the merits or substance of any item coming before the commission, except in writing filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-18.4 - Membership. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this subsection: 
(1)  Cartographer means a person who makes maps and has a minimum of three (3) years of work experience as a cartographer. 
(2)  Geographer means a person who specializes in geography and has a minimum of three (3) years of work experience as a geographer. 
(3)  Statistician means a person who is versed in or engaged in compiling statistics and has a minimum of three (3) years of work experience as a statistician. 
B.  Membership. The commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be selected and appointed in the manner provided for in subsection 6-18.4 SFCC 1987. 
(1)  One (1) member shall be a resident of city council district 1; 
(2)  One (1) member shall be a resident of city council district 2; 
(3)  One (1) member shall be a resident of city council district 3; 
(4)  One (1) member shall be a resident of city council district 4; 
(5)  One (1) member shall be a resident of the city of Santa Fe, who is a statistician, except that if a city resident is not available, then a resident of Santa Fe County may be appointed; 
(6)  One (1) member shall be a resident of the city of Santa Fe, who is either a geographer or cartographer, except that if a city resident is not available, then a resident of Santa Fe County may be appointed; and 
(7)  For the first commission, one (1) member shall be a resident of the city of Santa Fe and reside in the newly annexed area of the city that became effective on January 1, 2014. For future commissions, the one (1) member shall be a resident of any city council district. 
    Should the city not receive applications from interested persons for the membership positions described in subparagraphs (5) and (6), above, then those positions may be filled by interested persons of any city council district who have applied for and were not selected for the other membership positions. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-18.5 - Eligibility; selection; chairperson; term. 
A.  Eligibility to Serve on the Commission. 
(1)  Only persons who are both residents and registered voters of the city are eligible to apply for and serve on the commission, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance. 
(2)  Notwithstanding that a person may be a resident and registered voter of the city, the following persons are ineligible to apply for and serve on the commission: 
(a)  Any elected official; or 
(b)  A relative by blood or marriage within the second degree, or any domestic partner, within the meaning of subsection 19-3.8 SFCC 1987, of any elected city official; or 
(c)  A person who, at any time within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of their application for selection to the commission, has served as an elected city official; or 
(d)  A person who, within the last five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application for selection to the commission, has been a candidate, as defined in subsection 9-2.3(G) SFCC 1987, to become an elected city official; or 
(e)  A current employee of the city or a current employee of any organization representing any employee bargaining unit for employees of the city; or 
(f)  A person who is currently an officer in any non-profit organization that participates in the electoral process through endorsements of candidates. 
(g)  A person who is currently an officer in any political committee, as that term is defined in subsection 9-2.3(M) SFCC 1987; or 
(h)  A person who is currently an officer in any qualified political party, as that term is defined in 1-1-10 NMSA 1978, including, an officer of any county political party; or 
(i)  A person who, at any time within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of their application for selection to the commission, has served as a paid campaign worker or paid campaign consultant for an elected city official; or 
C.  Selection of Commission Members. 
(1)  The city clerk shall set a reasonable period for an application submittal period. 
(2)  Any person desiring to serve on the commission shall apply by submitting an application to the city clerk during the application submittal period. The application shall be on a form prepared by the city clerk and approved by the city attorney. 
(3)  The city clerk shall conduct a ministerial review of each submitted application for completeness. All applications shall be submitted to the city clerk by the close of the application submittal period in order to be considered. 
(4)  Upon close of the application submittal period, the city clerk shall count all applications submitted and determine the number of complete applications that will be available for the drawing. If the city clerk determines that less than three (3) complete applications, per membership position, have been submitted, the city clerk shall extend the application period, if doing so will not interfere with applicable deadlines for the redistricting process. The city clerk extended application period shall be no more than one-half (1/2) the length of the initial application period. 
(5)  The city clerk shall set a date, time and place for the members to be selected by means of a drawing by lot, so that one (1) member for each position, described in subsection 6-18.3 SFCC 1987, is selected, along with one (1) alternate, in the event the member resigns in writing prior to the end of the term of the commission. An alternate shall be subject to the same requirements of a member. An alternate shall be required to attend commission meetings; however, an alternate shall not be allowed to participate in the meetings unless they are called upon to fill the term of a vacant member position. 
D.  Chairperson. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected by members of the commission. The chairperson shall provide direction to the consultant and staff. 
E.  Term. 
(1)  The members of the first commission shall be selected as soon as practicable. The first commission shall be established no later than February 1, 2015, so that the initial districting plan shall be final by June 1, 2015. 
(2)  Members of each commission shall serve from the time they are appointed until after the vote on the final redistrict plan, or unless ordered otherwise by a court. 
F.  Eligibility to Run for Office. Members of the commission are ineligible to become a candidate for an elected official in a regular municipal election for two (2) years following the expiration of their membership term. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-18.6 - Meetings. 
    Each commission shall establish its regular meeting day, time and location and shall publish notice of each meeting with the city clerk, in accordance with the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, Sections 10-15-1 through 10-15-4 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-18.7 - Budget. 
    The city finance director shall request that adequate funds be appropriated for the commission to carry out its duties. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-18.8 - Staff. 
    The city attorney shall be the staff liaison to the commission. 
(Ord. #2014-37  1) 
6-19 - INDEPENDENT SALARY COMMISSION. 

6-19.1 - Name; creation; purpose. 
A.  There is hereby created the independent salary commission ("commission") as approved by the voters of the city of Santa Fe on March 4, 2014. 
B.  The sole purpose of the commission shall be to review and set the mayor's salary, pursuant to Article 6.02(C) of the Santa Fe Municipal Charter. 
C.  The commission shall be independent from the office of the mayor and the governing body so as to remove all conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2016-43  2) 
6-19.2 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The commission shall have the sole power to review and set the mayor's salary no less than once every four (4) years. 
B.  The commission shall set the salary of the mayor by comparing the salaries of other public executives within the County of Santa Fe, including the Santa Fe County manager, superintendent of Santa Fe public schools, and the city of Santa Fe city manager, as well as the mayor's salary in cities of comparable size, cost of living, and diversity within the region. 
C.  The salary set by the commission shall go into effect the Monday immediately following the regular election at which a mayor is elected or reelected. 
(Ord. No. 2016-43  2) 
6-19.3 - Membership; terms; vacancies. 
A.  Membership. The commission shall be comprised of seven (7) members, all of whom must reside within the municipal boundaries of the city of Santa Fe. The mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the governing body, the members of the commission. The commission shall consist of one (1) member from each of the following categories: 
(1)  One (1) shall be a member of the Santa Fe chamber of commerce. 
(2)  One (1) shall be a representative of a neighborhood association. 
(3)  One (1) shall be a representative of a community organization. 
(4)  One (1) shall be a current or retired attorney or judge. 
(5)  One (1) shall be a representative of the human resources industry, or an employment consultant. 
(6)  One (1) shall be a current or retired chief executive officer. 
(7)  One (1) member shall be appointed at-large. 
    Nominees to the commission shall have the ability to exercise sound and practical judgement in the implementation of their powers and duties as members of the commission. The mayor shall appoint a chairperson prior to the first meeting of the commission. The chairperson shall then appoint a vice-chairperson at the first regular meeting. 
B.  Terms. Members of the commission shall serve four (4) year terms. A member shall serve for no more than two (2) terms. After two (2) consecutive unexcused absences, a commission member shall be automatically removed from the commission, and a new member shall be appointed consistent with the provisions of paragraph A. 
C.  Vacancies. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled consistent with the provisions of paragraph A. 
(Ord. No. 2016-43  2) 
6-19.4 - Meetings; staff. 
A.  Meetings. The commission shall meet no less than once every four (4) years, no later than April 30 of the year prior to the election in which a mayor shall be elected or reelected so that the new salary may be included in the budget for the following fiscal year. 
B.  Staff. The human resources director, or their designee, shall serve as staff liaison for the commission at all meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-43  2) 
CHAPTER VII - BUILDING AND HOUSING 
7-1 - BUILDING CODES; GENERAL PROVISIONS.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code 1953,  7-1, 7-2; Ord. #1959-18,  1; Ord. #1961-27,  1; Ord. #1966-5,  1-5; Ord. #1972,  1; Code 1973,  5-1; Ord. #1975-3; Ord. #1977-34,  2; Ord. #1981-5,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-13-1; Ord. #1984-67,  1 and Ord. #1990-17,  1. 

7-1.1 - Adoption of codes. 
A.  For the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, unobstructed maintenance of required yards, and maintenance buildings or structures within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the city, the following provisions and codes are adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out herein unless otherwise amended by the city: 
(1)  Section 14.5.1 New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC) General Provisions; 
(2)  Section 14.5.2 New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC) Permits; 
(3)  Section 14.5.3 New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC) Inspections; 
(4)  2015 International Building Code (IBC) as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2015 New Mexico Commercial Building Code (NMAC 14.7.2); 
(5)  2015 International Residential Code (IRC) as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2015 New Mexico Residential Building Code (NMAC 14.7.3); 
(6)  2015 New Mexico Earthen Building Materials Code (NMAC 14.7.4); 
(7)  2015 New Mexico Non-Load Bearing Baled Straw Construction Building Standards (NMAC 14.7.5); 
(8)  2009 New Mexico Energy Conservation Code (NMAC 14.7.6); 
(9)  2015 International Existing Building Code as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2015 New Mexico Existing Building Code (NMAC 14.7.7); 
(10)  2015 New Mexico Historic Earthen Buildings Code; 
(11)  2012 Uniform Plumbing Code as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2012 New Mexico Plumbing Code (NMAC 14.8.2) and as amended in Section 7-1.8 SFCC 1987; 
(12)  2012 Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code Phase III as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2012 New Mexico Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code (NMAC 14.8.3); 
(13)  2012 Uniform Mechanical Code as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2012 New Mexico Mechanical Code (NMAC 14.9.2); 
(14)  2012 Uniform Solar Code as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division referred to as the 2012 New Mexico Solar Energy Code (NMAC 14.9.6); 
(15)  2014 National Electrical Code as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division and referred to as the 2014 New Mexico Electrical Code (NMAC 14.10.4); and 
(16)  2012 National Electrical Safety Code as amended by the state of New Mexico construction industries division as amended by the state of New Mexico and referred to as the 2012 New Mexico Electrical Safety Code (NMAC 14.10.5); 
B.  Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of the codes set forth in paragraph A. above or this chapter shall be punished as provided for in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
C.  A copy of the codes set forth in paragraph A. and this chapter shall be kept on file in the office of building inspections, and shall be at all reasonable times available and subject to inspection. 
D.  The codes set forth in paragraph A. shall be effective ten (10) days from the date of adoption of this ordinance. Upon request of the applicant, applications for permits submitted before six (6) months prior to the effective date may be issued in compliance with the prior codes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-1,  3; Ord. #2009-22,  1; Ord. #2011-18,  1; Ord. #2015-3  1; Ord. #2016-8  1; Ord. # 2017-6 ,  1) 
7-1.2 - Staff members may not engage in construction business. 
    It is unlawful for any certified city staff member charged with the administration and enforcement of the codes adopted by the city as set forth in Section 7-1.1 SFCC 1987 to engage in the business of the construction of buildings either directly or indirectly. The staff member shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city while charged with such duties. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be sufficient cause for dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-1,  4) 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code 1953,  5-3; Ord. #1981-5,  9; SFCC 1981,  6-13-8. 
7-1.3 - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
A.  The governing body shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for permits and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the land use department and may be altered or amended only by the governing body. No permit or approval required under this chapter shall be issued or granted unless and until such fees have been paid in full. The schedule of fees adopted by the governing body replaces fees adopted by the state of New Mexico construction industries division as set forth in the New Mexico Administrative Code. 
B.  The fees shall be reviewed as set forth in subsection 11-2.5 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. No. 2008-1,  6) 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code 1953,  7-10; Code 1973,  5-3; Ord. 1981-5,  9; SFCC 1981,  6-13.9. 
7-1.4 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- This section is moved to Chapter X, Nuisance, subsection 10-9.7. 
7-1.5 - Building permits. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or demolition of any structure of any kind within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the city unless the construction, erection or demolition of such structure complies with the terms and provisions of the codes as set forth in Section 7-1.1A. SFCC 1987 and all applicable ordinances adopted by the city. 
B.  Additional provisions regarding building permits are set forth in Section 14-3.10 SFCC 1987. 
(Code 1953,  7-3; Code 1973,  5-5; Ord. #1975-28,  2; Ord. #1981-5,  11; SFCC 1981,  6-13-11; Ord. #1984-67,  3; Ord. #1990-17,  2; Ord. #2008-1,  5; Ord. #2009-22,  2) 
7-1.6 - Building permit expiration. 
    Permits for residential construction shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and permits for commercial construction shall expire two (2) years from the date of issuance. Infrastructure permits, specifically grading and drainage permits and landscape and utility permits, for either residential or commercial construction shall expire two (2) years from date of issuance. The governing body by adoption of a resolution may approve the temporary suspension of the enforcement of this section due to severe economic conditions. The suspension may be retroactive to a date certain and may impose certain conditions. This authority shall not be used for specific building permits or individual economic situations, but shall apply to all building permits due to broad economic downturns. 
(Ord. #2008-1,  10; Ord. #2010-10  1) 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code 1953,  7-3; Code 1973,  5-5; Ord. #1975-28,  2; Ord. #1981-5,  11; SFCC 1981,  6-13-11; Ord. #1984-67,  3; Ord. #1990-17,  2. 
7-1.7 - Repair of frame buildings. 
    Any existing frame building within the city, which may be damaged by fire, decay or otherwise, to an extent in which repair will exceed one-half (1/2) of the building's value at the time of its damage, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be repaired or rebuilt but shall forthwith be removed by the owner or owner's representative within sixty (60) days after notification in writing by certified mail from the city building inspector to the owner or owner's representative. 
(Code 1953,  7-4; Code 1973,  5-6; Ord. #1975-30,  2; Ord. #1981-5,  13; SFCC 1981,  6-13-13) 
7-1.8 - Amendment to Sections 710.0 and 710.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code; Requirements for Sewer Backwater Valves. 
A.  Section 710.0 of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be renamed: 
    710.0 Drainage of Fixtures Located Above the Main Street Level or Located below the Main Sewer Level. 
B.  Section 701.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be deleted and the following substituted: 
    710.1 Backflow Protection. Installation of a backwater valve, to prevent sewage from the main sanitary sewer backing up into the sanitary sewer service lines due to cleaning or plugs in the sanitary sewer main, is required for all new construction connecting to a public or private sanitary sewer collection system and for all replacements or repairs made to an existing sanitary sewer service line. Backwater valves shall be accessible for routine inspection and service and the installation shall allow the working components of the devices to be quickly and easily serviced. The maintenance of the backwater valve and sanitary sewer service line and appurtenances shall be the sole obligation of the property owner. The city of Santa Fe shall be under no obligation to ascertain that the backwater valve or sanitary sewer service line and appurtenances continues in operating condition. Cleanouts for drains that pass through a backwater valve shall be clearly identified with a permanent label stating "backwater valve downstream". A list of approved backwater valves shall be prepared by the city of Santa Fe Wastewater Management Division and Inspection and Enforcement Division. 
    Exception: Property owners are exempt from the requirement to install a backwater device on their sanitary sewer service line when the property meets each of the following three conditions as certified by a licensed architect, engineer or surveyor: 
 (1) That a manhole without a locking cover exists upstream of the point where the building's sanitary sewer service line connects to the main sewer line; That the elevation of the top of said manhole is a minimum of two (2) feet below the lowest plumbing fixture drain in the building; and that said manhole is in an area with relatively low likelihood of a vehicle or other object being in a position to prevent the manhole cover from discharging sewage as intended. 
(Ord. #2011-18,  2; Ord. #2016-8  2) 
7-1.9 - Amendment to Section 1702.9 of the Uniform Plumbing Code; Non-Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems; Design and Installation. 
A.  Section 1702.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be deleted and the following substituted: 
    1702.1 General. The installation, construction, alteration, and repair of rainwater catchments systems intended to supply uses such as water closets, urinals, clothes washers, trap primers for floor drains and floor sinks, irrigation, and industrial processes, water features, cooling tower makeup and other uses shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
B.  Section 1702.9.1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be deleted and the following substituted: 
    1702.9.1 Outside Hose Bibbs. Outside hose bibbs shall be allowed on rainwater piping systems. Hose bibbs supplying rainwater shall be marked with the words: "CAUTION: NON-POTABLE WATER, DO NOT DRINK" and Figure 1709.9 and shall be fitted with a lock. 
(Ord. No. 2016-8  3) 
7-1.10 - Application of the International Existing Building Code. 
    The applicable provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted in subsection 7-1.1(A)(9), shall be applied to a construction permit upon the request of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39  9) 
7-1.11 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 7-1.11, Clearing Premises After Demolition of Building, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1953,  7-8; Code 1973,  5-10; Ord. #1981-5,  16; SFCC 1981,  6-13-17, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  13. 
7-1.12 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 7-1.12, Powers of Urban Renewal Agency, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ord. #1963-7,  1; Code 1973,  5-11; Ord. #1981-5,  17; SFCC 1981,  6-13-18, was moved to become subsection 7-2.1 by Ordinance No. 2001-8,  314. 
7-1.13 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 7-1.13, Functions and Duties of Urban Renewal Agency, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ord. #1963-7,  2; Code 1973,  5-12; Ord. #1981-5,  18; SFCC 1981,  6-13-19, was moved to become subsection 7-2.2 by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  15. 
7-1.14 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 7-1.14, Exceptions and Additions to Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ord. #1984-67,  4 and 1990-17,  3, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  16. 
7-1.15 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 7-1.15, Amendment to Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1984-67,  5-4.1; 17-1990,  1; 1995-25,  1 was repealed by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  17. 
7-2 - URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-2, Uniform Administrative Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1983-26,  5-14; SFCC 1981,  6-13A-1-6-13A-10; Ordinance Nos. 1989-37,  1; 1995-25,  2 and 2003-20,  1, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  18. 

7-2.1 - Powers of urban renewal agency. 
    It is in the public interest for the urban renewal agency, created by Section 3-46-41 NMSA 1978, to exercise all of the urban renewal project powers granted by such law. 
(Ord. #1963-7,  1; Code 1973,  5-11; Ord. #1981-5,  17; SFCC 1981,  6-13-18; Ord. #2008-1,  14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-46-41 NMSA 1978. 
7-2.2 - Functions and duties of urban renewal agency. 
    In accordance with the powers vested in the city by the Urban Renewal Law of the state, the governing body determines and declares that the exercise of all the urban renewal project powers defined in the Urban Renewal Law shall be by the urban renewal agency of the city which is vested with all the powers, functions, rights, duties and privileges of the Urban Renewal Law. 
(Ord. #1963-7,  2; Code 1973,  5-12; Ord. #1981-5,  18; SFCC 1981,  6-13-19; Ord. #2008-1,  15) 
State Law reference- State Urban Renewal Law,  3-46-1 through 3-46-45 NMSA 1978. 
7-3 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS. 

7-3.1 - Permits. 
A.  No frame, wood, frame and stucco, wood frame, wooden-clad or frame building or structure, whether covered with any material of any kind or not, shall be moved from without the city to any point within the city nor shall any such building or structure be moved from one point within the city to any other point within the city nor shall any such building or structure be removed from within the city or through the city or from without the city through the city except on a proper permit granted by the city. 
B.  This subsection shall not apply to the moving from one point within the city to any other point within the city of any temporary one-story frame building constructed for the use of builders and not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in area; provided, that the necessary permit is obtained; provided further, that the building is being moved only for temporary use during the construction of some other building and is immediately removed after the completion of such other building or on order of the city. 
C.  The governing body shall have the power, on written application and a showing of cause satisfactory to it, to issue permits subject to such conditions and on such terms as it may prescribe and as may be prescribed by other existing ordinances and regulations for the moving of buildings, the moving of which is otherwise prohibited, from any point within the city to any other point within the city. 
D.  Any person violating any of the terms of this subsection shall, on written notice from the building inspector, remedy or correct such violation within ten (10) days after receiving such written notice. It is unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to so comply with such notice. 
E.  The imposing of a fine or sentence for a violation of this subsection shall, in no way, prevent the requirement for the remedying or correcting of such violation. 
(Code 1953,  7-12; Code 1973,  5-13; SFCC 1981,  6-14-1) 
7-3.2 - Compliance with regulations. 
    No permit shall be granted under subsections 7-3.1 through 7-3.4 SFCC 1987 until the mover has complied with all ordinances and regulations concerning the moving of buildings and other structures which may have been adopted by the city. 
(Code 1953,  7-13; Code 1973,  5-14; SFCC 1981,  6-14-2) 
7-3.3 - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit for moving buildings or other structures through the city streets shall be forty-seven dollars ($47.00) for each building or structure so moved, together with all costs occasioned by such moving. 
(Code 1953,  7-14; Code 1973,  5-15; SFCC 1981,  6-14-3; Ord. #1983-26,  3; Ord. #2003-20  2) 
7-3.4 - Bond required. 
    Before any permit is granted to any person under the provisions of subsections 7-3.1 through 7-3.4 SFCC 1987 the person shall furnish a bond acceptable to the city building inspector in favor of the city in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and deposit and file it with the city clerk. Such bond shall be for the protection of the city, its citizens and all public utilities against any damage caused in the moving of the buildings or other structures and shall be conditioned on compliance with all ordinances and regulations relative to the moving of buildings. 
(Code 1953,  7-15; Code 1973,  5-16; SFCC 1981,  6-14-4) 
7-4 - GREEN BUILDING CODES.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-4, Fallout Shelters, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1961-25,  3-13, 1973 SFCC  5-7,  5-17-5-27 and SFCC 1981  6-15-1-6-15-11 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  19. 

7-4.1 - Authority. 
    The city of Santa Fe establishes the Santa Fe Green Building Codes pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to adopt ordinances for the purpose of providing for the safety and preserving the health of the municipality and its inhabitants (Section 3-17-1 NMSA 1978) and for prescribing standards for constructing buildings (Section 3-18-6 NMSA 1978). This section is adopted pursuant to the city of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter which was adopted effective March 15, 1998 and amended March 4, 2008, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act Sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978 and Article 10, Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
(Ord. #2009-9,  2) 
7-4.2 - Residential Green Building Code. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to: 
(1)  Provide criteria for rating the environmental performance of single-family residential construction and site design practices and provide guidelines for documentation that demonstrates conformance with those criteria; 
(2)  Encourage cost-effective and sustainable building methods by encouraging conservation of fossil fuels, water and other natural resources, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, recycling of construction materials, reducing solid waste and improving indoor air quality; 
(3)  Identify the specific requirements for complying with the requirements of the Residential Green Building Code; and 
(4)  Encourage more aggressive green building development through incentives and rewards to work toward the goals of the 2030 challenge as adopted by the governing body by Resolution No. 2006-55. 
B.  Residential Green Building Code; Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of the Santa Fe Residential Green Building Code shall apply to: 
(a)  New single-family, attached and detached, residential units as defined by the 2015 International Residential Code or its successor as adopted by the city; 
(b)  Modular homes which are built off-site and brought onto the site, provided that the land use director may approve exceptions to specific code requirements upon a showing by the applicant or modular home supplier that compliance would cause undue burden; and 
(c)  Residential additions that provide for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Only the addition is subject to the code provisions, not the existing structure. 
(2)  Upon request of an applicant, applications for permits submitted prior to March 1, 2017, may be issued in compliance with the prior version of Residential Green Building Code. The permit fee in paragraph F of this subsection shall apply. 
C.  Relationship to Other Codes; Compliance; Exceptions. 
(1)  The requirements of this section are in addition to and do not replace the requirements of other sections of this chapter and other chapters of this Code, including without limitation, all of the life safety codes, historic preservation ordinance, land development code and adopted building codes and development standards. 
(2)  All submittals and approvals required under this Residential Green Building Code shall be rendered in conjunction with a residential building permit application and related field inspections. The application shall be on a form approved by the land use director. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all of the provisions of this section prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the land use director. 
(3)  For a structure located in an historic overlay district where it can be demonstrated that strict compliance with the requirements of this section cannot be achieved without an exception to the historic overlay district requirements, the requirements of this section may be adjusted so as to resolve the conflict between the two (2) sections of the Code. 
D.  Administration. 
(1)  The land use director shall: 
(a)  Administer and enforce the Residential Green Building Code; and 
(b)  Require an applicant for a building permit, to prepare and submit Residential Green Building Code documentation to the green code administrator or designee to assure compliance with this section. 
E.  Requirements. 
(1)  Energy performance levels. A documented analysis of the building's energy performance using software in accordance with 2009 ICC IECC Section 405 is required. A projected Home Energy Rating System (HERS) index, or equivalent, shall be submitted as part of a building permit application and a report of the confirmed HERS index, or equivalent, meeting the standards of this section is required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The required HERS index for residences up to and including three thousand (3,000) square feet of conditioned space shall be 65 until January 1, 2018, when it shall be reduced to 60. The required HERS index for residences over three thousand (3,000) feet of conditioned space shall be reduced by one point for each one hundred (100) square feet of conditioned space over three thousand (3,000), or pro-rata portion thereof, until the required HERS index is zero and shall be zero for those and larger residences. 
(2)  HERS raters. HERS raters shall be certified to conduct HERS analysis by passing educational courses and obtaining continuing education credits as required by the land use director. In addition HERS raters shall: 
(a)  Confirm ventilation rates of the ventilation equipment used to satisfy the required house ventilation and report the findings to the land use department; 
b.  Supply a report that includes the building components contributing to achievement of the required HERS index to be compared to the building plans submitted for a building permit. Reports approved to supply this information shall be approved by the land use director; and 
c.  Supply an estimation of the greenhouse gas emissions avoided and the electricity and natural gas usage avoided when submitting the final or confirmed HERS index. Reports approved to supply this information shall be approved by the land use director. 
(3)  Building envelope insulation values. Building insulation levels shall meet the requirements of overall UA for 2015 IECC. A report of compliance shall be provided to the city as part of a building permit application. Reports approved to supply this information shall be approved by the land use director. 
(4)  Building thermal envelope insulation confirmation. The insulation installers shall provide a certification complying with a template to be provided by the land use department listing the type, manufacturer and R-value of insulation installed in each element of the building thermal envelope. For blown or sprayed insulations (fiberglass and cellulose), the initial installed thickness, settled thickness, settled R-value, installed density, coverage area and number of bags installed shall be listed on the certification. For insulated siding, the R-value shall be listed on the product's package and shall be listed on the certification. The insulation installer shall sign, date and provide the certification in a conspicuous location on the job site. (Consistent with 2015 IRC Section N1101.10.1.) 
(5)  Air sealing and insulation. The air barrier and insulation installation criteria from Table 402.4.2 from the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code shall be visually inspected pursuant to Section 402.4.2.2 whether or not the testing option from Section 402.4.2.1 has been achieved. Insulation values shall be verified to match those used to obtain the required HERS rating. 
(6)  Duct installation. The installation instructions for heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment shall be made available to the inspector conducting the duct installation inspection to ensure ducting meets the manufacture's specifications. It shall be located on the equipment or in a conspicuous location adjacent to the equipment to be easily located by the inspector. 
(7)  Duct leakage. Duct tightness shall be verified in accordance with 2009 IECC section 403.2.2 and shall not exceed six (6) percent of total fan flow. 
(8)  Duct protection during construction. All boots, ducts and ventilation openings shall be sealed during construction to prevent dust and debris from entering them and shall remain sealed until they are put into operation. 
(9)  Water conservation levels. Water conservation features are implemented to achieve conservation performance shall be required. A documented analysis using the water efficiency rating score (WERS) tool showing a maximum score of 70 shall be submitted to the land use department as part of a building permit application and a report of the confirmed rating with a maximum score of 70 shall be submitted to the land use department prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
(10)  Whole-house mechanical ventilation requirement. Mechanical ventilation shall be required at a rate based on the following formula: required cubic feet per minute of ventilation = (total heated floor area  .01) + ((number of bedrooms + 1)  7.5). 
(11)  Heating and cooling equipment sizing and system design. 
a.  Heating and cooling equipment and appliances shall be sized in accordance with Air Conditioning Contractors of America (ACCA) Manual S or other approved sizing methodologies based on building loads calculated in accordance with ACCA Manual J (version 8 or higher) or other approved heating and cooling methodologies. 
b.  Duct systems serving heating, cooling, and ventilation equipment shall be designed and installed in accordance with ACCA Manual D, the manufacturer's installation instructions or other approved methodologies. 
c.  Radiant hydronic systems shall be designed using manufacturer's recommendations, mechanical engineer design specifications or other approved hydronic heating design methods, and shall include equipment specifications, the number of zones, pipe diameter, length, and flow rate for each zone. 
d.  ACCA Manual J and S, and Manual D and radiant design reports, as applicable, along with an AHRI (Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute) certificate or equivalent mechanical equipment certification shall be submitted to the land use department either at time of building permit application or no later than the completion of rough framing. Duct design reports shall be submitted before ducts are installed. Radiant hydronic system in concrete shall be submitted before installation. 
e.  All HVAC documents submitted are subject to review and approval by the land use director before installation. Other approved HVAC design methodologies shall be approved by the land use director. 
(12)  Installation of a radon mitigation system consistent with Appendix F of the 2015 International Residential Building Code. 
(13)  Disclosure of building performance and homeowner's manual. The following items shall be documented and included in a homeowners manual provided to the first homeowner and available for review for homes that are for sale on forms provided by the land use director: 
(a)  The confirmed HERS index; 
(b)  The blower door result at ACH 50; 
(c)  The required amount of ventilation and the archived ventilation rate in air changes per hour; 
(d)  The type of ventilation system used; 
(e)  The percentage better that the UA is above the 2015 IECC maximum requirement; 
(f)  The confirmed WERS; 
(g)  A diagram showing the location of shut off valves for water, electricity and any combustions fuels (natural gas or propane) with labels in English and Spanish; 
(h)  The manuals for all major equipment and fixtures in English and in Spanish if available; and 
(i)  All other homeowner manual items available from the land use department at the time of certificate of occupancy for that purpose. 
F.  Permit Fee. 
(1)  Applicants for residential building permits shall pay a green building code permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each residential unit, subject to the provisions for fee waivers under subsection 14-8.11(G)(2)(a). 
G.  Effective Date. 
(1)  Section 7-4.1 SFCC 1987 shall be effective July 1, 2009. 
(Ord. #2009-9,  3; Ord. #2009-31,  1; Ord. #2010-19, Exh. A; Ord. #2012-4  1; Ord. #2014-11, Exh. A; Ord. #2016-40  1; Ord. # 2017-10 ,  1, 2) 
7-4.3 - Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to: 
(1)  Provide criteria for rating environmental performance of residential addition and remodel practices and provide guidelines for documentation that demonstrates conformance with those criteria; 
(2)  Encourage cost-effective and sustainable building and remodeling methods by encouraging the conservation of fossil fuels, water and other natural resources, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, recycling of construction materials, reducing solid waste and improving indoor air quality in existing residential structures; 
(3)  Identify the specific requirements for complying with the requirements of the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code; and 
(4)  Encourage more aggressive green remodeling and additions that work towards the goals of the 2030 challenge as adopted by the governing body by Resolution No. 2006-55. 
B.  Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code; Applicability. 
(1)  Exhibit B attached to the end of this chapter is adopted. Exhibit B shall be referred to as the Santa Fe Residential Addition and Remodel Building Code. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection apply to all additions and remodels affecting fifty percent (50%) or more of the floor area of attached and detached single-family residences. 
C.  Relationship to Other Codes; Compliance; Exceptions. 
(1)  The requirements of this subsection are in addition to and do not replace the requirements of other sections of this chapter or other chapters of this Code, including, without limitation, all of the life safety codes, historic preservation ordinance, land development code and adopted building codes and development standards. 
(2)  No person shall fail to comply with the requirements of this subsection. No person shall construct in violation of a Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code approval. All approvals in inspections of Addition and Remodel Green Building Code applications and requirements shall be done in conjunction with residential building permit application and field inspections. An application shall be made on a form approved by the land use department director. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all of the provisions of this section prior to the issuance of a final inspection signoff by the land use department. 
(3)  For a structure located in an historic overlay district where it can be demonstrated that strict application of the requirements of this subsection cannot be accomplished due to the requirements of the historic overlay district and that findings cannot be reasonably made for a variance or exception to the historic overlay district requirements, the requirements of this subsection may be reduced commensurate with the conflict between the two (2) sections of the Santa Fe City Code. 
D.  Administration. 
(1)  The Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code shall be administered by the city as set forth in the administrative procedures adopted by resolution of the governing body. All changes to the administrative procedures shall be reviewed and approved by the governing body. The administrative procedures shall set forth responsibilities, procedures and standards for administrative actions necessary to implement the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code, which include, without limitation, the following: 
(a)  Submitting and reviewing applicable residential building addition and remodeling permit requests and determining conditions of approval related to the requirements of the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code; 
(b)  Reviewing and certifying Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code checklists with property owners to ensure compliance with the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code and the administrative procedures; and 
(c)  Monitoring the performance of property owners subject to the requirements of the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code and the Administrative Procedures; and 
(d)  Taking appropriate action in the event of noncompliance. 
(2)  The land use department or its agent shall: 
(a)  Be responsible for the administration of the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code; and 
(b)  Prepare a User's Guide that provides detailed information regarding each checklist item in the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code and when an applicant is eligible to take points and how many points may be taken. 
(c)  Administer and enforce all other building codes and land use development codes that apply to building permit requests that are subject to this Section. 
(d)  Require, as part of the building permit submittals for projects subject to Chapter 11 of the Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code to prepare and submit a Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code Chapter 11 checklist to the Green Building Code Administrator or designee to assure compliance with this Section; and 
(e)  Where applicable, invoke sanctions for noncompliance with this section at the request of the City Manager. 
E.  Effective Date. Subsection 7-4.3 SFCC 1987 shall be effective August 1, 2014. 
(Ord. #2014-11,  1) 
7-5 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-5, Building Inspector, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1953  28-58-28-64; Code 1973,  5-29-5-35 and SFCC 1981,  6-16-2-6-16-8 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  20. 
7-6 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-6, Electrical Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1953,  8-1, 8-13; Code 1973,  7-1-7-3; SFCC 1981,  6-17-1, 6-17-2; Ordinance No. 1981-35,  3; and 1981-64,  28, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  21. 
7-7 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-7, Mechanical Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1972-13,  1; Code 1973,  11-1; Ordinance Nos. 1975-5,  2; 1977-36,  2-3; 1981-32,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-18-1; Ordinance Nos. 1985-38,  1-8; 1990-16,  1,2 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  22. 
7-8 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-8, Housing Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1972-23; Code 1973,  13-1; Ordinance Nos. 1975-4,  2; 1997-35,  2; 1981-30,  1,2; SFCC 1981,  6-19-1, 6-19-2, was repealed and moved to Chapter XXVI, Housing by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  23. 
7-9 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-9, Uniform Plumbing Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1956-17;  1,2; 1966-7,  1,2; 1972-15,  1; Code 1973,  24-1; Ordinance Nos. 1975-6,  2; 1977-37,  2,3; 1981-31,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-20-1; Ordinance Nos. 1985-37,  1,2; 1990-15,  1,2, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  24. 
7-10 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-10, Uniform Solar Energy Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1973,  29.1-1; Ordinance No. 1977-38,  1; 1981-33,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-21.1; Ordinance No. 1985-39,  2,3, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  25. 
7-11 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-11, Uniform Swimming Pool Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1973,  31-1; Ordinance No. 1981-34,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-22-1; Ordinance No. 1985-40,  1-4, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  26. 
7-12 - ADDRESS ASSIGNMENT AND POSTING. 

7-12.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Address Assignment and Posting Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1987-5,  1) 
7-12.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to require the assignment and posting of address numbers in order that residences, places of business and buildings may be identified with the ease and speed necessary to enable the city or its designated representative to provide prompt emergency medical, police and fire fighting services and to regulate the assignment and posting of addresses on any street or highway within the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1987-5,  2) 
7-12.3 - Assignment. 
A.  The Code Enforcement Department shall assign addresses to all buildings within the city of Santa Fe. Such assignment shall not obligate the city to maintain or improve the roadway. 
B.  Requests for address changes shall be made to the city by the owner of the property. The city may change an address assigned to any building if the address is inconsistent with the intent of this section. 
C.  Beginning on April 1, 1987, and thence forward, the Code Enforcement Department shall maintain records showing the addresses assigned to all buildings and such records shall be open for public inspection during the normal business hours. 
(Ord. #1987-5,  3) 
7-12.4 - Notice. 
    Notification by the city of address assignment or address change shall be as follows: 
A.  On all new construction, the address shall be issued with the building permit. This shall be considered official notification. 
B.  On all address changes, official notification shall consist of a written notice to the property owner or occupant. 
(Ord. #1987-5,  4) 
7-12.5 - Posting. 
A.  The owner shall post or cause to be posted the assigned address within thirty (30) days of notification by the city. 
B.  To insure the uniformity of the posting of addresses, all numbers shall be placed on the front of building and in so conspicuous a manner that the number may be easily discernable and read from the roadway from which it is addressed. 
C.  For buildings on private streets or easements the owner shall further post or cause to be posted the assigned address or range of assigned addresses within ten feet (10') of the point where the vehicular entrance to the premises leaves public right-of-way. The director of the Code Enforcement Department or his designee is authorized to permit a variance from this requirement only in cases of unreasonable conflict or extreme hardship. 
(Ord. #1987-5,  5) 
7-12.6 - Maintenance. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant to maintain in good condition the address of the building. 
B.  No person shall purposely take down, deface or in any manner, damage any sign or number posted under the provisions of this section. 
7-12.7 - Size and Type. 
A.  The minimum size of numbers or letters posted shall be related to the distance between the centerline of public roadway and the posting location as follows: 
DISTANCE HEIGHT WIDTH WEIGHT (width of line) FROM-TO    -50' 4" 2" 1/2"  50'-100' 6" 3" 3/4" 100'-200' 8" 5" 11/2" 200'-300' 10" 6" 11/2"  
B.  Any building further than three hundred feet (300') from the public right-of-way shall in addition to posting the address on the front of the building, further post or cause to be posted the assigned address within ten feet (10') of the point where the vehicular entrance to the premises leaves public right-of-way. 
C.  The address numbers or letters shall be made of a durable material which will reasonably withstand the natural elements. 
(Ord. #1987-5,  7) 
7-12.8 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. #1987-5,  8) 
7-13 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-13, Handicapped Accessibility Standards for Public Accommodations, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1993-13,  1, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  27. 
7-14 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-14, Fair Housing, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1990-10,  2-21, was repealed and moved to become Section 26-4 by Ordinance No. 2008-1,  28, 29. 
7-15 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 7-15, Energy Audits, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2007-38, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2009-9. 
7-16 - SINGLE-OCCUPANT RESTROOMS. 

7-16.1 - Definitions. 
    Gender neutral signage means a sign that indicates a restroom without preference to a specific gender. 
    Private or private use restroom means plumbing fixtures in residences and apartments, private bathrooms in hotels and hospitals, and restrooms in commercial establishments where the fixtures are intended for the use of a family or an individual and are accessible only from a private room or office. 
    Single-occupant restroom means a lockable restroom available for an individual for use with or without assistance. 
(Ord. #2015-17) 
7-16.2 - Applicability. 
    This section applies to single-occupant restrooms within commercial facilities that are not private or private use restrooms. This section is an additional requirement to those already required in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(Ord. #2015-17) 
7-16.3 - Signage required. 
A.  A single-occupant restroom subject to this section shall have gender-neutral signage. 
B.  A person with control over a commercial facility with at least one (1) single-occupant restroom shall install and maintain gender-neutral signage for each single-occupant restroom. 
(Ord. #2015-17) 
7-16.4 - Amendment to Section 2902.2 of the International Building Code; Separate Facilities. 
    2902.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex. 
    Exceptions: 
1.  Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling units and sleeping units . 
2.  Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load , including both employees and customers, of 15 or less. 
3.  Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies in which the maximum occupant load is 50 or less. 
4.  Single-occupant public or employee restrooms shall not be restricted to use by a specific sex or gender identity by means of signage, design or installation of fixtures. 
(Ord. #2015-17) 
EXHIBIT A 
EXHIBIT A
to CHAPTER VII
(Subsection 7-4.2)
SANTA FE RESIDENTIAL GREEN BUILDING CODE 
Introduction to the Santa Fe Residential Green Building Code ("RGBC") 
The RGBC addresses six categories relating to green building: 
(1)  Lot design, preparation and development; 
(2)  Resource efficiency; 
(3)  Energy efficiency; 
(4)  Water efficiency; 
(5)  Indoor environmental quality; and 
(6)  Operation, maintenance, and building owner education 
Each category contains subsections and line items with associated points. The items not marked "mandatory" may be selected for points to obtain the number of points required by each section. An additional 20 points is required and may be selected from any category. 
The RGBC requires that all single-family residential units reach a minimum level based on the number of heated gross square feet of the home. The level of certification is the minimum level for homes up to 3,000 heated gross square feet. Over that size, there are additional requirements for energy and water efficiency. 
New Mexico Green Building Code 
The RGBC has been designed to be consistent with state of New Mexico Building Codes. The RGBC is not intended to supersede any state requirements. 
The Administrative Procedures to the Santa Fe Residential Green Building Code 
On January 11, 2012, the governing body adopted Resolution No. 2012-12 setting forth the administrative procedures for the RGBC, which may be amended from time to time by the governing body. The administrative procedures detail each item of the RGBC checklist. 
Santa Fe Residential Green Building Review and Inspection Process 
The city of Santa Fe Green Building Code administrator will review building permit applications for compliance with the RGBC. The city of Santa Fe inspection division will inspect for most of the elements of the RGBC, however, a city-approved third party will conduct the Home Energy Rating System (HERS) analysis and perform inspections related to thermal bypass and insulation installation at the applicant's expense. To certify a home under the RGBC: 
(1)  When selecting a lot, set a goal for the level of certification, decide where points will be counted in each section, and write the implementation plan. 
(2)  Retain a HERS Rater to analyze the building plan to verify that it is projected to meet the required HERS index, perform the third-party testing that is required, and to submit all required documentation to the city's inspection division. 
(3)  When applying for a building permit, submit documentation including a completed certification checklist, implementation plan, and as much of the documentation as required by the verification column of the checklist as currently available. 
(4)  Keep track of documentation during construction. Be sure that there is documentation for the points that are being claimed. Submit results of third party inspections and other documentation to the city, as they become available. 
(5)  Notify the Green Building Code administrator at least two weeks prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy to allow for review of all submittals verifying compliance with the checklist items that are being claimed and have been received by the city and that all inspections have been made. 
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Santa Fe Residential Green Building Checklists 
Chapter 1. Reserved. 
Chapter 2
Definitions 
201 GENERAL 201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 201.2 Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 201.3 Terms defined in other document. Where terms are not defined in this Code, and such terms are used in relation to the reference of another document, those terms shall have the definition in that document. 201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 202 DEFINITIONS ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, the use of which is customarily accessory to and incidental to that of the residential building; the structure is located on the same lot or site as the residential building; the structure does not contain a dwelling unit; and (1) is classified as Group U - Utility and Miscellaneous in the accordance with the ICC International Building Code, or (2) is classified as accessory in accordance with the ICC International Residential Code, or (3) is classified as accessory to the residential use by a determination of the Adopting Entity. ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. ADOPTING ENTITY. The governmental jurisdiction, green building program, or any other third-party compliance assurance body that adopts this Code, and is responsible for implementation and administration of the practices herein. ADVANCED FRAMING. Code compliance layout, framing and engineering techniques that minimize the amount of framing products used and waste generated to construct a building while maintaining the structural integrity of the building. AFUE (Annual Fuel Utilization Efficiency). The ratio of annual output energy to annual input energy which includes any non-heating season pilot input loss, and for gas or oil-fired furnaces or boilers, does not includes electrical energy. AIR BARRIER. Material(s) assembled and joined together to provide a barrier to air leakage through the building envelope, An air barrier may be a single material or a combination of materials. AIR HANDLER. A blower or fan used for the purpose of distributing supply air to a room, space or area. AIR INFILTRATION. The uncontrolled inward air leakage into a building caused by the pressure effects of wind or the effect of differences in the indoor and outdoor air density or both. AIR, MAKE-UP. Air that is provided to replace air being exhausted. ARCHITECTURAL COATINGS. A material applied onto or impregnated into a substrate for protective, decorative, or functional purposes. Such materials include, but are not limited to, primers, paints, varnishes, sealers, and stains. An architectural coating is a materials applied to stationary structures or their appurtenances at the site of installation. Coatings applied in shop applications, sealants, and adhesives are not considered architectural coatings. BIO-BASED PRODUCT. A commercial or industrial product used in site development or building construction that is composed, in whole or in significant part, of biological products, renewable agriculture materials (including plant, animal, and marine materials), or forestry materials. CLIMATE ZONE. Climate zone for Santa Fe is 5 dry. COMMON AREA(S). Areas within a site or lot that are predominantly open spaces and consist of non-residential structures, landscaping, recreational facilities, roadways and walkways, which are owned and maintained by an incorporated or charted entity such as a homeowner's association or governmental jurisdiction. COMPLETE BASEMENT REMODEL. A basement remodel where the scope of work is such that it requires a building permit. COMPLETE KITCHEN REMODEL. A kitchen remodel where the scope of work is such that it requires a building permit. CONDITIONED SPACE. An area or room within a building being heated or cooled, containing uninsulated ducts, or with a fixed opening directly into an adjacent conditioned space. CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. A system of measures designed to reduce, reuse, and recycle the waste generated during construction and to properly dispose of the remaining waste. CONTINUOUS PHYSICAL FOUNDATION TERMITE BARRIER. An uninterrupted, non-chemical method of preventing ground termite infestation (e.g., aggregate barriers, stainless steel mesh, flashing, or plastic barriers). DIRECT-VENT APPLIANCE. A fuel-burning appliance with a sealed combustion system that draws all air for combustion from the outside atmosphere and discharges all flue gases to the outside atmosphere. DURABILITY. The ability of a building or any of its components to perform its required functions in its service environment over a period of time without unforeseen cost for maintenance or repair. DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. ENGINEERED WOOD PRODUCTS. Products that are made by combining wood stand, veneers, lumber or other wood fiber with adhesive or connectors to make a larger composite structure. EXISTING BUILDING. Building completed and occupied prior to any renovation considered under this Code. FROST-PROTECTED SHALLOW FOUNDATION. A foundation that does not extend below the design frost depth and is protected against the effects of frost in compliance with SEI/ASCE 32-01 or the provisions for frost-protected shallow foundations of the ICC IBC or IRC, as applicable. FULL BATHROOM REMODEL. A bathroom remodel where the scope of work is such that it requires a building permit. GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference lane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1830 mm) from the building, between the structure and a point 6 feet (1830 mm) from the building. HIGH-EFFICIENCY LAMPS. Compact fluorescent lamps (CFL); light emitting diode (LED); T-8 or smaller diameter linear fluorescent lamps, or lamps with a minimum efficacy of 1) 60 lumens per watt for lamps over 40 watts, 2: 50 lumens per watt for lamps over 15 watts or 40 watts, or 3) 40 lumens per watt for lamps 15 watts or less. HYDROZONING. A landscape practice that groups plants with similar watering needs together in an effort to conserve water. LAVATORY FAUCET. A valve for dispensing hot and/or cold water to a basin used for washing hands or face. LOT. A single parcel of land generally containing one primary structure or use. Lot development, as defined by this Code, may include multiple ownership (such as with a condominium building) or multiple uses (such as with a mixed-use building). A lot is predominately represented by a single-family dwelling unit, a multifamily structure, or a mixed-use building also containing offices and shops. Lots may be located in urban, suburban, and promote soil infiltration and recharge. MERV (Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value). The Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value for filters in accordance with the criteria contained in ASHRAE 52.2. MODULAR CONSTRUCTION. Three-dimensional sections of the complete building or dwelling unit built in a factory and transported to the jobsite to be joined together on a permanent foundation. MULTI-UNIT BUILDINGS. A building containing multiple dwelling units and classified as R-2 under the ICC IBC. NEW CONSTRUCTION. Construction of a new building or construction that completely replaced more than 75 percent of an existing building. PERMEABLE MATERIAL. A material that permits the passage of water vapor and/or liquid. PLUMBING FIXTURE. A receptor or device that requires both a water-supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system, such as water closets, lavatories, bathtubs, and sinks. PRECUT. Materials cut to final size prior to delivery to site and ready for assembly. PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the overhang width to the overhang height above the door threshold or window sill (PF=A/B). RECYCLE. To recover and reprocess manufactured goods into new products. REMODLING. The process of restoring or improving an existing building, dwelling unit, or property. RENEWABLE ENERGY. Energy derived from sources that are regenerative or cannot be depleted. RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE. Source of energy (excluding minerals) derived from incoming solar radiation, including natural solar radiation itself, photosynthetic processes; from phenomenon resulting there from, including wind, hydropower, waves and tides, and lake or pond thermal differences; from decomposition of waste material, including methane from landfills; from processes that use regenerated materials, including wood and bio-based products; and from the internal heat of the earth, including nocturnal thermal exchanges. REPLACEMENT. The act or process of replacing material or systems. REUSE. To recover a material or product for use again without processing. SIP (Structural Insulated Panel). A structural sandwich panel that consists of a light-weight foam plastic core securely laminated between two thin, rigid wood structural panel facings; a structural panel that consists of lightweight foam plastic and cold-formed steel sheet or structural cold-formed steel members; or other similar non-interrupted structural panels. SOLID FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCE. A chimney connected device designed for purposes of heating, cooking, or both that burns solid fuel. STORY. That portion of a building including between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof of the next above. STORY ABOVE GRADE. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade, except that a basement shall be considered as a story above grade where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is: 1. More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the grade plane. 2. More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter. 3. More than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground level at any point. VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. WATER RESISTIVE BARRIER. A material behind an exterior wall covering that is intended to resist liquid water that has penetrated behind the exterior covering from further intruding into the exterior wall assembly.  
(Ord. #2014-11,  2) 
Chapter 3. Reserved. 
Chapter 4. Reserved. 
Chapter 5
Lot Design, Preparation, and Development 
Item # Green Building Practices Points 501 Lot Selection   501.1 Lot: The lot is selected to minimize environmental impact by one or more of the following: (1) An infill site is selected. 4 (2) A greyfield or an EPA-recognized brownfield lot is selected. 5 501.2 Mass Transportation : A range of mass transportation choices are promoted by one or more of the following: (1) A lot is selected within one-half mile (805 m) of pedestrian access to a mass transit system or within five miles (8046 m) of a mass transit station with provisions for parking. 3 (2) Walkways, street crossings, and entrances designed to promote pedestrian activity are provided. New buildings are connected to existing sidewalks and areas of development. 3 (3) A lot is selected within one-half mile (805 m) of six or more community resources [e.g., recreational facilities (such as pools, tennis courts, basketball courts), parks, grocery store, post office, place of worship, community center, daycare center, bank, school, restaurant, medical/dental office, laundromat/dry cleaner). 3 503 Lot Design   503.0 Intent : The lot is designed to avoid detrimental environmental impacts first, minimize any unavoidable impacts next, and finally mitigate for those impacts that do occur. The project is designed to minimize environmental impacts and to protect, restore, and enhance the natural features and environmental quality of the lot. (to be awarded points allocated for design, the intent of the design is implemented) 503.1 Natural Resources : Natural resources are conserved by one or more of the following: (4) Basic training in tree or other natural resource protection is provided for the on-site supervisor. 4 503.5 Landscape Plan : A landscape plan is developed to limit water and energy use while preserving or enhancing the natural environment. (2) Vegetation and trees are selected that are native or regionally appropriate for local growing conditions. 4 (3) A percentage of cool season turf areas are limited.  (a) 0 percent 4 (4) Plants with similar watering needs are grouped (hydrozoning). 5 (5) Species and locations for tree planting are identified that will provide summer shading of streets, parking areas, and buildings to moderate temperatures, when trees reach maturity. 5 504 Lot Construction   504.0 Intent : Environmental impact during construction is avoided to the extent possible; impacts that do occur are minimized, and any significant impacts are mitigated. 504.2 Trees and Vegetation : Designated trees and vegetation are preserved by one or more of the following: (1) Fencing or equivalent is installed to protect trees and other vegetation. 3 (2) Trenching, significant changes in grade, and compaction of soil and critical root zones in "tree save" areas are avoided. 4 505 Innovative Practices   505.0 Intent: Innovative lot design, preparation and development practices are used to enhance environmental performance. Waivers or variances from local development regulations may be required, and innovative zoning practices may be used to implement such practices. 505.1 Driveways and Parking Areas: Driveways or parking areas are shared. Waivers or variances from local development regulations are obtained to implement such practices, as applicable. In a multi-unit project, parking capacity is not to exceed the local minimum requirements. 4 505.4 Select a small lot to promote density and public transit and reduce sprawl (1) Infill site of less than 6000 square feet OR 2 (2) Infill site of less than 5000 square feet OR 3 (3) Infill site of less than 4000 square feet OR 4 (4) Infill site of less than 3000 square feet 5  
TOTAL REQUIRED FOR NEW BUILDINGS (ALL BUILDING SIZES) 16  
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Chapter 6
Resource Efficiency 
Item # Green Building Practices Points 601 Quality of Construction Materials and Waste   601.0 Intent : Design and construction practices that minimize the environmental impact of the building materials are incorporated, environmentally efficient building systems and materials are incorporated, and waste generated during construction is reduced. 601.1 Conditioned Floor Area: Conditioned floor area, as defined by ICC IRC and calculated in accordance with NAHBRC Z765, is limited. Dwelling unit size is to be calculated in accordance with NAHBRC Z765. Only the conditioned floor area for stories above grade plane is to be included in the calculation. (1) less than or equal to 1,000 square feet (93 m 2 ) 15 (2) less than or equal to 1,500 square feet (139 m 2 ) 12 (3) less than or equal to 2,000 square feet (186 m 2 ) 9 (4) less than or equal to 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ) 6 601.2 Material Usage : Building-code-compliant structural systems or advanced framing techniques are implemented that optimize material usage. (Points awarded for each system or framing technique implemented). 3
9 Points
max (1) 24" OC framing (2) Single top-plate - exterior and bearing walls (3) Single top-plate - interior non-bearing partitions (4) Right-sized headers or insulated box headers (5) No headers in non-bearing partitions (6) Ladders at perpendicular wall intersections (7) Two-stud exterior corner framing or equivalent (8) Doubling the rim joist in lieu of header (9) Other (specify and provide detail) 601.5 Prefabricated components. Precut or preassembled components, or panelized or precast assemblies are utilized for a minimum of 90 percent for the following system or building: (1) floor system 4 (2) wall system 4 (3) roof system 4 (4) modular construction for the entire building located above grade 13 (5) manufactured home construction for the entire building located above grade 13 601.6 Stacked Stories : Stories above grade are stacked, such as in 1 1/2-story, 2-story, or greater structures. The area of the upper floor is a minimum of 50 percent of the area of the story below, based on areas with a minimum ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm). (1) first stacked story 4 (2) for each additional stacked story 2 601.7 Site-applied Finishing Materials : Building materials or assemblies are utilized that do not require additional site-applied material for finishing. (1) 90 percent or more of the installed building material or assembly listed below: 5 (Points awarded for each material or assembly.) (2) 50 percent to less than 90 percent of the installed building material or assembly listed below: 2 (Points awarded for each material or assembly.)      (a) pigmented, stamped, decorative, or final finish concrete or masonry      (e) Use no trim on doors and window counting both interior and exterior and both sides of internal doors. 601.9 Above Grade Wall Systems: One or more of the following above grade wall systems that provide sufficient structural characteristics are used for a minimum of 75 percent of the gross exterior wall area of the building or 30 percent of interior and exterior wall areas combined. 4 (1) adobe or compressed earth block (2) concrete and/or masonry (4) rammed earth 601.9.1 Use earth from site (80% of the soil used) to make adobes, compressed earth block or rammed earth material used in building. 8
Additional
Points 602 Enhanced Durability and Reduced Maintenance   602.0 Intent: Design and construction practices are implemented that enhance the durability of materials and reduce in-service maintenance. 602.1 Exterior Doors: Entries at exterior door assemblies, inclusive of side lights, are covered by one of the following methods to protect the building from the effects of precipitation and solar radiation. A projection factor of 0.375 minimum is provided. 5 Points
Max (a) installing a porch roof or awning (b) extending the roof overhang (c) recessing the exterior door (1) main entrance door 3 (2) additional covered door assemblies 1 602.2 Roof Overhangs : Fixed permanent roof overhangs, including portals, based on inches of rainfall in Table 602.2, are provided over a minimum of 90 percent of exterior walls for sloped roofs or portals that cover 50% or more of the wall area for flat roofed buildings to protect the building envelope. 4 Table 602.2 Minimum Roof Overhang for One- & Two-Story Buildings Inches Rainfall (1)       Eave Overhang (inches)       Rake Overhang   (inches) Less than 20          12          12    602.4 Drip Edge : Drip edge is installed at eaves and gable roof edges. 3 602.7 Termite Barrier : Continuous physical foundation termite barrier used with or without low toxicity treatment is installed. 4 602.7.1 Additional points for continuous physical foundation termite barrier using no toxic treatment installed. 2 602.11 Foundation Waterproofing: Enhanced foundation waterproofing is installed where waterproofing is required by code: (Note: Some coatings are not compatible with exterior foam insulation.) 4 (1) rubberized coating, or (2) drainage mat 602.12 Flashing : Flashing details are shown on plans and flashing is installed at all of the following locations, as applicable: 6 (1) around exterior fenestrations, skylights and doors (2) roof valleys (3) deck/balcony to building intersections (4) at roof-to-wall intersections and at roof-to-chimney intersections (5) a drip cap is provided above windows and doors that are not flashed or protected by covering in accordance with Section 602.1 603 Reused or Salvaged Materials   603.0 Intent : Practices that reuse or modify existing structures, salvage materials for other uses, or use salvaged materials in the building's construction are implemented. 603.1 Reuse of Existing Building : Existing buildings and structures are reused, modified, or deconstructed in lieu of demolition. (Points awarded for every 200 square feet (18.5 m 2 ) of floor area.) 1
 
12 Points
Max 603.3 Scrap Materials : Facilitation for sorting and reuse of scrap building material (e.g., provide a central storage area or dedicated bins). 4 605 Recycled Construction Waste   605.0 Intent : Waste generated during construction is recycled. All waste classified as hazardous shall be property handled and disposed. (Points not awarded for hazardous waste removal.) 605.1 Construction Waste and Management Plan: A construction waste management plan is developed, posted at the jobsite, and implemented with a goal of recycling or salvaging a minimum of 50 percent (by weight) of construction and land-clearing waste. 6 607 Resource-Efficient Materials   607.1 Resource-Efficient Materials : Products containing fewer materials are used to achieve the same end-use requirements as conventional products, including but not limited to: (3 points awarded for each material) 9 Points
Max (2) engineered wood or engineered steel products (3) roof or floor trusses 610 Innovative Practices   610.2 Universal Design: For future resource efficiency. One point per universal design element (see User's Guide), Max of 6 points. 6 610.3 Modular Building Dimensions. Frame structures or structures made with modular units are designed on 16- or 24-inch dimensions. 2 610.4 Use structural vigas, beams, or posts (from less than 300 miles away) (does not apply to decorative vigas) 10
max (1 point per installed 10 linear feet) 610.5 Structural insulated panels (SIPS) used for the exterior: (1) Walls 5 (2) Roof 5 610.6 Drainage from canales is done in accordance with all of the following 5 (1) Waterproof the foundation behind the splash area and extending 3 feet in both directions. (2) Install an impermeable liner in splash area under canale. (3) Liner or other collector guides water away from structure sloping a minimum of 6 inches over 6 feet for a minimum of 6 feet away from structure.  
TOTAL REQUIRED FOR NEW BUILDINGS (ALL BUILDING SIZES) 50  
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Chapter 7
Energy Efficiency 
Item # Green Building Practices Points 701 > Minimum Energy Efficiency Requirements   701.1 Mandatory Requirements : New buildings must comply with Section 702 (Performance Path). 701.4.3 Insulation and Air Sealing: 701.4.3.1 General. Insulation and air sealing is inspected by an approved third party and a report verifying compliance is provided to the City's Inspection Division and is in accordance with the following: (1) Insulation. Insulation is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or local code, as applicable. Mandatory (2) Shafts (duct shaft, piping shaft/penetrations, flue shaft). Openings to unconditioned space are fully sealed with solid blocking or flashing and any remaining gaps are sealed with caulk or foam. Fire-rated collars and caulking are installed where required. Mandatory 701.4.3.2 Floors, foundations, and crawlspaces: These items are inspected by an approved third party and a report verifying compliance is provided to the City's Inspection Division. (1) Floors. (including insulated floors above garages and cantilevered floors) Mandatory      (a) Insulation is installed to maintain permanent contact with the underside of the subfloor decking, enveloping any attached ductwork within the thermal envelope without compression or air gaps in the insulation. This practice does not apply to ducts or other mechanical equipment that is adjacent to the underside of the subfloor.      (b) Batt and loose-fill insulation is held in place by permanent attachments or systems in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. (2) Crawlspace. Where insulated, crawlspace wall insulation is permanently attached to the walls. Exposed earth in unvented crawlspaces is covered with continuous vapor retarder with overlapping joints that are taped or masticed. Mandatory 701.4.3.3 Walls: These items are inspected by an approved third party and a report verifying compliance is provided to the City's Inspection Division. (1) Windows and Doors. Caulking, gasketing, adhesive flashing tape, foam sealant, or weatherstripping is installed forming a complete air barrier Mandatory (2) Band joists and rim joists. Band and rim joists are insulated and air sealed. Mandatory (3) Between foundation and sill plate bottom plate      (a) Sill sealer or other material that will expand and contract is installed between foundation and sill plate. Mandatory      (b) Caulk or the equivalent is installed to seal the bottom plate of exterior walls Mandatory (4) Skylights and knee walls. Skylight shafts and knee walls are insulated to the same level as the exterior walls. Mandatory (5) Exterior architectural features . Code required building envelope insulation and air sealing are not disrupted at exterior architectural features such as stairs and decks. Mandatory 701.4.3.4 Ceilings and attics. These items are inspected by an approved third party and a report verifying compliance is provided to the City's Inspection Division. (1) Attic access (except unvented attics) . Attic access, knee wall door, or drop-down stair is covered with insulation and gasketed. Knee wall door is an insulated unit or is covered with insulation. Mandatory (2) Recessed lighting. Recessed light fixtures that penetrate the thermal envelope are airtight, IC-rated, and sealed with gasket, caulk or foam. Mandatory (3) Eave vents . Where ceiling/attic assemblies or designs have eave vents, baffles or other means are implemented to minimize air movement into or under the insulation. Mandatory 702 Performance Path   702.2 Energy cost performance levels. Energy efficiency features are implemented to achieve energy cost performance that exceeds the ICC IECC by the following. A documented analysis using software in accordance with ICC IECC, Section 404, or ICC IECC Section 506.2 through 506.5, applied as defined in the ICC IECC, is required. A projected Home Energy Rating System, or equivalent, rating in the form of an ES 2.5 report, or equivalent, shall be provided to submit for permit and a report of the confirmed rating also in the form of an ES 2.5 report, or equivalent shall be provided to the city of Santa Fe's Inspection Division. Mandatory  
Minimum HERS index is required as follows: Heated Square Footage Required HERS Index 0-3,000 70 3,001-3,500 65 3,501-4,000 60 4,001-4,500 55 4,501-5,000 50 5,001-5,600 45 5,601-6,200 40 6,201-6,800 35 6,801-7,400 30 7,401-8,000 25 8,001-8,500 20 8,501-9,000 15 9,001-9,500 10  9,501-10,000  5 10,001 +    0  
702.3 Better HERS Index than Required: For each two (2) whole HERS index points below the required HERS index. 
Note: When applying for building permit points are not given for the first 6 HERS index points. All points will be given once the confirmed HERS index is completed. 1 704 Additional Practices   704.1 Application of additional practice points. 704.2 Lighting and appliances 704.2.1 Hard-wired lighting is in accordance with one of the following: (1) A minimum of 50 percent of the bulbs in the hard-wired light fixtures, qualify as ENERGY STAR or equivalent. 4 (2) A minimum of 50 percent of the total hard-wired lighting fixtures qualify as ENERGY STAR or equivalent. 8 704.2.2 The number of recessed lighting fixtures that penetrate the thermal envelope are less than 1 per 400 square feet (37.16 m 2 ) of total conditioned floor area and are in accordance with Section 701.4.3.4(2). 2 704.2.4 Tubular daylighting device (TDD) or a skylight with sealed, insulated, low-E glass is installed in rooms without windows. 2 (Points awarded per building) 704.2.5 ENERGY STAR or equivalent appliance(s) are installed (1) refrigerator 5 (2) dishwasher 2 (3) washing machine 4 704.2.6 Induction cooktop is installed 1 704.3 Renewable energy and solar heating and cooling 704.3.1 Solar Space heating and cooling 704.3.1.1 Sun-tempered design. Building orientation, sizing of glazing, and design of overhangs are in accordance with all of the following: 5 (1) The long side (or one side if of equal length) of the building faces within 20 degrees of true south. (2) Vertical glazing area on the south face is between 5 and 7 percent of the gross conditioned floor area [also see Section 704.3.1.1(8)] if no mass is present or up to 12% if mass is present. (3) Vertical glazing area on the west face is less than 2 percent of the gross conditioned floor area, and glazing is ENERGY STAR compliant or equivalent. (4) Vertical glazing area on the east face is less than 4 percent of the gross conditioned floor area, and glazing is ENERGY STAR compliant or equivalent. (5) Vertical glazing area on the north face is less than 4 percent of the gross conditioned floor area, and glazing is ENERGY STAR compliant or equivalent. (6) Skylights, where installed, are in accordance with the following:   (a) shades and insulated wells are used, and all glazing is ENERGY STAR compliant or equivalent.   (b) horizontal skylights are less than 0.5 percent of finished ceiling area or less than 1.5% of finished ceiling area if thermal performance is enhanced by means such as reflectors or translucent insulation.   (c) sloped skylights located on slopes facing within 20 degrees of true south are less than 0.5 percent of the finished ceiling area or less than 1.5% of finished ceiling area if thermal performance is enhanced by means such as reflectors or translucent insulation. (7) Overhangs or adjustable canopies or awnings or trellises provide shading on south-facing glass in accordance with the diagram below: (8) The south face windows have a SHGC of 0.40 or higher (9) Return air or transfer grilles/ducts are in accordance with Section 704.4.5. 704.3.1.2 Automated solar protection with sensor or timer is installed to provide shading for all windows in the sun path. 1 704.3.1.3 Passive cooling design features are in accordance with three or more of the following: Points for three items: 3 Points for one additional item: 1 (1) Exterior shading is provided on east and west windows using one or a combination of the following: 2  (a) Vine-covered trellises with the vegetation separated a minimum of 1 foot (305 mm) from face of building  (b) awnings or louvers designed to shade the windows  (c) covered porches or portals  (d) attached or detached conditioned/unconditioned enclosed space that provides full shade of east and west windows (e.g., detached garage, shed, or building). (2) Overhangs are installed to provide shading on south-facing glazing in accordance with Section 704.3.1.1(7). (Points not awarded if points are take under Section 704.3.1.1.) (3) Windows and/or venting skylights are located to facilitate cross ventilation. (5) Internal exposed thermal mass is a minimum of three inches (76 mm) in thickness or 30 pounds of water per square foot of glazing. Thermal mass consists of concrete, brick, and/or tile that are fully adhered to a masonry base or other masonry material and is in accordance with one or a combination of the following:   (a) A minimum of 1 square foot (0.09 m 2 ) of exposed thermal mass of floor per 3 square feet (2.8 m 2 ) of gross finished floor area.   (b) A minimum of 3 square feet (2.8 m 2 ) of exposed thermal mass in interior walls or elements per square foot (0.09 m 2 ) of gross finished floor area. 704.3.1.4 Passive solar heating design. In addition to the sun-tempered design features in Section 704.3.1.1, all of the following are implemented: 4 (1) Additional glazing, no greater then 12 percent, is permitted on the south wall. This additional glazing is in accordance with the requirements of Section 704.3.1.1. 2 (2) Additional thermal mass for any room with south-facing glazing of more than 7 percent of the finished floor area is provided in accordance with the following:   (a) Thermal mass is solid and a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness. Where two thermal mass materials are layered together (e.g., ceramic tile on concrete base) to achieve the appropriate thickness, they are fully adhered to (touching) each other.   (b) Thermal mass directly exposed to sunlight is provided in accordance with the following minimum ratios: (i) Above latitude 35 degrees: 5 square feet (0.465 m 2 ) of thermal mass for every 1 square foot (0.0929 m 2 ) of south-facing glazing or 30 pounds of water. (c) Thermal mass not directly exposed to sunlight is permitted to be used to achieve thermal mass requirements of Section 704.3.1.4(2) based on a ratio of 40 square feet (3.72 m 2 ) of thermal mass for every 1 square foot (0.0929 m 2 ) of south-facing glazing. (3) In addition to return air or transfer grilles/ducts required by Section 704.3.1.1, provisions for forced airflow to adjoining areas are implemented as needed. 704.3.2 Solar Thermal Systems: 
A solar thermal system is installed in accordance with one of the following: (points can be taken for either 704.3.2.1 or 704.3.2.2 but not both)  
704.3.2.1 Solar Domestic Water Heating: SRCC (Solar Rating & Certification Corporation) OG 300 rated, or equivalent, solar domestic water heating system is installed. Solar Energy Factor (SEF as defined by SRCC) is in accordance with Table 704.3.2.1 (Note: A custom-designed system qualifies for points if a mechanical engineer certified the SEF) Points per
Table
704.3.2.1 Table 704.3.2.1
Solar Hot Water Systems  
SEF - Electric Tank SEF - Gas Tank POINTS 1.30-1.50 0.85-1.00 8 1.51-1.80 1.01-1.20 11 1.81-2.30 1.21-1.50 14 2.32-3.00 1.51-2.00 17 = 3.01 = 2.01 20  
704.3.2.2 Solar Domestic Water and Space Heater: SRCC (Solar Rating and Certification Corporation) OG 300 rated, or equivalent, solar collector thermal performance rating water and space heating system is installed. Manufacturer's specifications, SRCC OG 300 rating, and SEF for either gas or electric (or equivalent ratings) for solar water heating system and space heating system installed in building. 
Point calculation: Use the SRCC OG 100 rating for category C, Clear Day (note that the number provided in the tables at http://www.solar-rating.org is given in 1000 BTUs) and round down to the nearest whole number. 1 point per 7000 BTUs, 45 points maximum 704.3.3 Additional Renewable Energy Options 704.3.3.1 Photovoltaic panels are installed on the property 
(Points awarded per1/10kW (or per 100 Watts)) 1 704.3.3.2 Other on-site renewable energy source is installed (e.g., wind energy, on-site micro-hydro power. 
(Points awarded per1/10kW (or per 100 Watts)) One-half 704.4 Ducts 704.4.2 Space heating is provided by a system that does not include air ducts 15 704.4.3 Space cooling is provided by a system that does not include air ducts or there is no cooling system 15 704.4.4 Ductwork is in accordance with all of the following: 12 (2) Heating and cooling ducts and mechanical equipment are installed within the conditioned building space. (3) Ductwork is not installed in exterior walls. 704.4.5 Return ducts or transfer grilles are installed in every room with an interior door. This practice does not apply to kitchens, closets, and pantries. 5 704.5 HVAC Design and Installation 704.5.3 Performance of the heating and/or cooling system is verified by the HVAC contractor in accordance with all of the following that apply and provide a signed checklist to the city of Santa Fe Inspection Division: 3 (1) All start-up procedures are performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. (2) Refrigerant charge is verified by super-heat and/or sub-cooling method. (3) Burner is set to fire at input level listed on nameplate. (4) Air handler setting/fan speed is set in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. (5) Total airflow is within 10 percent of design flow. (6) Total external system static does not exceed equipment capability at rated airflow. 704.6 Insulation and Performance Verification 704.6.1 Third-party on-site inspection is conducted to verify compliance with all of the following, as applicable. Minimum of two inspections are performed. One inspection after insulation is installed and prior to being covered, and another inspection upon completion of the project. Where multiple buildings or dwelling units of the same model are built by the same builder, a representative sample inspection of a minimum of 15 percent of the buildings or dwelling units is permitted. 5
Mandatory (1) Ducts are installed in accordance with the ICC, IRC, or IMC and ducts are sealed. (2) Building envelope air sealing is installed. (3) Insulation is installed in accordance with Section 703.1.2. (4) Windows, skylights, and doors are flashed, caulked, and sealed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with Section 703.2.1. 704.6.2 Third-party testing is conducted to verify performance. 704.6.2.1 The blower door test results meet the air changes at 50 pascals in #4 below and the following practices are required: (2) Fossil fuel furnace and water heater is sealed combustion or power vented in accordance with Section 901.1. (4) The maximum leakage rate is in accordance with:      (a) 5 ACH50 3      (b) 4 ACH50 6      (c) 3 ACH50 9      (d) 2 ACH50 12      (e) 1 ACH50 15 705 INNOVATIVE PRACTICES   705.1 Energy Consumption Control. A whole building or whole dwelling unit device is installed that controls or monitors energy consumption. 7 Points
Max (1) Programmable communicating thermostat (Not applicable to radiant systems that don't use a solar hydronic system) 2 (2) Energy-monitoring device 4 (3) Energy management control system. 7 705.3 Use a more energy efficient system for cooling the house than refrigerated air conditioning. (1) Use whole house fan with insulation on flaps and the side walls have the same r-value as the exterior walls. 4 705.4 Lighting Install all interior lighting fixtures within the conditioned envelope of the building, e.g., housing does not penetrate insulated ceiling. 4 705.5 Skylights are less than 0.8% of the square footage of the conditioned area of the house. Final calculations based on installed skylights shall be provided at time of Final Green Building Inspection. 5 705.6 Install device(s) on all skylights to improve their efficiency such as aerogel panels. 
(2 points per skylight)8 Points Max 705.7 Reduce phantom loads with outlets tied to switches at room entries or comparable method 
(2 points per room where phantom loads are tied to switches) 8
Points Max 705.8 Construction site personnel has taken an approved thermal bypass inspection (TBI) class. 
(3 points for framer and 1 point for additional other trades) 6 Points Max  
TOTAL REQUIRED     0-3,000 HSF 26      3,001 + HSF 35  
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Chapter 8
Water Efficiency 
Item # Green Building Practices Points 801 Indoor and Outdoor Water Use   801.0 Intent. Measures that reduce indoor and outdoor water usage are implemented. 801.1 Indoor hot water usage 801.1.1 Indoor hot water usage is reduced by one of the following practices: (1) All hot water plumbing fixtures in both the kitchen and bathrooms are 32 feet (9,754 mm) or less in length from the water heater and is sized in accordance with the code for the specified application OR 2 (2) All hot water plumbing fixtures in both the kitchen and bathrooms is 24 feet (7,315 mm) or less from the water heater and is sized in accordance with the code for the specified application OR 3 (4) Pipe runs exceeding 32 feet (9,754 mm) from the water heater to fixture locations are aided by:      (a) tankless water heater is installed at point of use and is served only by cold water or a solar assisted system OR 1      (b) on-demand hot water recirculation system is installed with a water temperature sensor turn-off located at the fixture furthest from the water heater. 6 801.2 Water-Conserving Appliances. ENERGY STAR or equivalent water-conserving appliances are installed. (1) dishwasher 2 (2) washing machine OR 8 (3) washing machine with a water factor of 6.0 or less 12 801.4 Showerheads. Showerheads are in accordance with the following: (1) The total showerhead flow rate at any point in time in each shower compartment is 1.6 to less than 2.5 gpm. The total flow rate is tested at 80 psi (552 kPa) in accordance with ASME A112.18.1. Showers are equipped with an automatic compensating valve that complies with ASSE 1016 or ASME A112.18.1 and specifically designed to provide thermal shock and scald protection at the flow rate of the showerhead. Documentation of fixture flow rate must be provided at final plumbing inspection. 
(Points awarded per showerhead.) 1
3 points
max (2) All showerheads meet the requirements of 801.4(1). In addition, all showerheads are in compliance with either 801.4(2)(a) or 801.4(2)(b). Documentation of fixture flow rate must be provided at final plumbing inspection.      (a) 2.0 to less than 2.5 gpm 1 Additional Point      (b) 1.6 to less than 2.0 gpm 2 Additional Points For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m (3) Manual shower shutoff 2 per shutoff 801.5 Faucets 801.5.1 Water-efficient lavatory faucets with 1.5 gpm (5.68 L/m) or less maximum flow rate when tested at 60 psi (414 kPa) in accordance with ASME A112.18.1 are installed and documentation of flow rate must be provided at plumbing final inspection: (1) a bathroom 
(Points awarded for each bathroom) 1
3 Points Max (2) all lavatory faucets 2 Additional Points 801.5.2 pedal-activated faucet is installed to enable intermittent on/off operation. 
(Points awarded per fixture.) 1
3 Points
Max 801.6 Water Closets and Urinals. Water closets and urinals are in accordance with the following and if the gallons per flush rate is not printed on the fixture then documentation of the flush rate must be provided at the plumbing final inspection: 
(For water closets, points awarded for either Section 801.6 or 802.2, not both.) (2) A water closet is installed with an effective flush volume of 1.28 gallons (4.85 L) or less when tested in accordance with ASME A112.19.2 (all water closets) and ASME A112.19.14 (all dual flush water closets), and is in accordance with EPA WaterSense Tank-Type High-Efficiency Toilet. 
(Points awarded per fixture.) 6
18 Points Max (3) A urinal is installed with a flush volume of 0.5 gallons (1.9 L) or less when tested in accordance with ASME A112.19.2. 
(Points awarded per fixture.) 4
4 Points Max (4) All water closets and all urinals are in accordance with Section 801.6(2) or Section 801.6(3), as applicable. 6 Additional Points 801.7 Irrigation Systems 801.7.1 A low-volume irrigation system is installed: (2) drip irrigation OR 4 (3) bubblers OR 4 (4) drip emitters OR 4 (5) soaker hose 4 (6) subsurface irrigation 6 801.7.2 Irrigation system is in accordance with both of the following: 3 (1) designed by a professional in accordance with EPA WaterSense requirements or equivalent (2) Installed in accordance with EPA WaterSense program, or equivalent. 801.7.3 Irrigation system is zoned separately for areas with different watering needs (hydrozoning). 2 801.7.4 The irrigation system(s) is controlled by a smart controller (1) Evapotranspiration (ET) based irrigation controller with a rain sensor 4 (2) Soil moisture sensor based irrigation controller 4 (3) No irrigation is installed and a landscape plan is developed in accordance with Section 503.5, as applicable. 15 801.8 Rainwater Collection and Distribution. Rainwater collection and distribution is provided in an active system. (1) Rainwater is collected and used      (a) 1 gallon per square foot for 100% of roofed area is collected and at least 60% of the roof area is collected. 10      (b) 1 gallon per square foot for 75% of roofed area is collected and at least 50% of the roof area is collected. 8      (c) 1 gallon per square foot for 50% of roofed area is collected and at least 40% of the roof area is collected. 6 (2) Rainwater is distributed using a renewable energy source or gravity. 2 (3) Rainwater that is collected in (1) above is used in an irrigation system as described in 801.7.1 10 802 Innovative Practices   802.1 Gray Water. Gray water, as specified in ICC IRC, Appendix O, is separated and reused, as permitted by local building code. [Points awarded for either Section 802.1(1) or 802.1(2), not both.] (2) irrigation from reclaimed or recycled water on-site 10 802.2 Composting or Waterless Toilets and/or Urinals. Composting or waterless toilets and/or urinals are in accordance with the following: 24 Points Max      (For water closets, points awarded for either Section, 802.2 or 801.6, not both) (2) Composting or waterless toilet and/or urinal is installed 8      (Points awarded per fixture) (3) All toilets and urinals are in accordance with Section 802.2(2). 8 Additional Points 802.3 Automatic Shutoff Water Devices. One of the following automatic shutoff water supply devices is installed. Where a fire sprinkler system is present, installer is to ensure that device will not interfere with the operation of the fire sprinkler system. 2 (1) excess water flow shutoff (2) leak detection system 802.4 A real-time water use meter device is installed where the home occupant can easily see and monitor the home's water use like a KopyKap 4 802.5 Recirculating water pump is triggered by either a motion sensor or is switch activated 4 802.6 Rough plumbing shall be installed for future use of gray water for landscaping from at least one plumbing fixture. This item is required. Mandatory 802.6A Additional gray water connections. (1 point per connection over 1) 4 points max  
TOTAL REQUIRED:     0-3,000 HSF 18      3,001-5,000 HSF 28      5,001-8,000 HSF 50      8,000+ HSF 61  
(Ord. #2014-11,  3) 
Chapter 9
Indoor Environmental Quality 
Item # Green Building Practices Points 901 Pollutant Source Control   901.0 Intent. Pollutant sources are controlled. 901.1 Space and Water Heating Options 901.1.1 Natural draft space heating or water heating equipment is not located in conditioned spaces, including conditioned crawlspaces. Natural draft equipment is permitted to be installed within the conditioned spaces if located in a mechanical room that has an outdoor air source, and is otherwise sealed and insulated to separate it from the conditioned space(s). 5 901.1.2 Air handling equipment or return ducts are not located in the garage, unless placed in isolated, air-sealed mechanical rooms with an outside air source. 5 901.1.3 The following combustion space heating and water heating equipment is installed within conditioned space: (1) Direct vent (sealed combustion) furnace or boiler 5 (2) Water heater      (a) power vent water heater 3      (b) direct vent (sealed combustion) water heater 5 901.1.4 The following electric equipment is installed: (1) Heat pump air handler in unconditioned space 2 (2) Heat pump air handler in conditioned space 5 901.2 Fireplaces and Fuel-Burning Appliances: Fireplaces and fuel-burning appliances (except cooking appliances, clothes dryers, water heaters, and furnaces) located in conditioned spaces are in accordance with the following: 
[Section 901.2.1(2)(a) is not mandatory.] Mandatory 901.2.1 Fireplaces and natural draft fuel-burning appliances are code compliant, vented to the outdoors, and have adequate combustion and ventilation air provided to minimize spillage or back-drafting, in accordance with the following, as applicable. (2) Solid fuel-burning appliances are in accordance with the following requirements:      (a) All wood-burning fireplaces are equipped with gasketed doors designed to operate with the doors closed, outside combustion air, and a means is provided for sealing the flue to minimize interior air (heat) loss when not in operation. 4      (b) Factory-built, wood-burning fireplaces are in accordance with the certification requirements of UL 127 and are EPA certified. 6      (c) Wood stove and fireplace inserts, as defined in UL 1482 Section 3.8, are in accordance with the certification requirements of UL 1482 and are in accordance with the emission requirements of the EPA Certification and the State of Washington WAC 173-433-100(3). 6      (d) Pellet (biomass) stoves and furnaces are in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E 1509 or are EPA certified. 6      (e) Masonry heaters are in accordance with the definitions in ASTM E1602 and ICC IBC, Section 2112.1. 6 901.2.2 Fireplaces, woodstoves, pellet stoves, or masonry heaters are not installed. 7 901.3 Garages. Garages are in accordance with the following: (1) Attached garage      (b) A continuous air barrier is provided between walls and ceilings separating the garage space from the conditioned living spaces. Mandatory
2      (c) For one- and two-family dwelling units, a 100 cfm (47 L/s) or greater ducted, or 70 cfm (33 L/s) or greater unducted wall exhaust fan is installed and vented to the outdoors, designed and installed for continuous operation, or has controls (e.g., motion detectors, pressure switches) that activate operation for a minimum of 1 hour when either human passage door or roll-up automatic doors are operated. For ducted exhaust fans, the fan airflow rating and duct sizing are in accordance with Appendix A. 4 (2) A carport is installed, the garage is detached from the building, or no garage is installed. 10 902 Pollutant Control   902.0 Intent. Pollutants generated in the building are controlled. 902.1 Spot ventilation 902.1.1 Spot ventilation is in accordance with the following: (1) Bathrooms are vented to the outdoors. The minimum ventilation rate is 50 cfm (23.6 L/s) for intermittent operation or 20 cfm (9.4 L/s) for continuous operation in bathrooms. Mandatory (3) Kitchen exhaust units and/or range hoods are ducted to the outdoors and have a minimum ventilation rate of 100 cfm (47.2 L/s) for intermittent operation or 25 cfm (11.8 L/s) for continuous operation. 8 902.1.2 Bathroom and/or laundry exhaust fan is provided with an automatic timer, motion sensor, and/or humidistat: 9 Points Max (1) for first device 5 (2) for each additional device 2 902.1.4 Exhaust fans are ENERGY STAR, as applicable. 
(Points awarded per fan.) 6 Points Max (1) ENERGY STAR, or equivalent, fans 2 (2) ENERGY STAR, or equivalent, fans operating at or below 1 sone 
(Points awarded per fan.) 3 902.2 Building ventilation systems 902.2.1 One of the following whole building ventilation systems is implemented and is in accordance with the following formula: CFM fan flow continuous = (heated square footage X .01) + (7.5 X (number of bedrooms +1)). Mandatory Note: Continuous flow rate can also be achieved, for example, by two fans continuous at half the rate or by doubling the fan flow over half the time, with a timer. (1) exhaust or supply fan(s) ready for continuous operation and with appropriately labeled controls 8 (2) balanced exhaust and supply fans with supply intakes located in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines so as to not introduce polluted air back into the building. 10 (3) heat-recovery ventilator installed with balanced exhaust and supply fans with supply intakes located in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines so as to not introduce polluted air back into the building 15 (4) energy-recovery ventilator installed with balanced exhaust and supply fans with supply intakes located in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines so as to not introduce polluted air back into the building 17 902.2.2 Ventilation airflow is tested to achieve the design fan airflow at point of exhaust in accordance with Section 902.2.1 by a qualified third party and a report provided to the city of Santa Fe Inspection Division. 8 902.3 Radon control. Radon control measures are in accordance with ICC IRC Appendix F. (1) Buildings located in Zone 1 (Santa Fe) Mandatory      (a) a passive radon system is installed with an electric supply to be able to add a fan in the future if needed. 10      (b) an active system is installed 15 902.4 HVAC system protection. HVAC system protection measure is performed. (1) HVAC supply registers (boots), return grilles, and duct terminations are covered during construction activities to prevent dust and other pollutant from entering the system. HVAC may be run once the thermal envelope is completed during cold weather if run with filters and if cleaned after construction is complete. 3
(Mandatory) 902.5 Central vacuum system. Central vacuum system is installed and vented to the outside. 5 902.6 Living space contaminants. The living space is sealed to prevent unwanted contaminants and third-party verified. (1) Attic access, knee wall door, or drop down stair is caulked, gasketed, or otherwise sealed. 2
Mandatory (2) All penetrations (e.g., top plates, HVAC register boots, recessed can lights) are sealed in the following areas:      (a) attic /ceiling 2
Mandatory      (b) wall 2
Mandatory      (c) floors 2
Mandatory 903 Moisture Management: Vapor, Rainwater, Plumbing, HVAC   903.0 Intent. Moisture and moisture effects are controlled. 903.5 Plumbing 903.5.1 Plumbing supply distribution lines are not installed horizontally in exterior wall cavities. 2 903.5.2 Cold water pipes in unconditioned spaces are insulated to a minimum of R-4 with pipe insulation or other covering that adequately prevents condensation. 2 903.5.3 Plumbing is not installed in unconditioned spaces. 5 903.6 Duct insulation. All HVAC ducts, plenums, and trunks in unconditioned attics, basements, and crawlspaces are sealed with UL181 tape or mastic and insulated to a minimum of R-6. Outdoor air supplies to ventilation systems are sealed with UL181 tape or mastic and insulated to a minimum of R-6. (1) insulated to a minimum of R-6 Mandatory (2) insulated to a minimum of R-8. 2 904 Innovative Practices   904.4 Use non PVC materials for water supply lines including the service to the house. 4 904.5 Use no carpet or vinyl flooring 4  
TOTAL REQUIRED 14  
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Chapter 10
Operation, Maintenance, and Building Owner Education 
Item # Green Building Practices Points 1001 Building Owner's Manual for One- and Two-Family Dwellings   1001.0 Intent. Information on the building's use, maintenance, and green components is provided. 1001.1 A building owner's manual is provided that includes the following, as available and applicable. 1 (Points awarded per two items. Points awarded for
both mandatory and non-mandatory items.) (1) A green building program certificate or completion document Mandatory (2) List of green building features (can include the national green building checklist). Mandatory (3) Product manufacturer's manuals or product data sheet for installed major equipment, fixtures, and appliances, including any alternative energy systems. If product data sheet is in the building owner's manual, manufacturer's manual may be attached to the appliance in lieu of inclusion in the building owner's manual. Mandatory (4) Information on local recycling programs. (5) Information on available local utility or other energy provider programs that purchase a portion of energy from renewable energy providers. (6) Explanation of the benefits of using energy-efficient lighting systems [e.g., compact fluorescent light bulbs, light emitting diode (LED)] in high-usage areas. (7) A list of practices to conserve water and energy. (8) Local public transportation options. (9) A diagram showing the location of safety valves and controls for major building systems. Mandatory (10) Where frost-protected shallow foundations are used, owner is informed of precautions including:      (a) instructions to not remove or damage insulation when modifying landscaping.      (b) providing heat to the building as required by the ICC IRC or UMC      (c) keeping base materials beneath and around the building free from moisture caused by broken water pipes or other water sources. (11) A list of local service providers that offer regularly scheduled service and maintenance contracts to ensure proper performance of equipment and the structure (e.g., HVAC, water-heating equipment, sealants, caulks, gutter and downspout system, shower and/or tub surrounds, irrigation system). (12) A photo record of framing with the utilities installed. Photos are taken prior to installing insulation, clearly labeled, and included as part of the building owner's manual. (13) Maintenance checklist. (14) List of common hazardous materials often used around the building and instructions for proper handling and disposal of these materials. (15) Information on organic pest control, fertilizers, deicers, and cleaning products. (16) Information on native landscape materials and/or those that have low-water requirements. (17) Information on methods of maintaining the building's relative humidity in the range of 30 percent to 60 percent. (18) Instructions for inspecting the building for termite infestation. (19) Instructions for maintaining gutters and downspouts and importance of diverting water a minimum of 5 feet away from foundation. (20) A narrative detailing the importance of maintenance and operation in retaining the attributes of a green-built building. (21) Information regarding cost effective window treatments (22) Information about protecting the home from fire danger (23) Instructions for maintaining solar systems employed in the home (only available if solar systems are employed in the home) Mandatory (24) Provide homeowner with information about mulching and composting 1002 Training of Building Owners on Operation and Maintenance for One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Multi-Unit Buildings   1002.1 Training of building owners. Building owners/occupants are familiarized with the green building goals and strategies implemented and the impacts of the occupants' practices on the costs of operating the building. Training is provided to the responsible party(ies) regarding all equipment operation and control systems. Systems include, but are not limited to, the following: 6 (1) HVAC filters or boiler maintenance (2) thermostat operation and programming (3) lighting controls (4) appliances and settings (5) water heating settings (6) fan controls (7) the irrigation system (8) catchment system maintenance (9) all other equipment 1004 Innovative Practices   1004.1 (Reserved) 1004.2 Translate homeowner documents into Spanish and make both available to homeowner 6  
TOTAL REQUIRED 8  
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Chapter 11
REMODELING 
Item # Green Building Practices City
Green
Code
Points 11.3 COMPLIANCE AND APPLICABILITY 11.305.1 Compliance. Compliance with Section 305 is mandatory. 11.305.2 Compliance options. The criteria for existing buildings shall be in accordance with Section 305.3 for whole-building ratings or additions greater than 400 sf or Section 305.4 for compliance designations of building functional areas and additions under 400 sf. 11.305.3 Whole-building rating criteria 11.305.3.1 Applicability. The provisions of Section 305.3 shall apply to remodeling of existing buildings that effect 50% or more of the existing conditioned floor area and additions of 400 conditioned sf or greater. In addition to the foundation, at least one major structural system (such as walls) of the existing building shall remain in place after the remodel for the building to be eligible for compliance under Section 305.3. If less of the building remains than needed to be eligible for compliance under Section 305.3 then the Santa Fe Residential Green Building Code for new buildings shall apply. 11.305.3.1.1 Additions. For a remodeled building that meets the applicability for meeting the provisions of Section 305.3 and that includes an addition, the entire building including the addition shall comply with the criteria of Section 305.3. 11.305.3.3 Mandatory practices. For additions and remodels that must comply with Chapter 11, the building, including any additions and common areas, shall satisfy all practices designated as mandatory in Chapter 11. 11.305.3.4 Required points for Chapter 11. A minimum number of 40 points shall be achieved in Chapter 11 in any category. 11.5 LOT DESIGN, PREPARATION AND DEVELOPMENT 11.500.0 Intent: This section applies to the lot and changes to the lot due to remodeling of an existing building. This section does not apply if there is no landscaping or site work in the project. 11.503 LOT DESIGN 11.503.0 Intent. The lot is designed to avoid detrimental environmental impacts first, minimize any unavoidable impacts, and to mitigate for those impacts that do occur. The project is designed to minimize environmental impacts and to protect, restore, and enhance the natural features and environmental qualities of the lot. (Points awarded only if
the intent of the design is implemented) 11.503.1 Natural resources. Natural resources are conserved by one or more of the following: (4) Basic training in tree or other natural resource protection is provided for the on-site supervisor. 4 11.503.5 Landscape Plan : A landscape plan for the lot is developed to limit water and energy use while preserving or enhancing the natural environment. (Where "front" or "rear" only plan is implemented, only half of the points (rounded down to a whole number) are awarded for Items (1)-(6)) (2) Vegetation and trees are selected that are native or regionally appropriate for local growing conditions are selected and specified on the lot plan. 4 (3) The percentage of cool season turf areas is limited and shown on the lot plan. The percentage is based on the landscaped area of the lot not including the home footprint, hardscape, and any undisturbed natural areas.      (a) 0 percent 5 (4) Plants with similar watering needs are grouped (hydro zoning) and shown on the lot plan. 5 11.504 LOT CONSTRUCTION 11.504.0 Intent : Environmental impact during construction is avoided to the extent possible; impacts that do occur are minimized, and any significant impacts are mitigated. 11.504.2 Trees and vegetation : Designated trees and vegetation are preserved by one or more of the following: (1) fencing or equivalent is installed to protect trees and other vegetation. 3 (2) Trenching, significant changes in grade, and compaction of soil and critical root zones in "tree save" areas as shown on the lot plan are avoided. 5 11.505 INNOVATIVE PRACTICES 11.505.0 Intent: Innovative lot design, preparation and development practices are used to enhance environmental performance. Waivers or variances from development regulations are obtained, and innovative zoning is used to implement such practices. (1) Hardscape: Not less than 50 percent of the surface area of the hardscape on the lot meets one or a combination of the following methods. 5      (c) Permeable hardscaping: Permeable hardscaping materials are installed. (2) Roofs: Not less than 75 percent of the exposed surface of the roof is in accordance with one or a combination of the following methods. 5      (a) Minimum initial SRI of 78 for a low-sloped roof (a slope less than or equal to 2:12) and a minimum initial SRI of 29 for a steep-sloped roof (a slope of more than 2:12). The SRI is calculated in accordance with ASTM E1980. Roof products shall be certified and labeled. 11.601 QUALITY OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND WASTE 11.601.0 Intent : Design and construction practices that minimize the environmental impact of the building materials are incorporated, environmentally efficient building systems and materials are incorporated, and waste generated during construction is reduced. 11.601.1 Conditioned Floor Area: Finished floor area of a dwelling unit after remodeling is limited. Finished floor area is calculated in accordance with NAHBRC Z765. Only the finished floor area for stories above grade plane is to be included in the calculation. (1) less than or equal to 1,000 square feet (93 m 2 ) 15 (2) less than or equal to 1,500 square feet (139 m 2 ) 12 (3) less than or equal to 2,000 square feet (186 m 2 ) 9 (4) less than or equal to 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ) 6 (5) greater than 4,000 square feet (372 m 2 ) Mandatory   (For every 100 square feet (9.29 m 2 ) over 4,000 square feet (372 m 2 ), one point is to be added to the threshold points to maximum of 60 required points.) 11.601.2 New Work-Material Usage : Newly installed structural systems are designed or construction techniques are implemented that reduce and optimize material usage. 9 Points max   
(Points awarded only when the newly installed portion of each structural system comprises at least 25% of the total area of that structural system after the remodel). (1) 24" OC framing 3 (2) Single top-plate - exterior and bearing walls 3 (3) Single top-plate - interior non-bearing partitions 3 (4) Right-sized headers or insulated box headers 3 (5) No headers in non-bearing partitions 3 (6) Ladders at perpendicular wall intersections 3 (7) Two-stud exterior corner framing ore equivalent 3 (8) Doubling the rim joist in lieu of header 3 (9) Ladder blocking or equivalent at intersection of interior wall and exterior wall. 3 (10) Ladder blocking or equivalent at all interior wall intersections 3 (11) Other (specify and provide detail) 3 11.601.5 Prefabricated components. Precut or preassembled components, or panelized or precast assemblies are utilized for a minimum of 90 percent for the following system or building: 13 max (Points are awarded only when the newly installed system comprises at least 25 percent of the total area of that system of the building after the remodel) (1) floor system 4 (2) wall system 4 (3) roof system 4 (4) modular construction for any new construction located above grade 13 11.601.6 Stacked Stories : Stories above grade are stacked, such as in 1 1/2-story, 2-story, or greater structures. The area of the upper floor is a minimum of 50 percent of the area of the story below, based on areas with a minimum ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm). 8 Max (1) first stacked story 4 (2) for each additional stacked story 2 11.601.7 Site-applied Finishing Materials : Building materials or assemblies listed below that do not require additional site-applied material for finishing are incorporated into the building. 12 Max      (a) pigmented, stamped, decorative, or final finish for all new concrete or masonry 5      (h) Use no trim on all new or replaced doors and window counting both interior and exterior and both sides of internal doors. 5 11.602 ENHANCED DURABILITY AND REDUCED MAINTENANCE 11.602.0 Intent: Design and construction practices are implemented that enhance the durability of materials and reduce in-service maintenance. 11.602.1 Moisture Management - Building Envelope 11.602.1.2 Foundation waterproofing. Enhanced foundation waterproofing is installed in all new foundations, and on not less than 25 percent of the foundation after the remodel using one or both of the following: 4 (1) rubberized coating, or (2) drainage mat 11.602.1.5 Termite Barrier : Continuous physical foundation termite barrier used with low toxicity treatment or with no chemical treatment is installed. 4 11.602.10 Exterior Doors : Entries at exterior door assemblies, inclusive of side lights, are covered by one of the following methods to protect the building from the effects of precipitation and solar radiation. A projection factor of 0.375 minimum is provided. 2 per exterior door 6 Max      (a) installing a porch roof or awning      (b) extending the roof overhang      (b) recessing the exterior door  
11.602.1.12 Roof Overhangs : Fixed permanent roof overhangs, including portals, in accordance with Table 11.602.1.12, are provided over a minimum of 90 percent of exterior walls for sloped roofs or portals that cover 50% or more of the wall area for flat roofed buildings to protect the building envelope. 
  
  4  
Table 11.602.1.12
Minimum Roof Overhang for One- and Two-Story Buildings       Inches Rainfall (1) Eave Overhang
(inches) Rake Overhang
(inches) =40 12 12 >41 to =70 18 12 >70 24 12 (1) Annual mean total precipitation in inches in accordance with Figure 6(2) 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm  
11.603 REUSED OR SALVAGED MATERIALS 11.603.0 Intent : Practices that reuse or modify existing structures, salvage materials for other uses, or use salvaged materials in the building's construction are implemented. 11.603.1 Reuse of Existing Building : Major elements or components of existing buildings and structures are reused, modified, or deconstructed for later use. 1 
12 Max (Points awarded for every 200 square feet (18.5 m 2 ) of floor area) 11.603.3 Scrap Materials : Sorting and reuse of scrap building materials is facilitated (e.g., a central storage area or dedicated bins are provided). 4 11.604 RECYCLED-CONTENT BUILDING MATERIALS 11.605 RECYCLED CONSTRUCTION WASTE 11.605.0 Intent: Waste generated during construction is recycled. All waste classified as hazardous is properly disposed of. 11.605.2 Construction Waste Management Plan: A construction waste management plan is developed, posted at the jobsite, and implemented with a goal of recycling or salvaging a minimum of 50 percent (by weight) of construction waste. 6 11.608 RESOURCE EFFICIENT MATERIALS 11.608.1 Resource-efficient materials. Products containing fewer materials are used to achieve the same end-use requirements as conventional products, including but not limited to: 9 Max 3 per each material (2) engineered wood or engineered steel products (3) roof or floor trusses 11.611.3 Universal Design Elements: Dwelling incorporates one or more of the following universal design elements. Conventional industry tolerances are permitted. 10 Max (1) Any no-step entrance into the dwelling which (1) is accessible from a substantially level parking or drop-off area (no more than 2%) via an accessible path which has no individual change in elevation or other obstruction of more than 1-1/2 inches in height with a pitch not exceeding 1 in 12 and (2) provides a minimum 32-inch wide clearance into the dwelling. 3 (2) Minimum 36-inch wide accessible route from the no-step entrance into at least one visiting room in the dwelling and into at least one full or half bathroom which has a minimum 32 inch clear door width and a 30-inch by 48-inch clear area inside the bathroom outside the door swing. 3 (3) Minimum 36-inch wide accessible route from the no-step entrance into at least one bedroom which has a minimum 32 inch clear door width. 3 (4) Blocking or equivalent installed in the accessible bathroom walls for future installation of grab bars at water closet and bathing fixture, if applicable. 1 11.611.4 Modular Building Dimensions. Frame structures or structures made with modular units are designed on 16- or 24-inch dimensions. 2 11.611.5 Use structural vigas, beams, or posts (from less than 300 miles away) (does not apply to decorative vigas) 10 Max      (1 point per installed 10 linear feet) 11.611.6 Structural insulated panels (SIPS) used for the exterior: (1) Walls 5 (2) Roof 5 11.611.7 Drainage from canales is done in accordance with all of the following: 5 (1) Waterproof the foundation behind the splash area and extending 3 feet in both directions. (2) Install an impermeable liner in splash area under canale. (3) Liner or other collector guides water away from structure sloping a minimum of 6 inches over 6 feet for a minimum of 6 feet away from structure. 11.701 MINIMUM ENERGY EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS 11.701.4.3 Insulation and air sealing, 11.701.4.3.1 Building Thermal Envelope. The building thermal envelope exposed or created during the remodel is durably sealed to limit infiltration. The sealing methods between dissimilar materials allow for differential expansion and contraction. The following are caulked, gasketed, weather-stripped or otherwise sealed with an air barrier material, suitable film or solid material: Mandatory      (a) All joints, seams and penetrations.      (b) Site-built windows, doors and skylights.      (c) Openings between window and door assemblies and their respective jambs and framing.      (d) Utility penetrations.      (e) Dropped ceiling or chases adjacent to the thermal envelope.      (f) Knee walls.      (g) Walls and ceilings separating a garage from conditioned spaces.      (h) Behind tubs and showers on exterior walls.      (i) Common walls between dwelling units.      (j) Attic access openings.      (k) Rim joist junction.      (l) Other sources of infiltration. 11.701.4.3.2 Air Sealing and insulation. Grade 3 insulation installation is not permitted. The compliance of the building envelope tightness and insulation installation is demonstrated in accordance with Section 11.701.4.3.2(1) or 11.701.4.3.2(2). Mandatory (1) Testing Option: Building envelope tightness and insulation installation is considered acceptable when air leakage is less than seven air changes per hour (ACH) when tested with a blower door at a pressure of 33.5 psf (50 Pa). Testing is conducted after rough-in and after installation of penetrations of the building envelope, including penetrations for utilities, plumbing, electrical, ventilation and combustion appliances. Testing is conducted under the following conditions:      (a) Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors are closed, but not sealed;      (b) Dampers are closed, but not sealed, including exhaust, intake, makeup air, backdraft, and flue dampers;      (c) Interior doors are open;      (d) Exterior openings for continuous ventilation systems and heat recovery ventilators are closed and sealed;      (e) Heating and cooling system(s) is turned off;      (f) HVAC duct terminations are not sealed; and      (g) Supply and return registers are not sealed. (2) Visual inspection option. Building envelope tightness and insulation installation are considered acceptable when the items listed in Table 11.701.4.3.2(2) applicable to the method of construction and exposed and visible during the remodel, are field verified by an approved third party and a report verifying compliance is provided to the City's Inspection Division.  
Table 11.701.4.3.2(2) Air Barrier and Insulation Inspection Component Criteria Component     Criteria Criteria Air barrier and thermal barrier  Exterior thermal envelope insulation for framed walls is installed in substantial contact and continuous alignment with building envelope air barrier.  Breaks or joints in the air barrier are filled or repaired.  Air-permeable insulation is not used as a sealing material.  Air-permeable insulation is not installed with an air barrier. Ceiling/Attic  Air barrier in dropped ceiling/soffit is substantially aligned with insulation and any gaps are sealed.  Attic access (except unvented attic), knee wall door, or dropdown stair is sealed. Exterior Walls  Corners and headers are insulated.  Junction of foundation and sill plate is sealed. Windows and doors  Space between windows/door jambs is sealed. Rim joints  Rim joists are insulated and include an air barrier. Floors (including above-garage and cantilevered floors)  Insulation is installed to maintain permanent contact with underside of subfloor decking.  Air barrier is installed at any exposed edge of insulation. Crawlspace walls  Where installed, insulation is permanently attached to walls.  Exposed earth in unvented crawlspaces is covered with Class I vapor retarder with overlapping joints taped. Shafts, penetrations  Duct shafts, flue shafts, and utility penetrations, opening to the exterior or an unconditioned space are sealed. Narrow cavities  Batts in narrow cavities are cut to fit, or narrow cavities are filled by sprayed/ blown insulations. Garage separation  Air sealing is provided between the garage and conditioned spaces. Recessed lighting  Recessed light fixtures not installed in the conditioned space are air tight, IC rated, and sealed to drywall. Plumbing and wiring  Insulation is placed between the outside and pipes. Batt insulation is cut to fit around wiring and plumbing, or sprayed/ blown insulation extends behind piping and wiring. Shower/tub adjacent to exterior wall  Showers and tubs adjacent to exterior walls have insulation and an air barrier separation from the exterior. Electrical/phone box in exterior walls  Air barrier extends behind boxes or air sealed-type boxes are installed. Common wall  Air barrier is installed in common walls between dwelling units. HVAC register boots  HVAC register boots that penetrate building envelope are sealed to subfloor or drywall. Fireplace  Fireplace walls include an air barrier.  
11.701.4.3.3 Fenestration air leakage. Newly installed windows, skylights and sliding glass doors have an air filtration rate of no more than 0.3 cfm per square foot (1.5 L/s/m 2 ), and swinging doors no more than 0.5 cfm per square foot (2.6 L/s/m 2 ), when tested in accordance with NFRC 400 or AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 by an accredited, independent laboratory and tested and labeled. This practice does not apply to site-build windows, skylights and doors. Mandatory 11.701.4.3.5 Recessed lighting. Newly installed recessed luminaires installed in the building thermal envelope are sealed to limit air leakage between conditioned and unconditioned spaces. All recessed luminaires are IC-rated and labeled as meeting ASTM E 283 when tested at 1.57 psf (75 Pa) pressure differential with no more than 2.0 cfm (0.944 L/s) of air movement from the conditioned space to the ceiling cavity. All recessed luminaires are sealed with a gasket or caulk between the housing and the interior of the wall or ceiling covering. Mandatory 11.701.4.4 High-efficiency lighting. A minimum of 50 percent of the newly installed hard-wired lighting fixtures, or the bulbs in those fixtures, qualify as high efficacy or equivalent. Mandatory 11.701.4.5 Boiler supply piping. Boiler supply piping in unconditioned space that is accessible during the remodel is insulated. Mandatory 11.901 POLLUTANT SOURCE CONTROL 11.901.0 Intent. Pollution sources are controlled 11.901.1 Space and water heating options 11.901.1.1 Natural draft furnace, boilers, or water heaters are not located in conditioned spaces, including conditioned crawlspaces, unless located in a mechanical room that has an outdoor air source and is sealed and insulated to separate it from the conditioned space(s). 5      (points are awarded only for buildings that use natural draft
combustion space or water heating equipment.) 11.901.1.2 Air handling equipment or return ducts are not located in the garage, unless placed in isolated, air-sealed mechanical rooms with an outside air source. 5 11.901.1.3 The following combustion space heating and water heating equipment is installed within conditioned space: (1) all furnaces or boilers      (a) power vent furnace(s) or boiler(s) 3      (b) direct vent (sealed combustion) furnace(s) or boiler(s) 5 (2) all water heaters      (a) power vent water heater(s) 3      (b) direct vent (sealed combustion) water heater(s) 5 11.901.1.4 Newly installed gas-fired fireplaces and direct heating equipment is listed and is installed in accordance with the NFPA 54,ICC IFG, or the applicable local gas appliance installation code. Gas-fired fireplaces and direct heating equipment are vented to the outdoors. Mandatory 11.901.1.6 The following electric equipment is installed: (1) Heat pump air handler in unconditioned space 2 (2) Heat pump air handler in conditioned space 5 11.901.2 Solid fuel-burning appliances 11.901.2.1 Newly installed solid fuel-burning fireplaces, inserts, stoves and heaters are local code compliant and are in accordance with the following requirements: Mandatory (1) Site-built masonry wood-burning fireplaces are equipped with outside combustion air and a means of sealing the flue and the combustion air outlets to minimize interior air (heat) loss when not in operation. (2) Factory-built, wood-burning fireplaces are in accordance with the certification requirements of UL 127 and are EPA certified. (3) Wood stove and fireplace inserts, as defined in UL 1482 Section 3.8, are in accordance with the certification requirements of UL 1482 and are in accordance with the emission requirements of the EPA Certification and the State of Washington WAC 173-433-100(3). (4) Pellet (biomass) stoves and furnaces are in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E 1509 or are EPA certified. (5) Masonry heaters are in accordance with the definitions in ASTM E1602 and ICC IBC, Section 2112.1. (6) Removal of or rendering unusable an existing fireplace or fuel burning appliance that is not in accordance with 11.901.2.1 or replacement of each fireplace or appliance that is not in accordance with 11.901.2.1 with a compliant appliance. (Not Mandatory) 7 11.901.3 Garages. Garages are in accordance with the following: (1) Attached garage      (c) For one- and two-family dwelling units, a 100 cfm (47 L/s) or greater ducted, or 70 cfm (33 L/s) or greater unducted wall exhaust fan is installed and vented to the outdoors, designed and installed for continuous operation, or has controls (e.g., motion detectors, pressure switches) that activate operation for a minimum of 1 hour when either human passage door or roll-up automatic doors are operated. For ducted exhaust fans, the fan airflow rating and duct sizing are in accordance with Appendix A. 8 (2) A carport is installed, or a detached garage is installed. 10 11.901.12 Carbon monoxide (CO) alarms. A carbon monoxide (CO) alarm is installed in a central location outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. The CO alarm(s) is located in accordance with NFPA 720 and where there is existing electrical lines accessible is hard-wired with a battery back-up. The alarm device(s) is certified by a third-party for conformance to either CSA 6.19 or UL 2034. At least one of the CO alarms is capable of detecting CO concentrations as low as 9 ppm and includes a visible display. Mandatory    Exception: No CO alarms are required when all three of the following conditions are true: 1. The is no attached garage; 2. There are no gas-fired appliances within the conditioned space and; 3. There are no solid fuel burning appliances in the home, including fireplaces. 11.902 POLLUTANT CONTROL 11.902.0 Intent. Pollutants generated in the building are controlled. 11.902.1 Spot ventilation. 11.902.1.1 Spot ventilation is in accordance with the following: (1) Bathrooms are vented to the outdoors. The minimum ventilation rate is 50 cfm (23.6 L/s) for intermittent operation or 20 cfm (9.4 L/s) for continuous operation in bathrooms. Mandatory 
1 (Points are awarded only if a window complying with IRC Section R303.3
is provided in addition to mechanical ventilation.) (3) Kitchen exhaust units and/or range hoods are ducted to the outdoors and have a minimum ventilation rate of 100 cfm (47.2 L/s) for intermittent operation or 25 cfm (11.8 L/s) for continuous operation. 8 11.902.1.2 Bathroom and/or laundry exhaust fan is provided with an automatic timer, motion sensor, and/or humidistat: 11 Max for first device 5 for each additional device 2 11.902.1.4 Exhaust fans are ENERGY STAR, as applicable. 12 Max (1) ENERGY STAR, or equivalent, fans 2      (Points awarded per fan.) (2) ENERGY STAR, or equivalent, fans operating at or below 1 sone 3      (Points awarded per fan.) 11.902.2 Building ventilation systems 11.902.2.1 One of the following whole building ventilation systems is implemented and is in accordance with the specifications in Appendix B. Mandatory where the maximum air infiltration rate is less than 5 ACH50 or no blower door test is performed (1) exhaust or supply fan(s) ready for continuous operation and with appropriately leveled controls OR 3 (2) balanced exhaust and supply fans with supply intakes located in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines so as to not introduce polluted air back into the building OR 6 (3) heat-recovery ventilator OR 7 (4) energy-recovery ventilator 8 11.902.2.2 Ventilation airflow is tested to achieve the design fan airflow at point of exhaust in accordance with Section 11.902.2.1. 4 11.902.2.3 MERV filters 8 or equivalent or greater are installed on central forced air systems and are accessible. Designer or installer is to verify that the HVAC equipment is able to accommodate the greater pressure drop of MERV 8 filters. 3 11.902.3 Radon control, Radon control measures are in accordance with the Santa Fe Residential Green Building Code. (1) All residential buildings shall be tested both prior to, and after, remodeling or an addition and information regarding the potential health risks of radon exposure shall be supplied to the homeowner. Tests shall be consistent with the USEPA measurement protocols from homes or by the American Association of Radon Scientists and Technologists (AARST) "protocols for Radon Measurements in Homes" (MAH September 2005). It is highly recommended that mitigation be performed if the concentrations are at or above 4 pCi/L. It is recommended that remediation be performed if levels are between 2 and 4 pCi/L. NOTE: Some types of construction may increase radon concentrations including actions that reduce natural ventilation or the introduction of sources of radon such as granite. This information is intended as disclosure only for the homeowner to use at their discretion. Mandatory      (a) a passive radon system is installed 7      (b) an active radon system is installed 10 11.902.4 HVAC system protection. The following HVAC system protection measure is performed. (1) HVAC supply registers (boots), return grilles, and rough-ins are covered during construction activities to prevent dust and other pollutants from entering the system. 3 Mandatory 11.902.5 Central vacuum system. Central vacuum system is installed and vented to the outside. 3 11.902.6 Living space contaminants. The living space is sealed in accordance with Section 11.701.4.3.1 to prevent unwanted contaminants and third-party verified. Mandatory 11.903 MOISTURE MANAGEMENT: VAPOR, RAINWATER, PLUMBING, HVAC 11.903.0 Intent. Moisture and moisture effects are controlled. 11.903.1 Plumbing 11.903.1.1 Cold water pipes in unconditioned spaces are insulated to a minimum of R-4 with pipe insulation or other covering that adequately prevents condensation. 2 11.903.1.2 Plumbing is not installed in unconditioned spaces such as garages, attics, basements or crawl spaces. 5 11.903.2 Duct insulation. Ducts are in accordance with one of the following: (1) All HVAC ducts, plenums, and trunks are in conditioned space. 1 (2) All HVAC ducts, plenums, and trunks are in conditioned space. All HVAC ducts are insulated to a minimum of R4. 3 11.1001 BUILDING OWNERS' MANUAL 11.1001.0 Intent. Information on the building's use, maintenance, and green components is provided. 11.1001.1 A building owner's manual is provided that includes the following, as available and applicable. 1 
9 Max      (Points awarded per two items. Points awarded for
both mandatory and non-mandatory items.) (1) A green building program certificate or completion document Mandatory (2) List of green building features (can include the Green Building Code checklist). Mandatory (3) Product manufacturer's manuals or product data sheet for newly installed major equipment, fixtures, and appliances, including any alternative energy systems. If product data sheet is in the building owner's manual, manufacturer's manual may be attached to the appliance in lieu of inclusion in the building owner's manual. Mandatory (4) Maintenance checklist. (5) Information on local recycling programs. (6) Information on available local utility or other energy provider programs that purchase a portion of energy from renewable energy providers. (7) Explanation of the benefits of using energy-efficient lighting systems (e.g., compact fluorescent light bulbs, light emitting diode (LED)) in high-usage areas. (8) A list of practices to conserve water and energy. (9) Local public transportation options. (10) A diagram showing the location of safety valves and controls for major building systems. Mandatory (11) Where frost-protected shallow foundations are used, owner is informed of precautions including:      (a) instructions to not remove or damage insulation when modifying landscaping.      (b) providing heat to the building as required by the ICC IRC or UMC      (c) keeping base materials beneath and around the building free from moisture caused by broken water pipes or other water sources. (12) A list of local service providers that offer regularly scheduled service and maintenance contracts to ensure proper performance of equipment and the structure (e.g., HVAC, water-heating equipment, sealants, caulks, gutter and downspout system, shower and/or tub surrounds, irrigation system). (13) A photo record of framing with the utilities installed. Photos are taken prior to installing insulation, clearly labeled, and included as part of the building owner's manual. (14) List of common hazardous materials often used around the building and instructions for proper handling and disposal of these materials. (15) Information on organic pest control, fertilizers, deicers, and cleaning products. (16) Information on native landscape materials and/or those that have low-water requirements. (17) Information on methods of maintaining the building's relative humidity in the range of 30 percent to 60 percent. (18) Instructions for inspecting the building for termite infestation. (19) Instructions for maintaining gutters and downspouts and importance of diverting water a minimum of 5 feet away from foundation. (20) A narrative detailing the importance of maintenance and operation in retaining the attributes of a green-built building. (21) Where stormwater management measures are installed on the lot, information on the location, purpose, and upkeep of these measures. (22) For buildings originally built before 1978, the EPA publications "Reducing Lead Hazards When Remodeling Your Home" and "Asbestos in Your Home: A Homeowner's Guide". (23) Information regarding energy efficient window treatments (24) Information about protecting the home from fire danger Mandatory (25) Instructions for maintaining solar systems employed in the home (only available if solar systems are employed in the home) Mandatory (26) Provide homeowner with information about mulching and composting (27) Provide information about participating in a clean energy program (i.e., purchase energy from PNM Sky Blue). (28) Provide information about water conservation practices and City incentives Mandatory 11.1002 Training of Building Owners on Operation and Maintenance 11.1002.1 Training of building owners. Building owners are familiarized with the role of occupants in achieving green goals. On-site training is provided to the responsible party(ies) regarding newly installed equipment operation and maintenance, control systems, and occupant actions that will improve the environmental performance of the building. These include: Mandatory (1) HVAC filters or boiler maintenance (2) thermostat operation and programming (3) lighting controls (4) appliances operation (5) water heating settings and hot water use (6) fan controls (7) recycling practices (8) the irrigation system (9) catchment system maintenance (10) all other equipment 11.1004 Innovative Practices 11.1004.2 Translate homeowner documents into Spanish and make both available to homeowner 6  
(Ord. #2014-11,  4) 
Chapter 12
REMODELING OF FUNCTIONAL AREAS AND SMALL ADDITIONS 
Item # Green Building Practices 12.00 REMODELING OF FUNCTIONAL AREAS 12.0 Intent. This chapter sets forth the mandatory green practices for remodeling functional areas of buildings. The intent of Chapter 12 is to address the most common remodeling projects: complete kitchen, full bathroom, complete basement, or an addition under 400 square feet. Chapter 12 is not intended to be used for rating minor alterations. 12.305.4 Criteria for remodeling functional areas of buildings 13.305.4.1 Applicability. The provisions of Section 305.4 shall apply to remodeling of one or more of the following functional areas of the existing building as follows:      1. Addition, kitchen, bathroom, or basement in buildings other than multi-unit buildings.      2. Kitchen or bathroom of an individual dwelling unit in a multi-unit building 12.305.4.1.1 Additions. The total above-grade conditioned area added during a remodel that are less than 400 conditioned square feet. 12.305.4.2 Compliant. Projects that meet all applicable requirements of Chapter 12 for that functional area shall be designated as compliant. 12.305.4.3 Designation. The designation achieved under Section 305.4 applies only to the specific functional area of the existing building. The existing building may have more than one compliant functional area. 12.305.4.4 Additions. A bathroom(s), kitchen, or finished basement included in an addition shall comply with all criteria specifically applicable to those functional areas in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12. 305.4.5 Mandatory. Projects shall satisfy all applicable practices designated as mandatory in Chapter 12. 12.305.4.6 Existing attributes. The attributes of the existing building that were in compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 12 prior to the remodel and remain in compliance after the remodel shall be eligible for contributing to demonstration of compliance under Section 305.4. 12.701.4.3.1 Building Thermal Envelope. The portions of the building thermal envelope that are exposed or created during the remodel is durably sealed to limit infiltration. The sealing methods between dissimilar materials allow for differential expansion and contraction. The following are caulked, gasketed, weather-stripped or otherwise sealed with an air barrier material, suitable film or solid material:      (a) All joints, seams and penetrations.      (b) Site-built windows, doors and skylights.      (c) Openings between window and door assemblies and their respective jambs and framing.      (d) Utility penetrations.      (e) Dropped ceiling or chases adjacent to the thermal envelope.      (f) Knee walls.      (g) Walls and ceilings separating a garage from conditioned spaces.      (h) Behind tubs and showers on exterior walls.      (i) Common walls between dwelling units.      (j) Attic access openings.      (k) Rim joist junction.      (l) Other sources of infiltration. 12.701.4.3.2 Air Sealing and insulation. Grade 3 insulation installation is not permitted for newly installed insulation. The compliance of the portions of the building envelope that are exposed or created during the remodel for air tightness and insulation installation are considered acceptable when the items listed in Table 12.1.701.4.3.2(2) applicable method of construction are field verified. Table 12.1.701.4.3.2(2) Air Barrier and Insulation Inspection Component Criteria Component
Criteria Criteria Air barrier and thermal barrier  Exterior thermal envelope insulation for framed walls is installed in substantial contact and continuous alignment with building envelope air barrier.  Breaks or joints in the air barrier are filled or repaired.  Air-permeable insulation is not used as a sealing material.  Air-permeable insulation is not installed with an air barrier. Ceiling/Attic  Air barrier in dropped ceiling/soffit is substantially aligned with insulation and any gaps are sealed.  Attic access (except unvented attic), knee wall door, or dropdown stair is sealed. Exterior Walls  Corners and headers are insulated.  Junction of foundation and sill plate is sealed. Windows and doors  Space between windows/door jambs is sealed. Rim joints  Rim joists are insulated and include an air barrier. Floors (including above-garage and cantilevered floors)  Insulation is installed to maintain permanent contact with underside of subfloor decking.  Air barrier is installed at any exposed edge of insulation. Crawlspace walls  Where installed, insulation is permanently attached to walls.  Exposed earth in unvented crawlspaces is covered with Class I vapor retarder with overlapping joints taped. Shafts, penetrations  Duct shafts, flue shafts, and utility penetrations, opening to the exterior or an unconditioned space are sealed. Narrow cavities  Batts in narrow cavities are cut to fit, or narrow cavities are filled by sprayed/blown insulations. Garage separation  Air sealing is provided between the garage and conditioned spaces. Recessed lighting  Recessed light fixtures not installed in the conditioned space are air tight, IC rated, and sealed to drywall. Plumbing and wiring  Insulation is placed between the outside and pipes. Batt insulation is cut to fit around wiring and plumbing, or sprayed/blown insulation extends behind piping and wiring. Shower/tub adjacent to exterior wall  Showers and tubs adjacent to exterior walls have insulation and an air barrier separation from the exterior. Electrical/phone box in exterior walls  Air barrier extends behind boxes or air sealed-type boxes are installed. Common wall  Air barrier is installed in common walls between dwelling units. HVAC register boots  HVAC register boots that penetrate building envelope are sealed to subfloor or drywall. Fireplace  Fireplace walls include an air barrier. 12.1.701.4.3.4 Recessed lighting. Newly installed recessed luminaires installed in the building thermal envelope are sealed to limit air leakage between conditioned and unconditioned spaces. All recessed luminaires are IC-rated and labeled as meeting ASTM E 283 when tested at 1.57 psf (75 Pa) pressure differential with no more than 2.0 cfm (0.944 L/s) of air movement from the conditioned space to the ceiling cavity. All luminaires are sealed with a gasket or caulk between the housing and the interior of the wall or ceiling covering. 12.1.701.4.4 High-efficiency lighting. A minimum of 50 percent of the hard-wired lighting fixtures and bulbs in the remodeled portion of the building, or the bulbs in those fixtures, qualify as high efficacy or equivalent. 12.1.701.4.5 Boiler supply piping. Newly installed boiler supply piping in unconditioned space that is accessible during the remodel is insulated. 12.1.703.5.3 Appliances. All newly installed major appliances in the remodeled portion of the building are ENERGY STAR or equivalent. 12.1.901.1.4 Gas-fired equipment. Newly installed gas-fired fireplaces and direct heating equipment is listed and is installed in accordance with the NMAC. Gas-fired fireplaces and direct heating equipment are vented to the outdoors. 12.1.901.2.1 Solid fuel-burning appliances. Newly installed solid fuel-burning fireplaces, inserts, stoves, and heaters are code compliant and are in accordance with the following requirements: (1) Site-built masonry wood-burning fireplaces are equipped with outside combustion air and a means of sealing the flue and the combustion air outlets to minimize interior air (heat) loss when not in operation. (2) Factory-built, wood-burning fireplaces are in accordance with the certification requirements of UL 127 and are EPA certified. (3) Wood stove and fireplace inserts, as defined in UL 1482 Section 3.8, are in accordance with the certification requirements of UL 1482 and are in accordance with the emission requirements of the EPA Certification and the State of Washington WAC 173-433-100(3). Pellet (biomass) stoves and furnaces are in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E1509 or are EPA certified. Masonry heaters are in accordance with the definitions in ASTM E1602 and ICC IBC, Section 2112.1. 12.1.902.4 HVAC System Protection. One of the following HVAC system protection measures is performed. (1) HVAC supply registers (boots), return grilles, and rough-ins are covered during construction activities to prevent dust and other pollutants from entering the system. 12.1.903.2 Duct insulation. All newly installed, exposed, or modified All HVAC ducts, plenums, and trunks in unconditioned attics, basements, and crawl spaces are insulated to a minimum of R-6. Outdoor air supplies to ventilation systems are insulated to a minimum of R-6. 12.2 KITCHEN REMODELS 12.2.0 Applicability. In addition to the practices listed in Section 12.1, the following practices are mandatory for all kitchen remodels. 12.2.607.1 Recycling. Recycling by the occupants is facilitated by means of a built-in collection space in or near the kitchen and an aggregation/collection space in a garage, covered outdoor space, or other area for recycling containers. 12.3 BATHROOM REMODELS 12.3.611.3 Universal design elements. Where existing stud walls are exposed and where new walls are constructed, blocking or equivalent is installed to accommodate the future installation of grab bars at water closet(s) and bathing fixtures(s). 12.3.801.4 Showerheads. The total maximum combined flow rate of all newly installed showerheads that are controlled by a single valve at any point in time in a shower compartment is 1.6 to less than 2.5 gpm. Maximum of two valves are installed per shower compartment. The flow rate is tested at 80 psi (552 kPa) in accordance with ASME A112.18.1. Showerheads are served by an automatic compensating valve that complies with ASSE 1016 or ASME A112.18.1 and specifically designed to provide thermal shock and scald protection at the flow rate of the showerhead. 12.3.801.5.1 Faucets. Newly installed lavatory faucets have a maximum flow rate of 1.5 gpm (5.68 L/m) or less when tested at 60 psi (414 kPa) in accordance with ASME A112.18.1. 12.3.801.6 Water Closets. All newly installed water closets have an effective flush volume of 1.28 gallons (4.85 L) or less when tested in accordance with ASME A112.19.2 or ASME A112.19.14, as applicable, and is in accordance with EPA WaterSense Tank-Type Toilets. 12.4 BASEMENT REMODELS 12.4.0 Applicability. In addition to the practices listed in Section 12.1, the following practices are mandatory for all basement remodels. 12.4.2 Kitchen. When the basement remodel includes a kitchen, the remodel shall also comply with the practices in Section 12.2. 12.4.3 Bathroom. When the basement remodel includes a bathroom, the remodel shall also comply with the practices in Section 12.3. 12.4.4 Radon control. Passive or active radon control system is installed in accordance with ICC IRC Appendix F unless a radon test is performed demonstrating that the level is less than the USEPA mitigation action level of 4 pCi/L. (The USEPA recommends, but does not require, mitigation between 2 and 4 pCi/L) or unless it is structurally infeasible. 12.5 ADDITIONS 12.5.0 Applicability. In addition to the practices listed in Section 12.1, the following practices are mandatory for all addition remodels. 12.5.1 Kitchen. When the addition includes a kitchen, the remodel shall also comply with the practices in Section 12.2. 12.5.2 Bathroom. When the addition includes a bathroom, the remodel shall also comply with the practices in Section 12.3. 12.5.602.1.9 Flashing. Flashing is provided for the addition and for the intersection where the addition joins the existing building, to minimize water entry into wall and roof assemblies and to direct water to exterior surfaces or exterior water-resistive barriers for drainage. Flashing details are provided in the construction documents and are in accordance with the fenestration manufacturer's instructions, the flashing manufacturer's instructions, or as detailed by a registered design professional. Flashing is installed at all of the following locations, as applicable:      (a) around exterior fenestrations, skylights and doors      (b) at roof valleys      (c) at all building-to-deck, -balcony, -porch, and -stair intersections      (d) at roof-to-wall intersections, at roof-to-chimney intersections, at wall-to-chimney intersections, and at parapets.      (e) at ends of an under masonry, wood, or metal copings and sills      (f) above projecting wood trim      (g) at built-in roof gutters and canales, and      (h) drip edge is installed at eaves and rake edges. 12.5.602.1.14 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing backup of water, an ice barrier is installed on the addition in accordance with the ICC IRC at roof eaves of pitched roofs and extends a minimum of 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building. 12.5.602.1.15 Architectural features. New architectural features that increase the potential for water intrusion are avoided. (1) No roof configurations that create horizontal valleys in roof designs. (2) No recessed windows and architectural features that trap water on horizontal surfaces. (3) All horizontal ledgers are sloped away to provide gravity drainage as appropriate for the application. 12.5.902.3 Radon control. Passive or active radon control system is installed in accordance with ICC IRC Appendix F unless a radon test is performed in the existing house demonstrating that the level is less than the USEPA mitigation action level of 4 pCi/L. (The USEPA recommends, but does not require, mitigation between 2 and 4 pCi/L).  
(Ord. #2014-11,  5) 
Appendix A 
Ducted Garage Exhaust Fan Sizing Criteria 
A100 
Scope and Applicability 
A101.1 Applicability of Appendix A. Appendix A is part of this Code. 
A101.2 Scope. The provisions contained in Appendix A provide the criteria necessary for complying with Section 901.3(1)(c) for the installation of ducted exhaust fans in garages. To receive points for implementing Practice 901.3(1)(c), the fan airflow rating and duct sizing for ducted exhaust fans are to be in accordance with the applicable criteria of Appendix A. 
A101.3 Acknowledgement. The text of Appendix A, Section A200 and related Table are extracted from ASHRAE (American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.) Standard 62.2-2007 Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Low-Rise Residential Buildings, Section 7.3 and Table 7.1, respectively. 
A200 
Air Flow Rating 
A201.1 Airflow rating. The airflows required by this code refer to the delivered airflow of the system as installed and tested using a flow hood, flow grid, or other airflow measuring device. Alternatively, the airflow rating at a pressure of 0.25 in. w.c. (62.5 Pa) may be used, provided the duct sizing meets the prescriptive requirements of Table A201 or manufacturers' design criteria. 
[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY] 
Table A201 
Prescriptive Duct Sizing 
Duct Type Fan Rating 
cfm@0.25 in 
w.g. 
(L/s @62.5 Pa) Flex Duct Smooth Duct 50 80 100 125 50 80 100 125 (25) (40) (50) (65) (25) (40) (50) (65) Diameter, in. 
(mm) Maximum Length, Ft (m) 3(75) x x x x 5(2) x x x 4(100) 70(27) 3(1) x x 105(35) 35(12) 5(2) x 5(125) NL 70(27) 35(12) 20(7) NL 135(45) 85(28) 55(18) 6(150) NL NL 125(42) 95(32) NL NL NL 145(48) 7(175) and above NL NL NL NL NL NL NL NL  
This table assumes no elbows. Deduct 15 ft (5 m) of allowable duct length for each elbow. 
NL = no limit on duct length of this size. 
X = now allowed, any length of duct of this size with assume turns and fitting will exceed the rated pressure drop. 
(Ord. #2009-9, Exh. A; Ord. #2009-31,  1-13; Ord. #2010-19, Exh. A; Ord. #2012-4, Exh. A.) 
Appendix B
Whole Building Ventilation System Specifications 
B100 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY 
B101.1 Applicability of Appendix B. Appendix B is part of this standard. 
B101.2 Scope. The provisions contained in Appendix B provide the specifications necessary for complying with Section 902.2.1 for the installation of whole building ventilation systems. To receive points for implementing Practice 902.2.1, the chosen whole building ventilation system is to be in accordance with the applicable specifications of Appendix B. 
B191.3 Acknowledgment. The text of Appendix B, Section B200 and related Tables are extracted from ASHRAE (American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.) Standard 62.2-2010 Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Low-Rise Residential Buildings, Section 4, and is used with the permission of ASHRAE. The referenced Section and Table numbers within the extracted text are modified to be applicable to Appendix B of this Standard. "*" indicates added reference to ICC or ASHREA 62.2 to provide clarity. 
B200 WHOLE-BUILDING VENTILATION 
B201.1 Ventilation Rate. A mechanical exhaust system, supply system, or other combination thereof shall be installed for each dwelling unit to provide whole-building ventilation with outdoor air each hour at no less than the rate specified in Tables B201.1a and B201.1b or, equivalently, Equations B201.1a and B201.1b, based on the floor area of the conditioned space and number of bedrooms. 
B201.1.2 Alternative Ventilation. Other methods may be used to provide the required ventilation rates (of Tables B201.1a and B201.1b) when approved by a licensed design professional. 
Equation B201.1a 
Q fan = 0.01A floor + 7.5(N br +1) 
where 
Q fan = fan flow rate, cfm 
A floor = floor area, ft 2 
N br = number of bedrooms; not to be less than one 
Equation B201.1b 
Q fan = 0.05A floor + 3.5(N br +1) 
where 
Q fan = fan flow rate, L/s 
A floor = floor area, m 2 
N br = number of bedrooms; not to be less than one 
TABLE B201.1a (I-P)
Ventilation Air Requirements, cfm 
Floor Area Bedrooms   (ft 2 ) 0-1 2-3 4-5 6-7 >7 <1,500 30 45 60 75 90 1,501-3,000 45 60 75 90 105 3,001-4,500 60 75 90 105 120 4,501-6,000 75 90 105 120 135 6,001-7,500 90 105 120 135 150 >7,500 105 120 135 150 165  
TABLE B201.1b (SI)
Ventilation Air Requirements, L/s 
Floor Area Bedrooms   (m 2 ) 0-1 2-3 4-5 6-7 >7 <139 14 21 28 35 42 139.1-279 21 28 35 42 50 279.1-418 28 35 42 50 57 418.1-557 35 42 50 57 64 557.1-697 42 50 57 64 71 >697 50 57 64 71 78  
B201.2 System Type. The whole-house ventilation system shall consist of one or more supply or exhaust fans and associated ducts and controls. Local exhaust fans shall be permitted to be part of a mechanical exhaust system. Outdoor air ducts connected to the return side of an air handler shall be permitted as supply ventilation if manufacturers' requirements for return air temperature are met. See ASHRAE 62.2*, Appendix B for guidance on selection of methods. 
B201.3 Control and Operation. The "fan on" switch on a heating or air-conditioning system shall be permitted as an operational control for systems introducing ventilation air through a duct to the return side of an HVAC system. Readily accessible override control must be provided to the occupant. Local exhaust fan switches and "fan on" switches shall be permitted as override controls. Controls, including the "fan-on" switch of a conditioning system, must be appropriately labeled. 
Exception: An intermittently operating, whole-house mechanical ventilation system may be used if the ventilation rate is adjusted according to the exemption to Section B201.4. The system must be designed so that it can operate automatically based on a timer. The intermittent mechanical ventilation system must operate at least one hour out of every twelve. 
Equation B201.4 
Q f = Q r / (ef) 
where 
Q f = fan flow rate 
Q r = ventilation air requirement (from Table B201.1a or B201.1b) 
e = ventilation effectiveness (from Table B201.1) 
f = fractional on time 
if the system runs at least every three hours, 1.0 can be used as the ventilation effectiveness. (See ASHRAE 62.2* , Appendix B for an example of this calculation.) 
TABLE B201.4 
Ventilation Effectiveness for Intermittent Fans Daily Fractional On-Time, f Ventilation Effectiveness, e  = 35% 0.33 35% =  < 60% 0.50 60% =  < 80% 0.75 80% =  1.0  
(Ord. #2014-11,  6) 
CHAPTER VIII - RESERVED 
  
CHAPTER IX - ELECTION AND POLITICAL CAMPAIGN CODES 
9-1 - ELECTION CODE. 

9-1.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the Santa Fe Election Code. 
(Code 1973,  1-13; SFCC 1981,  1-2-1; Ord. #1985-60,  1) 
9-1.2 - Local Election Act opt-in; conduct of elections. 
    The city of Santa Fe opts-in to the Local Election Act. Municipal elections in the city shall be conducted in accordance with the Santa Fe Election Code, the Santa Fe Municipal Charter and the New Mexico Local Election Act. The date of the regular municipal election shall be the first Tuesday in November of odd-numbered years. 
(Code 1973,  1-13; SFCC 1981,  1-2-1; Ord. #1985-60,  1; Ord. #2007-39,  1; Ord. #2011-28,  1; Ord. # 2018-24 ,  1) 
9-1.3 - Creation of districts. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, city councilors shall reside in and be elected from municipal election districts. 
B.  The resident qualified electors in each of the four (4) municipal election districts shall elect one (1) city councilor from each district for a four (4) year term, so that each municipal election district is represented by two (2) city councilors serving staggered four (4) year terms. 
C.  There are created four (4) two (2)-member municipal election districts which include the following precincts and portions of precincts located within the municipal boundaries of the city of Santa Fe: 
(1)  District 1: Precincts 8, 9, 10, 11, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 83; 
(2)  District 2: Precincts 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55 and 77; 
(3)  District 3: Precincts 12, 62, 64, 75, 80, 86 and 89; 
(4)  District 4: Precincts 29, 35, 38, 39, 49, 50, 56, 66, 67, 74, 76 and 78. 
D.  The boundaries of each municipal election district are shown on the most current municipal election district map, hereby adopted as the official districting map and is to be kept in the custody of the city clerk. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  3; Ord. #1992-3,  1; Ord. #1998-36,  1; Ord. #1999-36,  1; Ord. #2000-12,  1; Ord. #2002-6,  1; Ord. #2002-7,  2; Ord. #2007-39,  2; Ord. #2009-55,  1; Ord. #2011-27,  1; Ord. #2013-30; Ord. #2015-18; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.4 - Districting. 
A.  In establishing the district boundaries, the independent citizens' redistricting commission established by Section 6-18 SFCC 1987, shall consider the following principles in the following order of priority: 
(1)  Each district shall contain as nearly as possible substantially the same population based upon the most recent federal census; 
(2)  Districting plans must avoid dilution of minority voting strength; 
(3)  Communities of interest, including those based upon ethnic and economic factors, shall be preserved within a single district whenever reasonable; 
(4)  Each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territories. The total length of all district boundary lines shall be as short as possible; 
(5)  Districting plans shall compensate for U.S. Census undercount of minorities. 
B.  District boundaries shall be reviewed and revised, if necessary, following each decennial federal census. 
C.  Revisions to the district boundaries shall be effective beginning with the March 2016 regular municipal election. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  4; Ord. #1999-36,  2; Ord. #2002-7,  3; Ord. #2011-27,  2; Ord. #2014-37  2) 
9-1.4.1 - Incorporation by reference. 
    The approved redistricting plan and plan documents (subsections 9-1.3 and 9-1.4) presented to the independent citizens' redistricting commission, in the course of revising the boundaries of the four (4) city council districts are incorporated by reference. A true and correct copy of said plan and plan documents shall be retained by the city clerk and made available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. #2002-7,  4, 5; Ord. #2007-39,  3; Ord. No. #2011-27,  3; Ord. #2014-37  3; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.5 - Residency of candidates. 
A.  Only persons residing in a particular municipal election district and who otherwise meet all applicable requirements imposed by law or ordinance, shall be allowed to be candidates for the position of city councilor for that municipal election district. 
B.  In determining whether the residence of a person is in a particular district, the rules set forth in Sections 3-8-3 and 1-1-7 NMSA 1978 shall apply. 
C.  In addition to the requirements for a declaration of candidacy set forth in Section 3-8-27 NMSA 1978 and subsection 9-1.6 SFCC 1987, the city clerk shall not accept a declaration of candidacy for the position of city councilor unless the declaration of candidacy states which district the candidate resides in and is seeking election from. The city clerk shall determine if the candidate's residence is within the district from which the candidate is seeking election. If the candidate does not reside within the district, the city clerk shall determine that the declaration of candidacy is invalid. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  5; Ord. #2011-28,  2; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.6 - Election resolution; declaration of candidacy; certification of candidacy and withdrawal of candidacy. 
A.  Election Resolution. The requirements for the regular municipal election resolution shall be governed by Section 3-8-26 NMSA 1978, except that the election resolution shall be adopted by the governing body no earlier than one hundred forty-seven (147) days and no later than one hundred nineteen (119) days prior to the date of a regular municipal election. 
B.  Candidate Filing Day. The requirements for candidate filing day shall be governed by Section 3-8-27(A) NMSA 1978, except that candidate filing day shall occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the ninety-first (91st) day preceding the day of election. 
C.  Certification of Declaration of Candidacy. The requirements for the certification of declaration of candidacy shall be governed by Section 3-8-27(G) NMSA 1978, except that no later than the ninetieth (90th) day preceding the day of the election, the city clerk shall determine whether a declaration of candidacy shall be certified. 
D.  Posting the List of Certified and Not Certified Candidates. The requirements for posting the list of certified and not certified candidates shall be governed by Section 3-8-27(H) NMSA 1978, except that the city clerk shall post such list no later than 9:00 a.m. on the eighty-ninth (89th) day preceding the election. 
E.  Candidate Statement to Ascertain Validity of Declaration of Candidacy. The requirements for the candidate statement to ascertain validity of declaration of candidacy shall be governed by Section 3-8-27(D)(5) NMSA 1978, except that the candidate or the candidate's authorized representative shall contact the office of the city clerk during normal business hours on the eighty-ninth (89th) day before the election to ascertain whether the city clerk has certified the declaration of candidacy as valid. 
F.  Affidavit of Withdrawal of Candidacy. The requirements for the affidavit of withdrawal of candidacy shall be governed by Section 3-8-27(I) NMSA 1978, except that no later than 5:00 p.m. on the eighty-fourth (84th) day before the day of the election, a candidate for municipal office may file an affidavit on the form provided by the city clerk in the office of the city clerk stating that the candidate is no longer a candidate for municipal office. 
G.  Confirmation of Names and Positions on the Ballot. The requirements for the confirmation of the names and positions on the ballot shall be governed by Section 3-8-27(J) NMSA 1978, except that no later than 10:00 a.m. on the eighty-third (83rd) day preceding the election, the city clerk shall confirm with the printer on contract with the municipality and the county clerk the names of the candidates and their position on the ballot. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  6; Ord. #2011-28,  3; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.7 - Polling places; early voting. 
A.  Polling Places. In addition to the requirements of Section 3-8-11 NMSA 1978, the governing body shall assure that each election district has not less than one (1) polling place. 
B.  Early Voting . In addition to the requirements of Section 3-8-37.1 NMSA 1978, an early voter may vote in person on a voting machine beginning on the twentieth day before the election in the office of the city clerk and any other alternate early voting location as established in an election resolution until the Friday immediately before the date of the election. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  7; Ord. #2015-32; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.8 - Ballots. 
    In addition to the requirements of Section 3-8-29 NMSA 1978: 
A.  The city clerk shall cause all ballots to be printed so that candidates are grouped for the position of city councilor by district. 
B.  The order of the candidates on the ballot for city councilor within each district shall be determined by a drawing by lot, which shall be held at 5:01 p.m. on the eighty-ninth (89th) day preceding the election. 
C.  The order of the candidates on the ballot for mayor and for municipal judge shall be determined by a drawing by lot, which shall be held at 5:01 p.m. on the eighty-ninth (89th) day preceding the election. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  8; Ord. #2011-28,  4; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.9 - Precinct boards. 
    In addition to the requirements of Section 3-8-20 NMSA 1978 each precinct board shall assure that each person votes only for a candidate for the position of city councilor running for office from the district within which that person resides. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  9) 
9-1.10 - Publication of names of candidates. 
    In addition to the requirements of Section 3-8-30 NMSA 1978, the city clerk shall assure that the publication of the names of candidates for the office of councilor shall designate from which election district each such candidate is seeking election. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  10; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-1.11 - Candidates for the same office with identical names. 
    If two (2) or more candidates with identical names and initials file declaration of candidacy for the same office, the city clerk shall assign a distinguishing number to each candidate. The number shall be printed on the ballot immediately to the right of the candidate's name. The first (1st) such candidate filing his declaration shall be assigned No. 1; the second (2nd), No. 2; the third (3rd), No. 3; and continuing for so many such candidates as shall file. The distinguishing number shall be printed in black-face type, the size to be determined by the city clerk. 
(Ordained by Code 1973,  1-20 by Ord. #1976-1,  1; repealed and ordained anew as Code 1973,  1-16 by Ord. #1981-29,  5; SFCC 1981,  1-2-4) 
9-1.12 - No political party designation on ballot. 
    No ballot used at any municipal election shall have printed thereon any party or political designation, emblem or mark of any kind or character, and there shall not be appended to the name of any candidate any such political designation as Republican or Democrat; provided that the slate designation of a candidate may be placed on the ballot, if the candidate so requests the city clerk in writing. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  1-21 by Ord. #1976-1,  1; repealed and ordained anew as Code 1973,  1-17 by Ord. #1981-29,  6; SFCC 1981,  1-2-5) 
9-1.13 - Proof of residence. 
    A certified copy of affidavit of voter registration is prima facie evidence of residence. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  1-22 by Ord. #1976-1,  1; repealed and ordained anew as Code 1973,  1-18 by Ord. #1981-21,  7; SFCC 1981,  1-2-6) 
9-1.14 - Voter assistance. 
A.  All matters required to be published pursuant to Sections 3-8-1 through 3-8-19 NMSA 1978, shall be published in both the English and Spanish languages. 
B.  At least one (1) election official at each polling place to be used in a municipal election shall be able to read, write, and understand both the English and Spanish languages, and such official's duty, in addition to that imposed by statute, shall be to render assistance to any voter who is not familiar with the English or Spanish language. 
C.  All ballots will be published in both the English and Spanish languages. 
D.  All propositions presented in any election to the voters shall be published in both the English and Spanish languages, and, in addition, if voting machines are used in any election, all propositions presented to the voters shall be displayed on such voting machines in both the English and Spanish languages. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  1-23 by Ord. #1976-1;  1; repealed and ordained anew as Code 1973,  1-19 by Ord. #1981-29,  8; SFCC 1981,  1-2-7) 
9-1.15 - Ranked Choice Voting. 
A.  Authority. The city has the authority to enact this section under all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of New Mexico by virtue of its enactment of its charter pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico Constitution, and pursuant to the New Mexico Municipal Charter Act including all implied powers and all powers necessary to implement all express powers of the city, as if each and every one of the city's implied powers were fully, completely and expressly enumerated in its charter. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  Choice means an indication on a ballot of a voter's assigned ranking of candidates (i.e., first choice, second choice, third choice) for any single office according to the voter's preference. 
(2)  Continuing ballot means a ballot that counts towards a continuing candidate. 
(3)  Continuing candidate means a candidate that has not been eliminated. 
(4)  Duplicate ranking means a voter has ranked the same candidate at multiple rankings for the office being counted. The highest ranking for the candidate is valid and any lower rankings of that candidate shall be ignored. 
(5)  Exhausted ballot means a ballot that cannot be advanced because no further continuing candidates are ranked on that ballot. 
(6)  Incorrectly marked ballot means a ballot showing an overvote, undervote, duplicate ranking, skipped ranking, or unused ranking, and shall be rejected with an error message. A person who accidentally spoils or erroneously prepares the ballot may return the spoiled or erroneously prepared ballot to the election judge and receive a new ballot. 
(7)  Majority of votes means fifty (50) percent plus one (1) of the votes cast for a continuing candidate. 
(8)  Next ranked means the highest ranked choice for a continuing candidate. 
(9)  Overvote means a voter has ranked more than one candidate at the same ranking. If a voter gives the same ranking to more than one (1) candidate, the voter's rankings shall be counted in order of preference, stopping at the point where the ballot contains the same ranking for more than one (1) candidate. 
(10)  Ranked choice voting means an election system in which voters rank the candidates for office in order of preference, and the ballots are counted in rounds that simulate a series of runoffs until one candidate receives a majority of votes. Ranked choice voting is also known as "instant runoff voting." 
(11)  Round of counting or round means a step in the counting process during which votes for all continuing candidates are tabulated for the purpose of determining whether a candidate has achieved a majority of the votes cast for a particular office and, absent a majority, which candidate or candidates must be eliminated. 
(12)  Skipped ranking means a voter has left a ranking blank and ranks a candidate in a subsequent ranking. If a voter skips a numerical ranking, the skipped ranking will be ignored and the next indicated ranking on that ballot will be valid. 
(13)  Undervote means a voter did not rank any candidates for an office. 
(14)  Unused ranking means the voter has ranked at least one (1), but not all, candidates. 
(15)  Vote means a ballot choice that is counted toward the election of a candidate. During each round of counting, each continuing ballot contains one vote. All first choices are votes and lower ranked choices are potential runoff votes that may, in accordance with the requirements of this section, become votes and subsequently credited for a continuing candidate. 
C.  General Provisions. 
(1)  Ranked choice voting elections for the offices of mayor, councilor and municipal judge shall be conducted according to the procedures in this section. 
(2)  Ranked choice voting shall commence with the 2018 regular municipal election and continue for all regular municipal elections thereafter unless later repealed or invalidated by a subsequent federal, state or city law, statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance. 
(3)  The New Mexico secretary of state must certify the software prior to the use of ranked choice voting. 
D.  Ballot. The ranked choice voting ballot shall allow voters to rank all choices. 
E.  Tabulation. The ballots shall be counted in rounds. 
(1)  In the first round, every ballot shall count as a vote towards the first choice candidate. 
(2)  After any round, if any candidate receives a majority of votes, that candidate shall be declared the winner. 
(3)  If no candidate receives a majority of votes, the candidate receiving the fewest number of votes shall be eliminated. 
(4)  Every ballot counting towards the eliminated candidate shall be transferred to the next ranked continuing candidate. All the continuing ballots for all continuing candidates shall be counted again in a new round. 
F.  Ties. In the event that two (2) or more candidates tie for the fewest number of votes, the candidate to eliminate shall be chosen by lot. 
G.  Severability. The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is determined to be impossible of performance, or held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose of this Campaign Code. 
(Ord. # 2017-26 ,  1) 
9-1.16 - Plurality of votes cast required for election. 
    In addition to the requirements of Section 3-8-32 NMSA 1978 each candidate for the position of mayor, councilor or municipal judge shall only receive votes cast for such candidate by the resident qualified electors of the election district from which that candidate is running. Except for a ranked choice voting election, the candidate who receives a plurality of votes cast in that district shall be elected to the office for the term designated. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  12; Ord. # 2017-27 ,  1) 
9-1.17 - Canvass of returns, election certificate. 
    Appropriate election officials shall assure that election returns are canvassed and election certificates are issued for the positions of mayor and municipal judge and on a district-by-district basis for the position of city councilor. 
(Ord. #1985-60,  13; Ord. #2011-28,  6) 
9-1.18 - Transition. 
    The terms of the city councilors and municipal judge whose terms were set to expire six (6) days after the March 2020 regular municipal election shall expire on December 31, 2019. The terms of the mayor and city councilors whose terms were set to expire six (6) days after the March 2022 regular municipal election shall expire on December 31, 2021. 
(Ord. # 2018-24 ,  2) 
9-1.19 - Effective date and filing date. 
    The amended provisions regarding the New Mexico Local Election Act in Sections 9-1.2 and 9-1.18 SFCC 1987 shall be effective provided that a simple majority of the qualified electors of the city of Santa Fe vote in favor of the 2018 Santa Fe Municipal Charter amendment question and the proper canvassing board certifies the results. If the 2018 Santa Fe Municipal Charter amendment question is approved by voters, the city clerk shall file a copy of this ordinance with the New Mexico Secretary of State no later than January 30, 2019. 
(Ord. # 2018-24 ,  3) 
9-2 - CAMPAIGN CODE.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1976-1, 1981-29, 1987-11, 1987-46, 1989-42, 1995-7. 

9-2.1 - Title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Campaign Code." 
(Ord. #1998-41,  1; Ord. #2005-14,  24) 
9-2.2 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the public policy of the city of Santa Fe: 
A.  That public confidence in municipal government is essential and must be promoted by all possible means; 
B.  That political campaign contributions and expenditures be fully disclosed to the public and that secrecy in the sources and application of such contributions be avoided; 
C.  That the public's right to know how political campaigns are financed far outweighs any right that this matter remain secret and private; and 
D.  That the public interest is served by encouraging the widest participation of the public in the electoral process by reducing the dependence of candidates on large contributions. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  2) 
9-2.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in the Campaign Code: 
A.  Anonymous contribution means a contribution for which any of the information required to be recorded or reported by the Campaign Code is unknown to the persons who are required to record or report it. 
B.  Ballot proposition means any measure, amendment or other question submitted to, or proposed for submission to, a popular vote at a Santa Fe election. 
C.  Campaign depository means a bank, mutual savings bank, savings and loan association or credit union doing business in this state under which a campaign account or accounts are maintained. 
D.  Campaign finance statement means a report of all contributions received and expenditures made according to a form prescribed by the city clerk which, when completed and filed, provides the information required in the sections to follow. 
E.  Campaign materials means any published communication, electronic or otherwise, disseminated to more than one hundred (100) persons that either supports the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or candidates or supports the approval or defeat of a ballot proposal, other than communications to, or editorials, reports, or commentary by news media. 
F.  Campaign treasurer and deputy campaign treasurer means the individual who is responsible for keeping the financial records of the political committee or candidate (the candidate may be their own campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer). 
G.  Candidate means any individual who seeks election to a Santa Fe municipal office. An individual shall be a candidate when they: 
(1)  Announce publicly; 
(2)  File for office; 
(3)  When contributions are accepted or expenditures made; or 
(4)  Any activity is held to promote an election campaign of an individual if that activity is endorsed or supported by that person or if the benefits of such activity are later accepted by such person. 
H.  Charity means an organization that is exempted from federal taxation by Title 26 United States Code, Section 501(c)(3). 
I.  Contribution means a loan, loan guarantee, gift, advance, pledge, contract, agreement or promise of money or anything of value or other obligation, whether or not these items are legally enforceable, made directly or indirectly, to a candidate or political committee, or to a person obligated to file a report under subsection 9-2.6 SFCC 1987, for the purpose of supporting the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or the approval or defeat of a ballot proposition. 
(1)  The term "contribution" includes: 
(a)  The transfer of funds or anything of value between political committees; 
(b)  The transfer of anything of value for less than full consideration; 
(c)  Interest, dividends or other income derived from the investment of campaign funds; 
(d)  The payment for the services of an individual serving on behalf of a candidate or political committee, which payments are made by a third party; 
(e)  The purchase of tickets for fundraising events such as dinners, rallies, raffles, etc., and the proceeds of collections at fundraising events; and 
(f)  A coordinated expenditure. 
(2)  The term "contribution" does not include a volunteer's personal services provided without compensation or the travel or personal expenses of such a campaign worker. 
J.  Contributor means: 
(1)  Individual contributor means an individual who makes a contribution from their personal assets which are not those of a business, corporation, partnership, labor organization, unincorporated association or political committee. 
(2)  Business or organizational contributor means an individual who uses the assets of a business, corporation, partnership, labor organization, unincorporated association or political committee as a contribution, or any business, corporation, partnership, labor organization, unincorporated association or political committee which makes a contribution. 
K.  Coordinated expenditure means an expenditure made: 
(1)  By an individual or entity other than a candidate or the candidate's political committee; and 
(2)  In cooperation, consultation or concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candidate, his/her representatives or agents or the candidate's political committee, including but not limited to, the following examples in subsections 9-2.3(K)(2)(a)-(d) SFCC 1987: 
(a)  There has been substantial discussion between the individual or entity making the expenditure and the candidate, candidate's political committee, or his/her representatives or agents. Substantial discussion includes, but is not limited to, an exchange of campaign strategies, polling information, voter lists or any other similar information that would facilitate the election or defeat of a candidate. 
(b)  An entity making the expenditure is directly or indirectly formed or established by or at the request or suggestion of, or with the encouragement of the candidate, candidate's political committee, or his/her representatives or agents; 
(c)  The candidate, candidate's political committee or his/her representatives or agents has solicited funds or engaged in other fundraising activities on behalf of the person or entity making the expenditure during the twelve-month period preceding the date of the expenditure. Fundraising activities include, but are not limited to, exchanging names of potential donors or other lists to be used in engaging in fundraising activity, regardless of whether or not the individual or entity pays fair market value for the names or lists provided; or being a featured guest or speaker at a fundraising event for the benefit of the entity making the expenditure. 
(d)  If the individual or entity making the expenditure has employed, has in a leadership position, or has accepted a donation of the campaign related professional services of any person, who, during the twelve-month period preceding the date of the expenditure, has been an employee of, has advised, or provided or is providing services to the candidate or candidate's political committee. These services include, but are not limited to, any services in support of the candidate's or candidate's political committee's campaign activities, such as advertising, message, strategy or policy services, polling, allocation of resources, fundraising or campaign operations. 
(e)  An expenditure is not a coordinated expenditure solely because: 
(i)  The individual or entity and a candidate or candidate's political committee use the same vendor to provide polling services, printing or distribution services or physical space, provided that the vendor has in place prior to the expenditure a firewall to ensure that there is no exchange of information between the individual or entity and the candidate or campaign committee. Evidence of an adequate firewall is a vendor's formal written policy or a contractual agreement with the vendor prohibiting the exchange of information between the individual or entity and the candidate or candidate's political committee, which policy or contract is distributed to all relevant employees, consultants, and clients affected by the policy or contract. The firewall shall be designed and implemented to prohibit the flow of information between employees and consultants providing services to the individual and entity and to those currently or previously providing services to the candidate or candidate's political committee. Coordination will be presumed in the absence of such a firewall; or 
(ii)  The individual or entity making the expenditure interviews a candidate; has endorsed a candidate; has obtained from the candidate a biography of the candidate or a position paper, press release, or similar material about the candidate; has invited the candidate to make an appearance before the person's members, employees or shareholders; or has shared space with a candidate or candidate's political committee for one (1) or more single events of limited duration. 
L.  Election means any regular or special Santa Fe municipal election. 
M.  Expenditure means a payment or transfer of anything of value in exchange for goods, services, property, facilities or anything of value for the purpose of supporting or opposing the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or the approval or defeat of a ballot proposition. This includes contributions, subscriptions, distributions, loans, advances, deposits, or gifts of money or anything of value, and includes a contract, a promise or agreement, whether or not legally enforceable, to make an expenditure. The term "expenditure" also means the transfer of funds or anything of value between political committees. 
N.  Political committee means any entity formed for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Raising or collecting, and expending or contributing money or anything of value for supporting the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or candidates or for supporting the approval or defeat of ballot propositions; or 
(2)  Coordinating or cooperating in efforts to support the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or of supporting the approval or defeat of any ballot proposition. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  3; Ord. #2005-14,  25; Ord. #2007-11,  5; Ord. #2009-10,  2; Ord. #2013-28,  1; Ord. #2014-2,  1; Ord. #2014-12,  3; Ord. #2015-23,  1) 
9-2.4 - Familiarity with Campaign Code. 
A.  Each potential candidate obtaining a form for the declaration of candidacy from the city clerk's office as required by Section 3-8-27 NMSA 1978 shall acknowledge in writing receipt and familiarity with the provisions of the Campaign Code and agree to abide by the code's requirements without waiving any legal rights to challenge. 
B.  Refusal to sign said acknowledgement shall not preclude a potential candidate from seeking office, but failure to do so will be made public information. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  27) 
9-2.5 - Identification of campaign material. 
A.  Campaign materials disseminated or communicated by a candidate shall conspicuously identify the name of the candidate and campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer. 
B.  Campaign materials disseminated or communicated by a political committee shall conspicuously identify the name of an officer or other responsible person of the political committee sponsoring such materials. 
C.  Any candidate, or person acting on behalf of a candidate, shall not willfully steal, destroy, or damage another candidate's campaign materials. 
D.  Written, printed or posted materials shall also show a telephone contact number. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  4; Ord. #2005-14,  28; Ord. #2007-11,  6; Ord. #2009-10,  3; Ord. #2013-28,  2; Ord. #2015-23,  2) 
9-2.6 - Independently sponsored campaign communications and reporting. 
A.  Any person or entity that makes expenditures of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more in the aggregate during a single election to pay for any form of public communication including print, broadcast, cable or electronic advertising, billboards, signs, pamphlets, mass mailers, mass electronic mail, recorded phone messages, organized phone-banking or organized precinct-walking, that is disseminated to one hundred (100) or more eligible voters, and that either expressly advocates the election or defeat of a candidate, or the approval or defeat of a ballot proposition; or refers to a clearly identifiable candidate or ballot proposition within sixty (60) days before an election at which the candidate or proposition is on the ballot, shall thereafter, on each of the days prescribed for the filing of campaign finance statements, file with the city clerk a report of all such expenditures made and all contributions received for the purpose of paying for such expenditures on or before the date of the report and which have not been previously reported. Each report shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city clerk. Contributions shall be specified by date, amount of contribution, name, address and occupation of the person or entity from whom the contribution was made. No contribution shall be reported in the name of a person who is not the actual contributor or who has been or will be reimbursed or compensated for the contribution by another person. The president, chief executive officer or equivalent position shall certify on the filing that its expenditures were or were not made in cooperation, consultation or concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candidate, his/her representatives or agents or the candidate's political committee. Expenditures shall be specified by date, the amount of the expenditure, the name and address of the person or entity where an expenditure was made and the purpose of the expenditure. No report is required under this subsection for expenditures made exclusively for communications to the news media, editorials, reports or commentary by the news media, impartial candidate forums or debates or the announcements thereof, or for impartial voter guides allowed by the Internal Revenue Code for Section 501(c)(3) organizations or a communication by a membership organization or corporation to its current members, stockholders or executive or administrative personnel unless the membership organization or corporation is a campaign committee or a political committee. 
B.  Any person or entity that has to file under this subsection and receives contributions from another entity that does not have to disclose its contributors to the city clerk, shall place the following visible disclosure on its campaign materials: "This campaign material is supported in part by donations from an organization that is not required to disclose its contributors to the Santa Fe city clerk. 
C.  Contributions shall be specified by date, amount of contribution, name, address and occupation of the person or entity from whom the contribution was made. The name of the president, chief executive officer or equivalent position and the address of the entity shall be stated in the report. 
D.  Expenditures shall be specified by date, the amount of the expenditure, the name and address of the person or entity where an expenditure was made and the purpose of the expenditure. The name of the president, chief executive officer or equivalent position and the address of the entity shall be stated in the report. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  29; Ord. #2007-11,  7; Ord. #2013-28,  3; Ord. #2015-23,  3) 
9-2.7 - Statement of political committee organization. 
A.  Every political committee shall file a statement of organization with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the earlier of the following, but in no event later than the date on which a political committee contracts for or initiates the dissemination of any campaign materials: 
(1)  Its organization; or 
(2)  The date on which it receives or has information which causes it to anticipate that it will receive contributions or will make expenditures in any election campaign. 
B.  The statement of organization shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, street address, city, county, state, zip code and telephone number of the political committee; 
(2)  The full name, street address, city, county, state and telephone number of each firm, association, partnership, business trust, corporation, company, committee, and other organization or group of individuals with which the political committee is affiliated or connected or with which it coordinated or cooperated in its efforts to support the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate; 
(3)  The names, addresses and titles of its officers; or if it has no officers, the names, addresses and titles of its responsible leaders; 
(4)  The full names, addresses and telephone number (home and business) of its campaign treasurer and campaign depository; 
(5)  The full name of each candidate whom the political committee is supporting or opposing; 
(6)  The ballot proposition concerned, if any, and whether the political committee is in favor of or opposed to such proposition; and 
(7)  What distribution of surplus funds will be made upon dissolution. 
C.  Any material change in information previously submitted to the city clerk shall be reported to the city clerk within ten (10) days of such change. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  5; Ord. #2005-14,  30; Ord. #2007-11,  8; Ord. #2009-10,  4) 
9-2.8 - Appointment of campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer and designation of depository by candidate. 
A.  Each candidate, within two (2) weeks after becoming a candidate, and each political committee, at the time it is required to file a statement of organization, shall designate and file with the city clerk the names and addresses of: 
(1)  One (1) legally competent individual, who may be the candidate, to serve as campaign treasurer and in addition any appointed deputy campaign treasurer(s); and 
(2)  The campaign depository. 
B.  A candidate, political committee, campaign treasurer, or deputy campaign treasurer may appoint as many deputy campaign treasurers as is considered necessary. The candidate or political committee shall file the names and addresses of any deputy campaign treasurers with the city clerk on the next business day after their appointment. 
C.  A candidate or political committee may at any time remove a campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer or change a designated campaign depository. In the event of the death, resignation, removal, or change of a campaign treasurer, deputy campaign treasurer, or depository, the candidate or political committee shall designate and file with the city clerk within ten (10) days after such designation, the name and address of any successor. 
D.  No contribution and no expenditure shall be accepted or made by or on behalf of a candidate or political committee unless there is a depository and either a campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer in office. A candidate is deemed to be their own campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer until or unless they appoint another person to that office. No expenditure shall be made by or on behalf of a candidate or political committee without the authorization of the treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  6; Ord. #2005-14,  31; Ord. #2007-11,  9) 
9-2.9 - Campaign treasurer; deputy campaign treasurer; duties. 
A.  The campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall keep a true and full record of contributions and expenditures. The record of contributions and expenditures required to be kept under the terms of the Campaign Code and the Public Campaign Finance Code shall reflect the requirements in subsection 9-2.11 SFCC 1987 and Section 9-3 SFCC 1987, respectively. 
B.  The campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall maintain: 
(1)  Receipts reflecting the purpose of each expenditure and the day and method of payment; and 
(2)  All campaign bank records, including deposit slips and canceled checks. 
C.  The campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall not accept anonymous contributions. Any such contribution received by the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall, within seven (7) days of receipt, be donated to a charity or to the city's general fund. The campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall keep a record of the amount and date of receipt of any such contributions and of the disposition that was made of the contribution, including the date when it was donated to the city or to a charity and the identity of the recipient of the donation. 
D.  Records required to be kept by the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer under the terms of paragraph A of this subsection, shall be filed with the city clerk as part of the public record, shall be provided to the ethics and campaign review board set forth in Section 6-16, SFCC 1987 upon request and may be inspected by the public during usual business hours, Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. 
E.  Records kept by the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall be made current not more than seven (7) days after the date of a contribution or of an expenditure. During the eight (8) days immediately preceding the date of any election for which the political committee has received any contributions or made any expenditures, the books of the account shall be kept current within one (1) business day. 
F.  The campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall preserve books of accounts, bills, receipts and all other financial records of the campaign or political committee for two (2) calendar years following the year in which the transaction occurred. 
G.  The campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall deposit within five (5) business days after receipt all monetary contributions received by a candidate, political committee, campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer in the campaign depository designated for that purpose. 
H.  Campaign funds shall be used and distributed as follows: 
(1)  All contributions received shall be under the custody of the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer and shall be segregated from, and not be commingled with, the personal funds of an individual, group or political committee. Contributions shall be used exclusively to pay expenses incurred in furtherance of the candidate's campaign, and shall not be used for any other purpose, including: 
(a)  The candidate's personal living expenses or compensation to the candidate; 
(b)  A contribution to the campaign of another candidate or to a political party or political committee or to a campaign supporting or opposing a ballot proposition; 
(c)  An expenditure supporting the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or the passage or defeat of a ballot proposition; or 
(d)  Any gift or transfer for which compensating value is not received, other than a donation or distribution permitted by this subsection at the conclusion of an election. 
(2)  Any campaign contributions remaining unspent and any tangible assets with an estimated resale value greater than two hundred dollars ($200.00) that were purchased with such contributions and remain in the possession of the campaign at the conclusion of an election shall be distributed for the following purposes: 
(a)  Expenditures of the campaign; 
(b)  Donations to the city's general fund or, in the case of tangible assets, to the city for its use or disposition in accordance with the city's procurement code. Proceeds from such disposition shall be deposited in the city's general fund; 
(c)  Donations to charities; or 
(d)  Disbursements to return unused funds to the contributors. 
(3)  All unspent campaign contributions shall be distributed within six (6) months following a municipal election, for any of the purposes listed in this subsection 9-2.9H. All candidates and political committees shall file reports listing the date, amount and recipient of each post-election expenditure, donation or disbursement made from campaign funds pursuant to this subsection 9-2.9H. Such report shall be part of the final campaign finance statement that is required by subsection 9-2.10B SFCC 1987. 
I.  A campaign treasurer, deputy campaign treasurer or political committee may invest funds deposited in the campaign account in an account of indebtedness of a financial institution up to the amount of federal deposit insurance; United States bonds or certificates of indebtedness or those of a federal agency; and/or bonds or warrants of the state or any municipal corporation of the state. All interest, dividends, and/or other income derived from the investment and the principal when repaid shall be deposited in the campaign account. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  7; Ord. #2005-14,  32; Ord. #2007-11,  10; Ord. #2009-10,  5; Ord. #2009-43,  1; Ord. #2013-28,  4; Ord. #2013-31  1; Ord. #2015-23,  4) 
9-2.10 - Campaign finance statement required. 
A.  In addition to any statement of organization required pursuant to subsection 9-2.7A. SFCC 1987, each candidate or political committee and their respective campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall file a campaign finance statement of all contributions received and expenditures made to date which report shall be current as of the day immediately preceding the reporting date. Contributions shall be reported as of the date of receipt of cash, checks, pledges, commitments for in-kind contributions, promissory notes or other money instruments regardless of the date of actual cashing or deposit. The report shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city clerk, and shall be filed during the following periods: 
(1)  By 5:00 p.m. on the fortieth day preceding an election in which the candidate is seeking election to an office or in connection with which the political committee has received contributions or made expenditures; 
(2)  By 5:00 p.m. on the twenty-fifth (25th) day preceding such election; 
(3)  By 5:00 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding such election; 
(4)  By 12:00 noon on the Monday preceding such election; 
(5)  Within two (2) weeks following such election; and 
(6)  As required in subsection 9-2.10B SFCC 1987 below. 
B.  The candidate or political committee and their respective campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer shall file a final report no later than six (6) months following a municipal election. Upon submitting a final report there shall be no obligation to make any further reports unless there are outstanding debts. If there are, a report shall be filed every six (6) months until all outstanding debts have been liquidated. 
C.  If a reporting day falls on a weekend, the campaign finance statement shall be filed with the city clerk on the first working day immediately following the weekend. 
D.  Campaign finance statements shall be filed with the city clerk during regular business hours. 
E.  The city clerk is authorized to reject any incomplete campaign finance statements. The city clerk shall notify the candidate or political committee that the campaign finance statement is incomplete. 
F.  Any candidate who withdraws from an election shall be required to file a report at the time of withdrawal. 
G.  The city clerk shall assess a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for unexcused late filing of campaign finance statements. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  8; Ord. #2005-14,  33; Ord. #2007-11,  11; Ord. #2009-10,  6) 
9-2.11 - Campaign finance statement; contents. 
A.  Each campaign finance statement shall be filed in accordance with subsection 9-2.10 SFCC 1987. The initial statement shall begin with the date of the first contribution or expenditure. Subsequent statements shall begin on the day after the end date of the previous reporting period. Statements shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The funds on hand at the beginning of the period. This shall include the cumulative total amount of all contributions and expenditures. This includes, but is not limited to, contributions and expenditures in aid of, or in opposition to, candidates or ballot propositions before they qualify for the ballot and contributions and expenditures following the election; 
(2)  The full name, home address, occupation, name of employer, date of receipt and amount of each contribution received from each individual contributor from whom a contribution in money, goods, materials, services, facilities or anything of value has been received and whether the contribution was received in cash, by check, by credit card, by electronic transfer or otherwise. No contribution shall be reported in the name of a person who is not the actual contributor, or who has been or will be reimbursed or compensated for the contribution by another person. 
(3)  The full name, type of business, physical address, date of receipt and amount of each contribution for each business or organizational contributor, from whom a contribution in money, goods, materials, services, facilities or anything of value has been received, and whether the contribution was received in cash, by check, by credit card, by electronic transfer or otherwise. No contribution shall be reported in the name of a person who is not the actual contributor, or who has been or will be reimbursed or compensated for the contribution by another person. 
(4)  The date of receipt and amount of any anonymous contribution received by the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer and the disposition that was made of each such contribution pursuant to subsection 9-2.9C SFCC 1987, including the date when it was donated to the city or to a charity and the identity of the recipient of the donation. 
(5)  The full name and complete mailing address of each individual or business to whom an expenditure has been made, the purpose of each campaign expenditure and the date each expenditure was made. This report shall be itemized with the total amount paid to each individual or business for the goods, services or facilities provided; 
(6)  The full name of the candidate or political committee and the full name and complete address of the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer; 
(7)  For each contributor, the cumulative total of all contributions made; and 
(8)  Where goods, materials, services, facilities or anything of value other than money is contributed or expended, the monetary value thereof shall be reported at the fair market value. 
B.  Loans of money, property or other things made to a candidate or political committee during the period covered by the campaign finance statement shall be reported separately in the statement, with the following information: 
(1)  The total value of all loans received during the period covered by the campaign finance statement; 
(2)  The full name and address of each lender, the date of the loan, the interest rate and the amount of the loan remaining unpaid; 
(3)  The cumulative total value of all loans received; and 
(4)  The total amount of loans remaining unpaid. 
C.  If a loan has been forgiven or paid by a third person, it shall be reported pursuant to this section. 
D.  Investments made with campaign funds under subsection 9-2.9 SFCC 1987 and interest, dividends and/or other income received shall be reported separately in the statement. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  10; Ord. #2005-14,  34; Ord. #2007-11,  12; Ord. #2009-10,  7; Ord. #2013-28,  5; Ord. #2013-31  2; Ord. #2014-12,  4; Ord. #2015-23,  5) 
9-2.12 - Campaign finance statement; signing. 
    Each campaign finance statement shall be signed under oath and acknowledged by both the campaign treasurer or deputy campaign treasurer and the candidate and shall contain a statement that: 
A.  The campaign finance statement has been prepared with all reasonable diligence and that it is true and complete; however, the campaign finance statement of a candidate for municipal judge is not required to be signed or acknowledged by the candidate. 
B.  A candidate or political committee that receives contributions from another entity that does not have to disclose its contributors to the city clerk, shall indicate as such on the campaign finance statement submitted to the city clerk pursuant to existing reporting requirements. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  11; Ord. #2005-14,  35; Ord. #2013-28,  6; Ord. #2015-23,  6) 
9-2.13 - Campaign finance statement; filing. 
A.  A candidate or political committee is not required to file a campaign finance statement if neither the contributions received nor the expenditures made on behalf of the campaign exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
B.  However, at each of the intervals in which a campaign finance statement is required to be filed, such a candidate or political committee shall file with the city clerk a written declaration under oath to the effect that neither the campaign contributions nor the expenditures of the candidate or political committee have exceeded five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
C.  If contributions received or expenditures made thereafter exceed a sum total of five hundred dollars ($500.00), including contributions received or expenditures made prior to the twentieth day before the election, the candidate or political committee shall file campaign finance statements as required by subsection 9-2.10 SFCC 1987 of the Campaign Code. 
D.  The city clerk shall encourage electronic filing and require posting of all documents generated pursuant to the Campaign Code in an accessible and searchable format to inform and educate the electorate. Such documents include: 
(1)  Statements of organization of candidates and political committees; and 
(2)  Campaign finance statements or other required disclosures. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  12; Ord. #2005-14,  36; Ord. #2007-11,  13) 
9-2.14 - Spending limitations; contribution amounts. 
A.  A candidate may volunteer, to limit the candidate's expenditures to one dollar ($1.00) per registered voter in the city for the mayoral or municipal judgeship or one dollar ($1.00) per registered voter in the applicable district for the city council election. 
B.  A candidate may volunteer to make no contributions to the candidate's own campaign or political committee of personal assets that in aggregate exceeds ten percent (10%) of the applicable expenditure limits for the mayoral or municipal judgeship position. A candidate may volunteer to make no contributions to the candidate's own campaign or political committee of personal assets that in aggregate exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the applicable expenditure limits for the city council position. 
C.  No candidate for council or municipal judge or the candidate's political committee shall accept contributions from any one (1) individual, entity or organization which in the aggregate exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in any one (1) election. 
D.  No candidate for mayor or the candidate's political committee shall accept contributions from any one (1) individual, entity or organization which in the aggregate exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any one (1) election. 
E.  Contributions from any one (1) individual, entity or organization to any elected official or his or her election campaign, which in the aggregate exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) during the two (2) years preceding any official act of the elected official affecting the financial interest of the contributor, are subject to the conflict of interest provisions of subsections 1-7.5 and 1-7.7M SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  13; Ord. #2005-14,  37; Ord. #2009-10,  8; Ord. #2009-43,  1; Ord. #2014-12,  2) 
9-2.15 - Temporary political signs. 
    The following requirements shall apply for political campaign signs: 
A.  No building permit is required. 
B.  Signs shall not be located on or overhang onto public property, including but not limited to, rights-of-way. Signs placed on a curb strip in front of a private residence, with the permission of the owner, are exempt from this section. 
C.  Each candidate shall designate a liaison contact as responsible for the lawful placement and location of political campaign signs. The contact's name and telephone number shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall legibly appear on every political campaign sign. A candidate may be a liaison contact. 
D.  Political campaign signs may be located only on private property, with the consent of the property owner, who may remove any sign placed on such owner's property without permission. 
E.  The city manager shall request candidate liaison contacts to remove their own candidates' unlawful signs within twenty-four (24) hours and upon their failure to do so shall impose a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per sign per day. 
F.  If not removed as directed in paragraph E. above, the city manager shall direct city staff to remove those signs placed on public property or rights-of-way in violation of this section, including the towing of vehicles displaying political campaign signs illegally parked on city property. 
G.  No sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
H.  All political signs shall be removed within five (5) days after the election. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  38; Ord. #2007-11,  14; Ord. #2007-21,  2) 
9-2.16 - Enforcement. 
    The Campaign Code shall be enforced by the ethics and campaign review board pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-16 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  14; Ord. #2005-14,  40) 
9-2.17 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this section shall be ten (10) days after passage and shall only be applied prospectively. 
(Ord. #1998-41,  15; Ord. #2005-14,  41) 
9-2.18 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose of this Campaign Code. 
(Ord. #2005-14,  42) 
9-3 - PUBLIC CAMPAIGN FINANCE CODE. 

9-3.1 - Short title. 
    Section 9-3 SFCC 1987 may be cited as the Public Campaign Finance Code. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  2; Ord. #2011-28,  6) 
9-3.2 - Findings and purposes. 
A.  Findings. The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds and declares that the current system of privately financed campaigns for municipal office: 
(1)  Undermines public confidence in the democratic process and democratic institutions. 
(2)  Creates a danger of undue influence by encouraging elected officials to take money from private interests that are directly affected by governmental actions. 
(3)  Forces candidates to raise increasing amounts of money from interest groups that have a financial stake in matters before Santa Fe city government in order to keep pace with escalating campaign costs. 
(4)  Diminishes elected officials' accountability to their constituents by compelling them to be disproportionately accountable to the contributors who finance their campaigns. 
(5)  Burdens officeholders with the incessant need to raise campaign funds and thus decreases the time available to them to carry out their public responsibilities. 
B.  Purposes. The purposes of the Public Campaign Finance Code are: 
(1)  To strengthen public confidence in the governmental and election processes. 
(2)  To eliminate the danger of undue influence on elected officials caused by the private financing of campaigns. 
(3)  To provide candidates with sufficient resources to communicate with voters without the need to resort to private fund-raising. 
(4)  To increase the accountability of elected officials to the constituents who elect them, as opposed to the contributors who fund their campaigns. 
(5)  To free officeholders from the need to raise campaign money, and thus to allow them more time to carry out their official duties. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  3; Ord. #2011-28,  7) 
9-3.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 
A.  Campaign depository means a bank, mutual savings bank, savings and loan association or credit union doing business in this state under which a campaign account or accounts are maintained. 
B.  Campaign materials means any published communication, electronic or otherwise, disseminated to more than one hundred (100) persons that either supports the election or defeat of any identifiable candidate or candidates or supports the approval or defeat of a ballot proposal, other than communications to, or editorials, reports, or commentary by news media. 
C.  Candidate means any individual who seeks election to a Santa Fe municipal office. An individual shall be a candidate when they: 
(1)  Announce publicly; 
(2)  File for office; 
(3)  When contributions are accepted or expenditures made; or when 
(4)  Any activity is held to promote an election campaign of an individual if that activity is endorsed or supported by that person or if the benefits of such activity are later accepted by such person. 
D.  Contested race means a race in which there are at least two (2) candidates for the office sought. 
E.  Contribution means a loan, loan guarantee, gift, advance, pledge, contract, agreement or promise of money or anything of value or other obligation, whether or not legally enforceable, made directly or indirectly, to a candidate or political committee, or to a person obligated to file a report under subsection 9-2.6 SFCC 1987, for the purpose of supporting or opposing the election of a candidate or the approval or defeat of a ballot proposition. 
(1)  The term "contribution" includes: 
(a)  The transfer of funds or anything of value between political committees; 
(b)  The transfer of anything of value for less than full consideration; 
(c)  Interest, dividends or other income derived from the investment of campaign funds; 
(d)  The payment for the services of an individual serving on behalf of a candidate or political committee, which payments are made by a third party; 
(e)  The purchase of tickets for fundraising events such as dinners, rallies, raffles, etc. and the proceeds of collections at fundraising events; and 
(f)  A coordinated expenditure. 
(2)  The term "contribution" does not include a volunteer's personal services provided without compensation or the travel or personal expenses of such a campaign worker. 
F.  Coordinated expenditure means an expenditure that is made: 
(1)  By an individual or entity other than a candidate or the candidate's political committee; and 
(2)  In cooperation, consultation or concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candidate, his/her representatives or agents or the candidate's political committee, including but not limited to, the following examples in subsections 9-3.3(F)(2)(a)-(d): 
(a)  There has been substantial discussion between the individual or entity and the candidate, candidate's political committee or his/her representatives or agents. Substantial discussion includes, but is not limited to, an exchange of campaign strategies, polling information, voter lists or any other similar information that would facilitate the election or defeat of a candidate; 
(b)  An entity making the expenditure is directly or indirectly formed or established by or at the request or suggestion of, or with the encouragement of the candidate, candidate's political committee or his/her representatives or agents; 
(c)  The candidate, candidate's political committee or his/her representatives or agents has solicited funds or engaged in other fundraising activities on behalf of the person or entity making the expenditure during the twelve-month period preceding the date of the expenditure. Fundraising activities include, but are not limited to, exchanging names of potential donors or other lists to be used in engaging in fundraising activity, regardless of whether or not the individual or entity pays fair market value for the names or lists provided; or being a featured guest or speaker at a fundraising event for the benefit of the entity making the expenditure; 
(d)  If the individual or entity making the expenditure has employed, has in a leadership position, or has accepted a donation of the campaign related professional services of any person, who, during the twelve-month period preceding the date of the expenditure, has been an employee of, has advised, or provided or is providing services to the candidate or candidate's political committee. These services include, but are not limited to, any services in support of the candidate's or candidate's political committee's campaign activities, such as advertising, message, strategy or policy services, polling, allocation of resources, fundraising or campaign operations. 
(e)  An expenditure is not a coordinated expenditure solely because: 
(i)  The individual or entity and a candidate or candidate's political committee use the same vendor to provide polling services, printing or distribution services or physical space, provided that the vendor has in place prior to the expenditure a firewall to ensure that there is no exchange of information between the individual or entity and the candidate or campaign committee. Evidence of an adequate firewall is a vendor's formal written policy or a contractual agreement with the vendor prohibiting the exchange of information between the individual or entity and the candidate or candidate's political committee, which policy or contract is distributed to all relevant employees, consultants and clients affected by the policy or contract. The firewall shall be designed and implemented to prohibit the flow of information between employees and consultants providing services to the individual and entity and to those currently or previously providing services to the candidate or candidate's political committee. Coordination will be presumed in the absence of such a firewall; or 
(ii)  The individual or entity making the expenditure interviews a candidate; has endorsed a candidate; has obtained from the candidate a biography of the candidate or a position paper, press release, or similar material about the candidate; has invited the candidate to make an appearance before the person's members, employees or shareholders; or has shared space with a candidate or candidate's political committee for one (1) or more single events of limited duration. 
G.  Election means any regular or special Santa Fe municipal election. 
H.  Expenditure means a payment or transfer of anything of value in exchange for goods, services, property, facilities or anything of value for the purpose of supporting or opposing the election of a candidate or the approval or defeat of a ballot proposition. This includes contributions, subscriptions, distributions, loans, advances, deposits, or gifts of money or anything of value, and includes a contract, a promise or agreement, whether or not legally enforceable, to make an expenditure. The term "expenditure" also means the transfer of funds or anything of value between political committees. 
I.  Fund means the public campaign finance fund created by subsection 9-3.4 SFCC 1987. 
J.  Non-participating candidate means a candidate who is not a participating candidate. 
K.  Participating candidate means a candidate who has qualified and has been certified pursuant to subsection 9-3.9 SFCC 1987 as eligible to receive payments from the fund. 
L.  Qualified elector means a person who is registered to vote in the city of Santa Fe. 
M.  Qualified small contribution means a contribution of no more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) made and accepted in compliance with the provisions of subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987. 
N.  Qualifying contribution means a contribution of no more and no less than five dollars ($5.00) that is received from a qualified elector during the qualifying period by a candidate seeking to become a participating candidate. A candidate for councilor shall only receive qualifying contributions from qualified electors registered to vote in the council district in which the candidate is running. 
O.  Qualifying period means the period during which a candidate seeking to become a participating candidate is permitted to collect qualifying contributions and to apply for certification as a participating candidate. It begins one hundred eighty-three (183) days before the election and ends one hundred six (106) days before the election. 
P.  Race means the electoral process in which one (1) or more candidates run and one (1) candidate is elected to the office of mayor, municipal judge or city councilor for a particular district. 
Q.  Seed money contribution means a contribution of no more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) made and accepted in compliance with the provisions of subsection 9-3.6 SFCC 1987 and used exclusively for the purposes specified in that section. 
R.  Uncontested race means a race in which there is only one (1) candidate for the office sought. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  4; Ord. #2011-28,  8; Ord. #2013-28,  7; Ord. #2014-2  2; Ord. #2015-22,  1; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  1) 
9-3.4 - Public campaign finance fund. 
A.  A dedicated public campaign finance fund ("the fund") is established to be administered by the city clerk for the purpose of providing public financing for the election campaigns of participating candidates. Monies in the fund and disbursed from the fund to participating candidates are public monies entrusted to the candidates to be used solely for the public purposes specified in this Section 9-3 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Each fiscal year, the sum of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) shall be budgeted for and deposited in the fund. 
C.  The governing body shall appropriate and deposit in the fund such additional sums, if any, as may be necessary to ensure: 
(1)  That the balance in the fund one hundred nineteen (119) days preceding each election for mayor and four (4) council seats is at least six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000.00); and 
(2)  That the balance in the fund one hundred nineteen (119) days preceding each election for municipal judge and four (4) council seats is at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). 
D.  In addition to the deposits required by paragraphs B. and C. of this subsection, the following shall also be deposited in the fund: 
(1)  All seed money contributions received by candidates seeking to become certified as participating candidates which remain unspent; 
(2)  All qualifying contributions received by candidates seeking to become certified as participating candidates; 
(3)  All amounts paid from the fund to participating candidates which have not been spent or obligated as of the date of the election; 
(4)  All fines levied by the ethics and campaign review board or as decreed by a court of competent jurisdiction as a condition of probation; 
(5)  Voluntary donations made to the fund; 
(6)  All interest and other income earned from investment of the fund; and 
(7)  Such other appropriations to the fund as may be made by the governing body as necessary to fulfill the requirements of this Section 9-3 SFCC 1987. 
E.  A deposit to the fund pursuant to paragraph B. of this subsection shall not be made if the balance in the fund prior to the deposit exceeds eight hundred thousand dollars ($800,000.00). If a deposit to the fund pursuant to paragraph B. of this subsection would cause the balance in the fund to exceed eight hundred thousand dollars ($800,000.00), only so much of the deposit shall be made as will increase the balance to that amount and no more. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  5; Ord. #2011-28,  9; Ord. #2016-36; Ord. # 2018-5 ,  1; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  2) 
9-3.5 - Eligibility as a participating candidate. 
    Any candidate for municipal office may qualify as a participating candidate eligible to receive payments from the fund pursuant to subsections 9-3.10 and 9-3.13 SFCC 1987 if the candidate: 
A.  Meets the requisites to be listed on the ballot as a certified candidate for municipal office pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-8-27(B) through (E) NMSA 1978 and Article IV, Section 4.03 of the Santa Fe Municipal Charter; 
B.  Has collected the requisite number of qualifying contributions, as follows: 
(1)  For a candidate running for the office of mayor, six hundred (600) qualifying contributions from separate qualified electors; 
(2)  For a candidate running for the office of city councilor, one hundred fifty (150) qualifying contributions from separate qualified electors registered to vote in the council district in which the candidate is running; 
(3)  For a candidate running for the office of municipal judge, one hundred fifty (150) qualifying contributions from separate qualified electors. 
C.  Submits an application for certification pursuant to subsection 9-3.8 SFCC 1987 setting forth the agreement and the averments and accompanied by the forms, reports and payments that are required by that section. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  6; Ord. #2011-28,  11; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  3) 
9-3.6 - Seed money contributions. 
A.  A candidate seeking to become a participating candidate may solicit and accept seed money contributions to defray expenses incurred in obtaining qualifying contributions and in seeking certification as a participating candidate. 
B.  The aggregate amount of seed money contributions from any one contributor to any one candidate shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the aggregate amount of seed money contributions accepted by a candidate shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount payable under subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987 to a candidate in a contested election for the office sought. 
C.  Each seed money contribution shall be accompanied by a form signed by the contributor, which shall include the contributor's name, home address, telephone number, occupation and name of employer. The ethics and campaign review board may, by regulation, permit the use of an electronic signature on such forms. 
D.  No person shall knowingly make and no candidate shall knowingly receive a seed money contribution which is not from the person named on the form or for which the person named on the form has been or will be reimbursed or compensated by another person. 
E.  All seed money contributions received by a candidate shall be deposited in a non-interest-bearing account in a campaign depository to be established by the candidate before soliciting or accepting any such contributions. All expenditures of seed money shall be made from the campaign depository. 
F.  Seed money contributions shall be used only for the purposes specified in paragraph A. of this subsection, and all seed money contributions that have not been spent or used for such purposes by the time the candidate applies for certification as a participating candidate or by the end of the qualifying period, whichever is sooner, shall then be paid over to the city clerk for deposit in the fund; provided, however, that if payment of all of the candidate's unspent seed money to the city clerk would cause the bank account in the campaign depository to be closed, an amount of seed money necessary to keep the account open may be temporarily retained in the account and paid over to the city clerk at a later time in compliance with paragraph C. of subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  7; Ord. #2011-28,  11; Ord. #2013-28,  8; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  4, 12) 
9-3.7 - Qualifying contributions. 
A.  Each qualifying contribution shall be accompanied by a form signed by the contributor, which shall include the contributor's name, registered address and telephone number. The ethics and campaign review board may, by regulation, permit the use of an electronic signature on such forms. 
B.  No candidate or person acting on a candidate's behalf shall pay to any other person any form of compensation for soliciting or obtaining a qualifying contribution. 
C.  No person shall knowingly make and no candidate shall knowingly receive a qualifying contribution which is not from the person named on the form or for which the person named on the form has been or will be reimbursed or compensated by another person. 
D.  All qualifying contributions received by a candidate shall be deposited in a non-interest-bearing account in a campaign depository to be established by the candidate before soliciting or accepting any such contributions, and shall be paid over to the city clerk for deposit in the fund when the candidate applies for certification as a participating candidate or when the qualifying period ends, whichever is sooner. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  8; Ord. #2011-28,  12; Ord. #2013-28,  9; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  5) 
9-3.8 - Application for certification as a participating candidate. 
A.  A candidate who wishes to be certified as a participating candidate shall, before the end of the qualifying period, file an application for such certification with the city clerk on a form prescribed by the city clerk. 
B.  The application shall identify the candidate and the office that the candidate is seeking, and shall set forth: 
(1)  The candidate's averment under oath that the candidate satisfies the requisites for qualification and certification as a participating candidate prescribed by subsection 9-3.5 SFCC 1987; 
(2)  The candidate's averment under oath that the candidate has accepted no contributions to the candidate's current campaign other than qualifying contributions and seed money contributions solicited and accepted pursuant to subsections 9-3.6 SFCC 1987 and 9-3.7 SFCC 1987; 
(3)  The candidate's averment under oath that the candidate has made no expenditures for his or her current campaign from any source other than seed money contributions; and 
(4)  The candidate's agreement that his or her current campaign will not solicit, direct or accept any further contributions or make any further expenditures from any sources other than payments received from the fund pursuant to subsections 9-3.10 and 9-3.13 SFCC 1987 and qualified small contributions received pursuant to subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Reports listing all seed money contributions and qualifying contributions received by the candidate and all expenditures of seed money contributions made by the candidate, and showing the aggregate amounts of all such contributions and expenditures and the aggregate amounts of all contributions received from each contributor; 
(2)  Copies of forms signed by contributors for all seed money contributions and qualifying contributions received by the candidate; and 
(3)  A check or checks issued to the city of Santa Fe from the candidate's campaign depository for the amount of all qualifying contributions received by the candidate and all seed money contributions received by the candidate except: 
(a)  Amounts previously spent for the purposes specified in paragraph A of subsection 9-3.6 SFCC 1987; and 
(b)  The amount, if any, that has been temporarily retained by the candidate for the purpose of keeping open the bank account in the campaign depository pursuant to paragraph E. of subsection 9-3.6 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  9; Ord. #2011-28,  13; Ord. #2013-28,  10; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  6) 
9-3.9 - Certification as a participating candidate. 
A.  On or before the eighty-ninth (89th) day before the election the city clerk shall make a determination whether the candidate's application complies with the requirements of subsection 9-3.8 SFCC 1987 and whether the candidate satisfies the requisites for certification as a participating candidate prescribed by subsection 9-3.5 SFCC 1987, and shall thereupon issue a decision, in accordance with the determination so made, granting or refusing such certification to the candidate. 
B.  The city clerk may revoke a candidate's certification as a participating candidate for any violation by the candidate of the requirements of this section, and may require that any candidate whose certification has been revoked to pay over to the city clerk for deposit in the fund any amounts previously paid to the candidate pursuant to subsections 9-3.10 and 9-3.13 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  10; Ord. #2011-28,  14; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  7) 
9-3.10 - Payments to participating candidates. 
A.  Within three (3) business days of certifying a candidate as a participating candidate, the city clerk shall disburse to the candidate from the fund: 
(1)  Sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) for a candidate in a contested race for the office of mayor; 
(2)  Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for a candidate in a contested race for the office of city councilor; 
(3)  Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for a candidate in a contested race for the office of municipal judge; or 
(4)  For a candidate in an uncontested race, ten percent (10%) of the amount that would be due to a candidate in a contested race for the same office. 
B.  If the amounts required to be paid to candidates under paragraph A of this subsection exceed the total amount available in the fund, each payment shall be reduced in proportion to the amount of such excess. Any such proportionate reduction in the payment due to any candidate under paragraph A of this subsection shall give the candidate the option to reject the payment and to withdraw as a participating candidate. A candidate who withdraws as a participating candidate pursuant to this paragraph shall file an affidavit with the city clerk so stating and shall thenceforth be treated for all purposes as a non-participating candidate relieved of all obligations and restrictions and excluded from all benefits and exemptions imposed or conferred on a participating candidate by this Section 9-3 SFCC 1987. 
C.  Within five (5) business days of the candidate's receipt of the amount disbursed under paragraph A of this subsection or the city clerk's refusal to certify the candidate as a participating candidate pursuant to paragraph A. of subsection 9-3.9 SFCC 1987, whichever is sooner, the candidate shall pay over to the city clerk for deposit in the fund any amount of seed money that has been temporarily retained by the candidate for the purpose of keeping open the bank account in the campaign depository pursuant to paragraph E. of subsection 9-3.6 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  11; Ord. #2011-28,  15; Ord. #2013-28,  11; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-3.11 - Use of payments from the fund. 
A.  All payments received by a participating candidate from the fund shall be deposited in a separate non-interest-bearing account in the candidate's campaign depository and shall be used exclusively to pay expenses reasonably incurred in furtherance of the candidate's current campaign. 
B.  Payments received from the fund shall not be used for any other purpose, including: 
(1)  The candidate's personal living expenses or compensation to the candidate or the candidate's family; 
(2)  A contribution to another campaign of the candidate or a payment to retire debt from another such campaign; 
(3)  A contribution to the campaign of another candidate or to a political party or political committee or to a campaign supporting or opposing a ballot proposition; 
(4)  An expenditure supporting the election of another candidate or the approval or defeat of a ballot proposition or the defeat of any candidate other than an opponent of the participating candidate; 
(5)  Payment of legal expenses or any fine levied by a court or the ethics and campaign review board; 
(6)  Any gift or transfer for which compensating value is not received; 
(7)  Reimbursement to the candidate or any other person for campaign expenditures made from personal funds or with a personal credit card. 
C.  All payments from the fund received by a participating candidate which have not been spent or obligated for the purposes specified in paragraph A of this subsection and any electronic, telecommunication or computer tangible assets purchased with such payments remaining in the possession of the campaign as of the date of the election shall be returned by the candidate and shall be conveyed to the city clerk within forty-five (45) days after that date. Returned payments shall be deposited in the fund. Tangible assets shall be conveyed to the city for its use or disposition in accordance with the city's procurement code. Proceeds from such disposition shall be deposited in the fund. 
D.  In accordance with the agreement entered into pursuant to subparagraph B(4) of subsection 9-3.8 SFCC 1987, a candidate who has been certified as a participating candidate shall not thereafter accept any contribution to the candidate's campaign other than payments received from the fund pursuant to subsections 9-3.10 and 9-3.13 SFCC 1987 and qualified small contributions received pursuant to subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987, and shall not make any expenditure in support of the candidate's campaign from any source other than payments and contributions so received and previously deposited in the candidate's campaign depository. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  12; Ord. #2011-28,  16; Ord. #2013-28,  12; Ord. #2015-22,  2; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  8) 
9-3.12 - Qualified small contributions. 
A.  A participating candidate may solicit and accept qualified small contributions beginning on the date on which the candidate is certified as a participating candidate pursuant to subsection 9-3.9(A) SFCC 1987. 
B.  The aggregate amount of qualified small contributions from any one contributor to any one candidate shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
C.  The aggregate amount of qualified small contributions accepted by a participating candidate shall not exceed: 
(1)  For a candidate for mayor, fifty percent (50%) of the amount initially paid to the candidate pursuant to subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987; and 
(2)  For a candidate for council or municipal judge, twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount initially paid to the candidate pursuant to subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987. 
D.  Each qualified small contribution shall be accompanied by a form signed by the contributor, which shall include the contributor's name, home address, telephone number, occupation and name of employer. The ethics and campaign review board may, by regulation, permit the use of an electronic signature on such forms. 
E.  No person shall knowingly make and no candidate shall knowingly receive a qualified small contribution which is not from the person named on the form or for which the person named on the form has been or will be reimbursed or compensated by another person. 
F.  Before soliciting or accepting qualified small contributions, a candidate shall appoint a treasurer and establish a campaign depository in the manner required by subsection 9-2.8 SFCC 1987. All qualified small contributions received by a candidate shall be recorded by the candidate's campaign treasurer, deposited in a separate non-interest-bearing account in the campaign depository and used in the candidate's campaign or disposed of following the election in the manner required by subsection 9-2.9 SFCC 1987. All such contributions shall be timely reported in a campaign finance statement prepared in the manner required by subsections 9-2.10 through 9-2.12 SFCC 1987 and filed on the dates required by subsection 9-2.10 SFCC 1987. Campaign finance statements reporting the receipt of qualified small contributions shall be accompanied by copies of the forms signed by each contributor pursuant to paragraph D. of this subsection. 
(Ord. # 2018-28 ,  9) 
9-3.13 - Additional reports of qualified small contributions; additional matching payments from the fund. 
A.  In addition to filing the campaign finance statements required by subsection 9-3.12(F) SFCC 1987, a participating candidate may file one additional campaign finance statement reporting the receipt of qualified small contributions on the fifty-seventh (57th) day preceding the election. 
B.  Within two (2) business days after the filing of a campaign finance statement by a participating candidate reporting the receipt of qualified small contributions and accompanied by copies of the forms signed by the contributors as required by paragraph D. of subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987, the city clerk shall disburse to the candidate an additional payment from the fund equal to the total amount of the qualified small contributions reported in the campaign finance statement; provided, however, that no such additional matching payments shall be made for contributions reported in a campaign finance statement filed after the twenty-fifth (25th) day preceding the election. 
C.  Additional payments made to a participating candidate pursuant to paragraph B. of this subsection shall be deposited in the separate account in the candidate's campaign depository that was established by the candidate for the deposit of payments received from the fund pursuant to paragraph A. of subsection 9-3.11. 
D.  The aggregate amount of additional payments made to a participating candidate pursuant to paragraph B. of this subsection shall not exceed: 
(1)  For a candidate for mayor, fifty percent (50%) of the amount initially paid to the candidate pursuant to subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987; and 
(2)  For a candidate for city council or municipal judge, twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount initially paid to the candidate pursuant to subsection 9-3.10 SFCC 1987. 
E.  If the amounts required to be paid to candidates under paragraph B. of this subsection exceed the total amount available in the fund, each payment shall be reduced in proportion to the amount of such excess. 
(Ord. # 2018-28 ,  10) 
9-3.14 - Reports of expenditures; exemption from certain reporting requirements. 
A.  A participating candidate shall file with the city clerk reports under oath of expenditures made from the payments received from the fund, indicating that the expenditures were made from that source and showing the date and amount of each such expenditure, the name and address of the person or organization to whom it was made, the purpose of the expenditure, the aggregate amount of such expenditures made to each person or organization and the aggregate amount of all such expenditures made by the candidate or by his or her campaign. A copy of each receipt, printed on 81/2-inch by 11-inch paper, shall be filed with the city clerk with the reports provided for in this subsection. Each report shall be accompanied by a copy of the most recent bank statement for the separate account established by the candidate for the deposit of payments from the fund pursuant to paragraph A. of subsection 9-3.11 SFCC 1987. Within ninety (90) days after the election, the candidate shall file a copy of a final bank statement showing that all funds in the account have been expended or returned to the city in the manner required by paragraphs A. and C. of subsection 9-3.11 SFCC 1987 and that the account has been closed. 
B.  The reports required by paragraph A. of this subsection shall be filed on each of the days prescribed for the filing of campaign finance statements by subsection 9-2.10 SFCC 1987. 
C.  A campaign finance statement filed by a participating candidate to report qualified small contributions pursuant to paragraph F. of subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987 or paragraph A. of subsection 9-3.13 SFCC 1987 shall also include a report of all expenditures made during the period covered by the statement from the separate account established by the candidate for the deposit of such contributions pursuant to paragraph F. of subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987. The statement shall show that the expenditures were made from that source and shall contain all the information concerning the expenditures, account balances and funds on hand that is required for campaign finance statements filed pursuant to subsection 9-2.11 SFCC 1987. 
D.  Except as provided in paragraphs A. through C. of this subsection, paragraph C. of subsection 9-3.8 SFCC 1987, paragraph F. of subsection 9-3.12 SFCC 1987 and paragraph A. of subsection 9-3.13 SFCC 1987, participating candidates are exempt from the requirement to file campaign finance statements imposed by subsections 9-2.10 SFCC 1987 through 9-2.12 SFCC 1987 and from the requirements to file campaign records with the city clerk imposed by paragraph D. of subsection 9-2.9 SFCC 1987; provided, however, that campaign records shall be maintained in the manner required by the applicable provisions of the Campaign Code (Section 9-2 SFCC 1987) and shall be made available upon request to the city clerk and the ethics and campaign review board. 
E.  Seed money and qualifying contribution reports, campaign finance statements and contribution and expenditure reports of a candidate for municipal judge are not required to be signed or acknowledged by the candidate. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  15; Ord. #2011-28,  19; Ord. #2013-28,  13; Ord. #2013-31  3; Ord. #2015-22,  3; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  11) 
9-3.15 - Contributions and expenditures to retire debt from previous campaigns. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a candidate shall not be considered ineligible for certification as a participating candidate and shall not be deemed to have violated the provisions of paragraph D. of subsection 9-3.11 SFCC 1987 solely by reason of contributions received or expenditures made to retire debt incurred in the course of a previous campaign in which the candidate was not a participating candidate, provided that any such contribution or expenditure has been made and duly reported in full compliance with the requirements of the Campaign Code (Article 9-2 SFCC 1987). 
(Ord. #2009-44,  16; Ord. #2011-28,  20) 
9-3.16 - Rules and educational materials. 
    The city clerk and the ethics and campaign review board may adopt and publish rules and educational materials explaining and applying the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  17; Ord. #2011-28,  21; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-3.17 - Enforcement and review. 
    This section shall be enforced by the ethics and campaign review board pursuant to the provisions of Section 6-16 SFCC 1987. Any decision of the city clerk under this section is reviewable by the ethics and campaign review board on petition of an aggrieved party. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of any otherwise applicable state criminal or civil statutes, laws or municipal ordinances. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  18; Ord. #2011-28,  22; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-3.18 - Reports and forms. 
A.  All reports and forms that are required by Section 9-3 SFCC 1987 shall be signed under oath and on forms prescribed by the city clerk. 
B.  The city clerk is authorized to reject any incomplete report or form. The city clerk shall notify a participating candidate that the report or form is incomplete. 
C.  The city clerk shall assess a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for unexcused late filing of reports or forms. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  19; Ord. #2011-28,  23; Ord. # 2018-28 ,  12) 
9-3.19 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this section and each of its subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences and clauses are severable. In the event that any such provision is held to be invalid or unenforceable by any judicial or administrative tribunal, it is the intent of the governing body that all other provisions thereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. #2009-44,  20; Ord. #2011-28,  24) 
CHAPTER X - ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 
10-1 - Littering. 

10-1.1 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 10-1.1, Littering on Streets, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance #1959-19,  C; Code 1973,  10-16 and SFCC 1981,  4-3-3 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-7. For additional laws regarding littering see subsection 16-6.4 SFCC 1987. 
10-1.2 - Placing in receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public or private place. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  D; Code 1973,  10-17; SFCC 1981,  4-3-2) 
10-1.3 - Sweeping in gutter; clean sidewalks. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public or private place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk, planter strips and driveways abutting their premises clean and free of litter. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  E, F; Code 1973,  10-18; Ord. #1980-38,  5; SFCC 1981,  4-3-3) 
10-1.4 - Throwing from vehicles. 
    No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter on any private property, any street or other public place within the city. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  G; Code 1973,  10-19; SFCC 1981,  4-3-4) 
10-1.5 - Construction or loading of vehicle. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its load or contents from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other private or public place. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  H; Code 1973,  10-20; SFCC 1981,  4-3-5) 
10-1.6 - Littering in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on any street or other private or public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  I; Code 1973,  10-21; SFCC 1981,  4-3-6) 
10-1.7 - Littering in bodies of water. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, river, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the city. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  J; Code 1973,  10-22; SFCC 1981,  4-3-7) 
10-1.8 - Distribution of handbills on public property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  K; Code 1973,  10-23; SFCC 1981,  4-3-8) 
10-1.9 - Depositing handbills in vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any vehicle. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  L; Code 1973,  10-24; SFCC 1981,  4-3-9) 
10-1.10 - Distribution of handbills on residential premises. 
A.  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on residential premises which are inhabited except as provided herein. No handbill shall be placed on posted premises. In the case of inhabited premises which are not posted, the distributor, unless requested by anyone on the premises not to do so, shall have the authority to place or deposit any noncommercial handbill in or on the inhabited premises if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places; provided, further, that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. No handbills shall be distributed or deposited on vacant property. 
B.  The provisions of this subsection shall neither apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  O; Code 1973,  10-25; SFCC 1981,  4-3-10) 
10-1.11 - Littering from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  P; Code 1973,  10-28; SFCC 1981,  4-3-11) 
10-1.12 - Posting of notices. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other object to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public structure or building except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  Q; Code 1973,  10-29; SFCC 1981,  4-3-12) 
10-1.13 - Receptacles on private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on any private property. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  R; Code 1973,  10-30; SFCC 1981,  4-3-13) 
10-1.14 - Premises to be free from litter and refuse. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall maintain the premises free of litter and refuse; provided, that this subsection shall not prohibit the storage of litter and refuse in authorized private receptacles. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  s; Code 1973,  10-31; SFCC 1981,  4-3-14) 
10-1.15 - Disposition of litter on vacant private property. 
A.  The city manager is authorized to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city, or the agent of the owner, to properly dispose of litter located on the owner's property. Such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to the owner or agent at his last known address or by personal delivery. 
B.  On the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of the litter within five (5) days after receipt of written notice or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the post office, the city manager is authorized to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the city. The cost of removal shall be a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due plus interest and costs. Such lien shall be enforced according to applicable state law. 
(Ord. #1959-19,  U; Code 1973,  10-33; SFCC 1981,  4-3-15) 
10-1.16 - Declaration of nuisance and penalties. 
    The littering of private property, whether it be occupied, inhabited or vacant, by any means whatsoever by the property owner or any other person and the distribution of handbills, unless done pursuant to an exception or exceptions provided for in the ordinances of the city is a violation of city code and punishable as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. In addition, such littering may be determined to be a nuisance and abated as set forth in Section 10-9 SFCC 1987. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  10-34 by Ord. #1975-13; Ord. #1983-66,  1; SFCC 1981;  4-3-16; Ord. 2005-1,  5) 
10-2 - NOISE. 

10-2.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Noise Ordinance". 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-1 by Ord. #1981-10,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-23-1) 
10-2.2 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe to ensure its citizens an environment free from such excessive sound as may jeopardize their health, welfare and safety, or degrade the quality of life. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-2 by Ord. #1981-10,  2; SFCC 1981,  6-23-2) 
10-2.3 - Definitions. 
    All terminology used in this section and not defined below shall be in conformance with the American national standards institute publication, Acoustical Terminology, S1. 1-1960, revised 1971, or other American national standards institute publication. As used in this section: 
    A-weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the "A-weighting" network. The standard notation is db(A) or dBA. 
    Ambient sound pressure level means the sound pressure level of the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of sounds from many sources. It is also the "A-weighted" sound pressure level exceeded ninety percent (90%) of the time based on a measurement period which shall not be less than ten (10) minutes. 
    Boom box means a sound amplifier usually installed in motor vehicles or transported by hand or any other means of conveyance, which transmits excessive noise with a boom-like quality from recorded devices or live radio-transmitted sources and resulting in detectable reverberations. 
    Continuous sound means any sound which exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten (10) minutes or more. 
    Decibel means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as dB. 
    Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces noise when operated or handled. 
    Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Equivalent sound level (Leq) means a level of steady sound which in a stated time period and stated location, has the same A-weighted sound energy as the time varying sound. Leq shall be calculated using approved Federal Highway Administration noise projection models. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from batteries or from overhead trolley wires, but not operated on rails. 
    Muffler means an apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating from such apparatus. 
    Noise means any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which annoys or disturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitivities, or which injures or endangers the public health, welfare or safety. 
    Noise sensitive zone means any land use, including but not limited to, dwellings, residentially zoned properties, schools, day cares, health care facilities, churches, recreational facilities, libraries or similar land use that may have a diminished use when subjected to excessive noise. 
    Percentile sound pressure level includes: 
A.  Tenth percentile noise level which is the "A-weighted" sound pressure level that is exceeded ten percent (10%) of the time in any measurement period, such as the level that is exceeded for a total of over (1) minute in a ten-minute period, and is denoted L10; and 
B.  Ninetieth percentile noise level which is the "A-weighted" sound pressure level that is exceeded ninety percent (90%) of the time in any measurement period, such as the level that is exceeded for a total of nine (9) minutes in a ten-minute period, and is denoted L90. 
    Person means any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user, owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or employees. 
    Plainly audible noise means any noise for which the information content of that noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as but not limited to understanding or spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms. 
    Property boundary means an imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one (1) person from that owned by another person. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity. 
    Retarder means any exhaust and/or engine device used as braking power, to slow down a motor vehicle's rate of speed. 
    Sound means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in a medium with interval forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, output meter and visual display and frequency weighting networks, that is sensitive to pressure fluctuations. The instrument reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated and is of Type II or better, as specified in American National Standards Institute publication, Specifications for Sound Level Meters, ANSI S1. 4-1971. 
    Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space due to sound. 
    Sound pressure level means twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the root mean square to the reference pressure, which shall be twenty (20) micropascals, denoted pressure level (LP) or sound pressure level (SPL). 
    Stationary noise source means any device, fixed or movable, which is located or used on property other than a public right-of-way. 
    Zone district means those districts established by the city zoning ordinances. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-23 by Ord. #1981-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  6-23-3; Ord. #1988-30,  1; Ord. #1994-49,  1; Ord. #2003-10,  1) 
10-2.4 - Noises prohibited. 
A.  In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in paragraph B. below and subsections 10-2.5 and 10-2.9 of this Code, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance within the city limits. 
B.  The following are in violation of this section: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle or other vehicle on any street or public place within the city, except as a danger warning signal as provided in the state Motor Vehicle Code, or the sounding of any such signaling device for an unnecessary period of time. 
(2)  The sounding of any device or piece of equipment, including but not limited to a retarder, which helps slow a motor vehicle's rate of speed (braking power). When activated, a retarder creates noise through the motor vehicle's exhaust system. 
(3)  Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, except as provided for in subparagraph (4) below: 
(a)  Which violates the zone district noise levels set out in subsection 10-2.5, or causes a noise disturbance; 
(b)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property boundary of the source; or 
1)  Is plainly audible at fifty feet (50') or fifteen (15) meters from such device when operated within a vehicle parked on a public right-of-way; or 
2)  Is plainly audible through partitions common to two (2) occupants within a building or structure. 
(4)  Using or operating a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound vehicle in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property for the purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in a manner which violates subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise disturbance, unless a permit is provided by subsection 10-2.8 has been obtained. 
(5)  Operating, or causing to be used or operated, any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto: 
(a)  In residential or commercial zone areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and 
(b)  In any other areas of the city where such operation exceeds the sound level limits for an industrial land use as set forth in subsection 10-2.5. 
(6)  Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment rated five (5) horsepower or less used for home or building repair or grounds maintenance, including but not limited to power saws, sanders, lawn mowers, garden equipment or snow removal equipment, in residential or commercial zoned areas: 
(a)  Outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and 
(b)  Which emits a sound pressure level in excess of eighty (80) dBA measured at a distance of twenty-five feet (25') or seven and five-tenths (7.5) meters. 
(7)  Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment, except construction equipment used for construction activities, rated more than five (5) horsepower, including but not limited to chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers and powered hand tools: 
(a)  In residential or commercial zoned areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and 
(b)  In any other areas of the city, if such equipment emits a sound pressure level in excess of eighty-eight (88) dBA measured at a distance of twenty-five feet (25') or seven and five-tenths (7.5) meters. 
(8)  Operating or permitting to be operated in any place of public entertainment any loudspeaker or other source of sound which produces, at a point that is normally occupied by a customer, maximum sound pressure levels of one hundred (100) dBA as read with the slow response on a sound level meter, unless a conspicuous and legible sign at least two hundred twenty-five (225) square inches in area is posted near each public entrance stating: "WARNING: SOUND LEVELS MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT". This provision shall not be construed to allow the operation of any loudspeaker or other source of sound in such a manner as to violate subsection 10-2.5. 
(9)  Operating or permitting to be operated or used any truck, automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle which, by virtue of disrepair or manner or time of operation, violates subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise disturbance. 
(10)  Operating or causing or permitting to be operated any refuse compacting vehicle which creates a sound pressure level in excess of seventy-nine (79) dBA at twenty-five feet (25') or seven and five-tenths (7.5) meters from the vehicle. 
(11)  Operating or causing or permitting to be operated any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto in a manner which violates subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise disturbance for a consecutive period longer than ten (10) minutes during which such vehicle is stationary in a residential zone. 
(12)  Creating noise in excess of the residential standard as defined in subsection 10-2.5 within the vicinity of any school, hospital, institution of learning, court or other designated area where exceptional quiet is necessary, while the same is in use, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating a quiet zone. 
(13)  Sounding, operating or permitting to sound or operate an electronically amplified signal from any burglar alarm, bell, chime or clock, including but not limited to bells, chimes or clocks in schools, house of religious worship or governmental buildings, which fail to meet the standards set forth in subsection 10-2.5 for more than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour. 
(14)  Operating a recreational vehicle or snowmobile in a manner which violates subsection 10-2.5 or causes a noise disturbance. 
(15)  Playing, operating or permitting the playing or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, tape recorder, cassette player, boom box or other electronic machine or device used for the production or reproduction of amplified sound whether located in a motor vehicle or transported by hand or any other means of conveyance and is being operated in any public street, alley or park, or in commercial or residential parking facilities and which is audible by any person from a distance of twenty-five feet (25') constitutes a public nuisance and is hereby prohibited. Words or phrases need not be discernible. 
C.  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
D.  A first offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) with each subsequent offense punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
E.  Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-4 by Ord. #1981-10,  4; SFCC 1981,  6-23-4; Ord. #1988-30,  2; Ord. #1994-49,  2; Ord. No. 2003-10,  2) 
10-2.5 - Zone district noise levels; maximum; correction. 
A.  It is a violation of this section for any person to operate or permit to be operated any stationary source of sound in such a manner as to create a ninetieth percentile sound pressure level (L90) for a measurement period of ten (10) minutes or more unless otherwise provided in this section, which exceeds the limits set forth for the following receiving zones. The location for measuring exterior sound levels shall be at least one foot (1') inside the property line of the affected property and three to six feet (3' to 6') above ground level and at least four feet (4') from walls and other reflective surfaces. 
Zone District 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Residential 50 dBA 55 dBA R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-7, RC-5, RC-8, RM, RAC, AC, PRC, PRRC, HZ, Mobile Home Park Commercial 55 dBA 60 dBA C-1, C-2, C-4, SC, BCD Industrial-Agricultural 70 dBA 75 dBA I-1, I-2, IP  
    When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one (1) land use category, the limits of the more restrictive use shall apply at the boundaries between different zones. 
B.  It is a violation of this section for any person to operate, or permit to be operated, any stationary source of sound within any area of the city which creates a tenth percentile sound pressure level (L10) of ten (10) dBA greater than the levels set forth for the receiving zones in paragraph A of this subsection for any measurement period. Such measurement period shall not be less than ten (10) minutes. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection, it is a violation of this section for any person to operate or permit to be operated, any stationary source of sound within any area of the city which creates a tenth percentile sound pressure level (L10) greater than fifteen (15) dBA above the ambient sound pressure level (L90) of any measurement period. Such measurement period shall not be less than ten (10) minutes. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-5 by Ord. #1981-10,  5; SFCC 1981,  6-23-5; Ord. #1988-30,  3) 
10-2.6 - Sound level measurement. 
    Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter using the "A-weighting" scale, in accordance with standards promulgated by the American national standards institute or other reasonable standards adopted and tested by the city of Santa Fe city manager or appointed designee. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-6 by Ord. 1981-10,  6; SFCC 1981,  6-23-6; Ord. #1988-30,  4) 
10-2.7 - Exemptions. 
    The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
A.  Noise of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves; 
B.  Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; 
C.  Noise resulting from emergency work; 
D.  Noise resulting from lawful fireworks and noisemakers used for a celebration of an official holiday; and 
E.  Noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law for which a license or permit has been approved by the city manager or appointed designee in accordance with subsection 10-2.8 of this Code. 
F.  Noise resulting from the use of a retarder in an emergency situation. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-7 by Ord. #1981-10,  7; SFCC 1981,  6-23-7; Ord. #1988-30,  5; Ord. #1994-49,  3) 
10-2.8 - Permits. 
A.  Application for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions in this section on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city manager or appointed designee. The application shall be in writing and set forth the conditions as specified in paragraph A(1), (2) or (3) of this subsection entitling the appellant to the relief requested. Any permit granted by the city manager or appointed designee shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including, but not limited to the effective dates, any time of day, location, sound pressure level or equipment limitation. The relief requested may be granted upon good and sufficient showing: 
(1)  That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this section; or 
(2)  That the activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section; and 
(3)  That no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
B.  The city manager or appointed designee may prescribe reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon a community or the surrounding neighborhood. 
C.  Any person denied a permit by the city manager or appointed designee shall have the right to appeal the denial to the governing body. The appeal shall not be entertained unless it is in the form of a verified petition, in writing, filed with the city manager within five (5) calendar days of the denial, setting forth the condition, as specified in paragraph A(1), (2) or (3) of this subsection entitling the appellant to the relief requested. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-8 by Ord. #1981-10,  8, SFCC 1981,  6-23-8; Ord. #1988-30,  6) 
10-2.9 - Motor vehicle noise. 
A.  No persons shall drive, move, cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles in a manner which exceeds the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle shown below. Noise shall be measured at a distance of at least twenty-five feet (25') or seven and five-tenths (7.5) meters from the near side of the nearest lane being monitored and at a height of at least four feet (4') or one and two-tenths (1.2) meters above the immediate surrounding surface: 
Sound Pressure Level, dBA Speed Limit 
45 MPH or Less Speed Limit 
Over 45 MPH Motor vehicles with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle 90 94 Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle 77 81  
B.  This subsection applies to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this section relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control. 
C.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of such vehicle is: 
(1)  Free from defects which affect sound reduction; 
(2)  Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; 
(3)  Not equipped with any cut-out, by-pass or similar device; and 
(4)  Not modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler of the type originally installed on the vehicle. 
D.  The procedures for enforcing the provisions of this subsection are as follows: 
(1)  A violation of this subsection shall be cause for a complaint to be filed with the municipal court of the city; and 
(2)  The violator may decide to effect a repair or bring the vehicle into compliance prior to appearance in court. It will be the responsibility of the violator to arrange retesting of vehicle for compliance and, if it is found in compliance, the violator shall notify the court within twenty-four (24) hours of said compliance. 
E.  In order to implement and enforce this subsection, and for the general purpose of noise abatement, a uniformed police officer shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in him, the power to stop a motor vehicle reasonably suspected of violating any provision of this subsection, and issue a notice of violation or abatement order which may require the motor vehicle to be inspected or tested as the enforcement officer may reasonably require. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-9 by Ord. #1981-10,  9; SFCC 1981,  6-23-9; Ord. #1988-30,  7) 
10-2.10 - New development; street or highway. 
A.  Public or private projects shall be subject to a review process by the city manager or appointed designee in order to determine compliance with this section if such projects are likely to cause sounds in violation of this section. 
B.  Plans for construction of a new street or highway systems or expansion of the capacity of an existing street or highway systems will not be approved where the proposed project, using the twenty (20) year traffic projections, will create equivalent hourly sound level (Leq) readings at critical locations within residential areas or noise sensitive zones above sixty-four (64) dBA Leq, unless the project includes such noise mitigation measures as are determined to be technically and economically feasible and reasonable. Critical locations for noise measurement shall be at any location on residential property where frequent human use occurs or at a point of four feet (4') from the exterior of the building structure on property, other than residential but classified as in a noise sensitive zone. The mitigation measures proposed for the project shall be deemed to be reasonable and feasible if so determined and approved by the city council. Such review by the council will be based upon information submitted on costs, barrier effectiveness and public acceptance of the proposed measures. Provisions of this section shall apply only to streets classified as collector, secondary arterial, and major arterial as defined in subsection 14-1.1, Chapter XIV, Land Development. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-10 by Ord. #1981-10,  10; SFCC 1981,  6-23-10; Ord. #1988-30,  8) 
10-2.11 - Contracts. 
    Any written agreement, purchase order, or instrument whereby the city is committed to the expenditure of funds in return for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing, shall not be entered into unless such agreement, purchase order or instrument contains a provision that the contractor, contracting party, setter or other person agrees that all activity pursuant thereto will be performed, constructed, conducted or manufactured in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-11 by Ord. #1981-10,  11; SFCC 1981,  6-23-11) 
10-2.12 - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The city manager or appointed designee shall have primary, but not exclusive, enforcement responsibility with appropriate law enforcement agencies as it relates to vehicular sources. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-12 by Ord. #1981-10,  12; SFCC 1981;  6-23-12; Ord. #1988-30,  9) 
10-2.13 - Method of enforcement. 
    Violation of this section in which the noise source is not self-propelled, or if self-propelled, not customarily used or designed for transportation upon a public right-of-way, shall be cause for summons and complaint to be issued forthwith; provided, however, that in lieu of summons and complaint, enforcement personnel may issue a twenty-four (24) hour notice, or other reasonable amount of time not to exceed five (5) days, signed by the city manager or duly authorized representative, in writing, which may be served personally or by certified mail to the last known address of the person to whom addressed, with return receipt requested, directed to the owner, occupant, person in charge of, or in control of the machine, device, building or other premises to abate the violation of this section. Failure to comply with the order so issued and served shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-13 by Ord. #1981-10,  13; SFCC 1981,  6-23-13) 
10-2.14 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as provided in paragraph B of this subsection. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
B.  With regard to persons operating motor vehicles and violating this section, the person shall, for the first offense, be fined thirty dollars ($30.00); however, if repairs are effected on the motor vehicle prior to court appearance and the vehicle passes a compliance test as prescribed by the city manager or appointed designee, the fine shall be waived. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-14 by Ord. #1981-10,  14; SFCC 1981,  6-23-14; Ord. #1988-30,  10) 
10-2.15 - Additional remedies. 
    Violations of subsections 10-2.4 through 10-2.10 SFCC 1987 are declared to be a nuisance and as such may be abated as set forth in Section 10-9 SFCC 1987. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  31.2-15 by Ord. #1981-10,  15; SFCC 1981,  6-23-15; Ord. #2005-1,  6) 
10-2.16 - Advertising; amplification. 
A.  Advertising from Private Property; Use of Loudspeakers or Sound Amplifiers. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast on the public streets, from private property, for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure, enterprise or activity. 
(2)  The governing body may, in its discretion, allow such operation. 
B.  Special Use Permit Required. All applicants for advertising by use of loudspeakers or sound amplifiers from private property are required to obtain a special use permit from the office of the city clerk after approval and prior to the event or activity. The administrative service charge for issuing the permit is twenty dollars ($20.00). The city may, at its discretion, require: 
(1)  A one hundred dollar ($100.00) deposit; 
(2)  A state tax number; 
(3)  A city business number; and 
(4)  An environmental improvement agency food and drink permit number. 
(Code 1953,  3-1; Code 1973,  19-1; SFCC 1981,  9-10-1, 9-10-2) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate noise and any practice which tends to annoy persons on the streets or public grounds, Sec. 3-18-17 NMSA 1978. 
10-3 - WEEDS. 

10-3.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Weed Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1983-30,  1; SFCC 1981,  6-24-1) 
10-3.2 - Declaration of a nuisance. 
    Pursuant to Section 3-18-17 NMSA 1978, the governing body of the city of Santa Fe hereby declares the growth of weeds as defined and in and under the conditions prescribed by the Weed Ordinance, to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. #1983-30,  2; SFCC 1981,  6-24-2) 
10-3.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Weeds means weeds, grass, brush or other vegetation which is in excess of twelve inches (12") in height, which has a stem diameter of less than two inches (2") and also includes bindweed, Canada thistle, perennial sowthistle, Russian knapweed, common ragweed, milkweed, dandelion, Russian thistle (tumbleweed), fire weeds, mustards, sandburs, hairy stickweed, and weeds include grass and any other growth that is injurious to the public health, welfare and safety. Weeds do not include flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens, native vegetation used for landscaping or small grain plots. 
(Ord. #1983-30,  3; SFCC 1981,  6-24-3) 
10-3.4 - Growth or accumulation of weeds prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, occupant, or person in possession or control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or tract of land or any part thereof within the municipal boundaries to permit or maintain on any such lot or tract of land, or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same: 
A.  Any growth of weeds to a height greater than twelve inches (12") and which have a stem diameter of less than two inches (2"); or 
B.  Any weeds which because of their dry condition or dense growth constitute a fire hazard or danger to the public health, welfare or safety. 
(Ord. #1983-30,  4; SFCC 1981,  6-24-4) 
10-4 - GENERAL ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS. 

10-4.1 - Applicability. 
    After the effective date of Ordinance No. 1962-19: 
A.  Any use established or changed to, and any building, structure or tract of land developed, constructed or used for any permitted or permissible principal or accessory use shall comply with all of the performance standards herein set forth for the district involved; 
B.  If any existing use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged or reconstructed portion or portions of such use or building or other structure; and 
C.  Any existing use, building or other structure that is nonconforming with respect to performance standards shall be made to conform within two (2) years from July 23, 1967, or from the effective date such use, building or structure is annexed into the zoning jurisdiction of the city, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Ord. #1967-8; Code 1973,  36-341; SFCC 1981,  3-31-1) 
10-4.2 - Smoke and other particulate matter. 
A.  For the purposes of this section: 
    Particulate matter means material, including smoke, discharged into or suspended in the atmosphere in finely-divided form. 
    Ringlemann chart means the chart described in U.S. Bureau of Mines information circular 6888 which provides standards for estimating the light-obscuring capacity, and thus the density, of smoke. Ringlemann numbers are used for identifying the standardized elements of the Ringlemann chart. 
    Smoke means the particulate matter resulting from the process of combustion. 
    Smoke units means the numbers obtained by multiplying the number used to identify density on the Ringlemann chart by time of emission in minutes of smoke at that density. 
B.  For the purpose of grading the density of emission of smoke, the Ringlemann chart shall be employed. For the purpose of determining smoke units, the Ringlemann density reading shall be made at least once every minute during the period of observation. Each reading, i.e., the Ringlemann number, shall be multiplied by the time in minutes for which it was observed, and the products added together to give the total number of smoke units observed during the total period of observation. This total shall then be converted into units per hour. 
C.  In the I-1 and I-2 districts, the emission of more than ten (10) smoke units per hour per stack and smoke with a density in excess of Ringlemann No. 2 is prohibited except as indicated below. For special operations, the following limitations apply: 
(1)  Maximum frequency permitted: 
(a)  For rebuilding fires within a twenty-four-hour period, once; and 
(b)  For banking and cleaning fires, soot blowing or process purging, once in six (6) hours; and 
(2)  Maximum smoke units permitted per hour per stack during special operations: 
(a)  Ringlemann No. 1, twenty (20) smoke units; 
(b)  Ringlemann No. 2, ten (10) smoke units; and 
(c)  Ringlemann No. 3, three (3) smoke units. 
D.  Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Determine maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by acres of lot area, obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre; 
(2)  For each gross hourly rate of emission, deduct the height of emission correction factor from the following table, interpolating as necessary for heights not given: 
Allowance for 
Height Emission Height of Emission 
Above Grade (feet) Correction 
(pounds per hour per acre) 50 0.01 100 0.06 150 0.10 200 0.16 300 0.30 400 0.50  
(3)  The result is the net hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre from each source of emission; and 
(4)  Adding together individual net rates of emission gives the total net rate of emission from all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. 
E.  The total net rate of emission from all sources within the boundaries of a lot of emission from all sources within the boundaries of a lot in an I-1 or I-2 district shall not exceed one (1) pound per acre of lot area during any one (1) hour. 
F.  The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by weight of particles having a diameter larger than forty-four (44) microns is prohibited. 
G.  Dust and other types of air pollution carried by the wind from such sources as storage yards, piled materials, yards and roads shall be included in particulate matter measurements and limitations and shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate screening, design, landscaping, paving, oiling, sprinkling or other acceptable means. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973,  36-344; SFCC 1981,  3-31-2) 
10-4.3 - Odorous matter. 
A.  In any I-1 or I-2 district, no odor shall be permitted at any lot line exceeding the lowest amount set forth in Table III, Odor Thresholds of Chapter 5, Physiological Effects of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual of the manufacturing chemists association, according to the latest edition of such table published for compounds described therein, or the equivalent of such tables as set forth in the rules and regulations adopted by the administrative official. 
B.  For compounds not described in Table III, odor thresholds may be established by the methods indicated in Chapter 5 of this manual, or the equivalent of the chapter as set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the administrative official, and no odor shall be permitted at any lot line exceeding the amount determined by the application of such methods. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973,  36-345; SFCC 1981,  3-31-3) 
10-4.4 - Toxic or noxious matter. 
A.  Toxic or noxious matter means for the purposes of this subsection, any solid, liquid or gaseous matter, including but not limited to gases, vapors, dusts, fumes and mists containing properties which by chemical means are: 
(1)  Inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health; or 
(2)  Capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or damage to property. 
B.  For the purpose of measuring the density of mineral dusts, the light field low power method, described in U.S. Public Health Report 47, No. 12, pp. 669-672, March 18, 1932, or its equivalent, as set forth in rules and regulations promulgated by the administrative official, shall be used and a standard type impinger, or its equivalent, as set forth in rules and regulations promulgated by the administrative official, shall be employed for taking atmospheric dust samples. 
C.  In an I-1 or I-2 district, the concentration of toxic or noxious matter shall not exceed, at any point on or beyond any lot line, one-tenth (0.1) of the maximum allowable concentration set forth in Section 12-29 of the Industrial Code Rule No. 12, Relating to Control of Air Contaminants, adopted by the board of standards and appeals of the New York department of labor on June 21, 1956, or the equivalent of such standards as set forth in rules and regulations promulgated by the administrative official. 
D.  In an I-1 or I-2 district, in addition to the performance standards regulating toxic or noxious matter, the emission of such matter shall be so controlled that no concentration of such matter, at or beyond the lot line shall be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or other aspects of the general welfare, or cause injury or damage to property. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973,  36-346; SFCC 1981,  3-31-4) 
10-4.5 - Radiation hazards. 
    No operation, whether or not licensed by the Atomic Energy Commission, shall be conducted in any I-1 or I-2 district, if such operation exceeds the standards established in Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, Standards for Protection Against Radiation, as amended through July 30, 1958, or as it may thereafter be amended, or the equivalent of such standards as set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the administrative official. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973,  36-347; SFCC 1981,  3-31-5) 
10-4.6 - Fire and explosive hazards. 
A.  For the purpose of this subsection: 
    Closed cup flash point means the temperature at which a liquid sample produces sufficient vapor to flash but not to ignite when in contact with a flame in a closed cup tester, such as Pensky-Martens, Tagliabue or other standard test equipment. 
    Flammable or explosive materials means materials which produce flammable or explosive gases or vapors under ordinary temperature conditions, including liquids with a closed cup flash point of less than one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit (105F). 
    Free-burning materials means materials which burn actively and easily support combustion. 
    Intense-burning materials means materials which have low ignition temperature, a high rate of burning and create great heat. 
    Moderate-burning materials means materials which in themselves support combustion and are consumed slowly as they burn. 
    Original sealed containers means containers with a capacity of not more than fifty-five (55) gallons. 
    Slow-burning materials means materials which will not ignite or actively support combustion during an explosion for five (5) minutes to a temperature of twelve hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200F), and, therefore, do not constitute an active fuel. 
B.  Regulations and standards in an I-1 and I-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products including incombustible to moderate-burning is permitted; 
(2)  Storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products including free-burning and intense-burning is permitted; provided, that such materials or products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system; 
(3)  The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids, or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted; 
(4)  When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (STP) permitted shall not exceed three hundred (300) times the quantities as listed below where the factor three hundred (300) is the volume in cubic feet occupied by one (1) gallon of the liquids. 
Total Capacity of Flammable Materials Permitted 
(in gallons) 
I-1 District Industries Engaged in 
Storage Only Aboveground Underground Materials with closed cup flash point over 187F Prohibited 100,000 Flash point 105F to 187F Prohibited 40,000 Flash point under 105F Prohibited 20,000 Industries Engaged in Utilization 
and Manufacture of 
Flammable Materials Materials with closed cup flash point 
over 187F 50,000 100,000 Flash point 105F to 187F 20,000 40,000 Flash point under 105F 5,000 10,000  
I-2 District 
Unrestricted; provided that storage, handling and use shall be in accordance with the Flammable Liquids Code of the city. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973,  36-348; SFCC 1981,  3-31-6) 
10-4.7 - Humidity, heat or glare. 
A.  In the I-1 district, any activity producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air or producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat or glare is not perceptible at any lot line. 
B.  In the I-2 district, any activity producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air or producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such manner that the steam, humidity, heat or glare is not perceptible at or beyond any residential or commercial district boundary. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973,  36-349; SFCC 1981,  3-31-7) 
10-4.8 - Electromagnetic interference. 
    In an I-1 or I-2 district, no use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in residential or commercial districts. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-5; Code 1973, 636-350; SFCC 1981,  3-31-8) 
10-4.9 - Intent and enforcement. 
    Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of performance standards range from those which can be made by a reasonable person using normal senses and no equipment to those which require high technical competence and complex equipment. It is the intent of this section that: 
A.  Where determinations can reasonably be made by the administrative official or other city employees using equipment and personnel normally available to the city or obtainable without extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made before notice of violation is issued; and 
B.  Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the city to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary in making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for protecting individuals from arbitrary and capricious administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations and for protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administrative enforcement. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-7; Code 1973,  36-351; SFCC 1981,  3-31-9) 
10-4.10 - Violations. 
    If the administrative official finds, after making determinations in the manner set forth in appropriate parts of subsection 10-4.1 SFCC 1987 that there is violation of performance standards relating to emission of smoke, fire and explosive hazards, humidity, heat, glare or electromagnetic interference, he shall take or cause to be taken lawful action as provided in subsection 14-7.10 SFCC 1987 to eliminate such violation; failure to obey lawful orders concerning cessation of violation shall be punishable as provided in subsection 14-7.11 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-7; Code 1973,  36-352; SFCC 1981,  3-31-10) 
10-4.11 - Measurement of weight of particulate matter, vibration, toxic or noxious matter, odorous matter and radiation hazards. 
    If, in the considered judgment of the administrative official, there is violation of performance standards as set forth in subsection 10-4.1 concerning emission of particulate matter, odorous matter, vibration, toxic or noxious matter or radiation hazards the following procedures shall be followed: 
A.  The administrative official shall give written notice to those responsible for the alleged violation by registered mail or other means insuring a signed receipt for such notice. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation and the reasons why the administrative official believes there is a violation in fact; it shall require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrative official within a reasonable time limit set by the administrative official. The notice shall state that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the administrative official within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of this section. The notice shall further state that on request of those to whom it is directed, technical determination as described in the appropriate portion of subsections 10-4.1 and 10-4.10 will be made; and that if violation as alleged is found, costs of the determination will be charged against those responsible, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate; and that if it is determined that no violation exists, costs of the determinations will be paid by the city; 
B.  If, within the time limit set, there is no reply but the alleged violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the administrative official, he shall note "violation corrected" on his copy of the notice and shall retain it among his records, taking such other action as may be warranted by the circumstances of the case; 
C.  If there is no reply within the time limit set, thus establishing admission of violation as provided in paragraph A of this section, and the alleged violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the administrative official within the time limit set, he shall proceed to take or cause to be taken such action as warranted by continuation of an admitted violation after notice to cease; 
D.  If a reply is received within the time limit set indicating that the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the administrative official but that more time is required than was granted by the original notice, the administrative official may grant an extension of time, if he deems such extension warranted in the circumstances of the case and if such extension will not, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life, health or property. In acting on such requests for extension of time, the administrative official shall in writing state his reasons for granting or refusing to grant extension; and 
E.  If a reply is received within the time limit set, requesting technical determinations as described in the appropriate portion of this section, and if the alleged violations continue, the administrative official may call in properly qualified experts to make the determinations. If expert findings indicate violation of the performance standards, the cost of the determination shall be assessed against the persons responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of subsection 14-7.11 SFCC 1987. If no violation is found, costs of determination shall be paid by the city without assessment against the persons involved. 
(Ord. #1962-19,  28-7; Code 1973, 636-353; Ord. #1981-10,  17; SFCC 1981,  3-31-11) 
10-5 - JUNK VEHICLES. 

10-5.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Junk Vehicle Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1997-10,  1) 
10-5.2 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The governing body finds and declares pursuant to Section 3-18-17(A) NMSA 1978, that junk vehicles which are located within the city of Santa Fe on any private lot, tract, or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved and which are visible from any private or public place, including, without limitation, public rights-of-way, parks, public buildings and their grounds, and private business or commercial property open to the public in the normal course of business are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
B.  Junk vehicles reduce the value of private property, invite vandalism, constitute fire hazards, and are attractive nuisances that pose a threat to the health and safety of children. 
C.  Junk vehicles are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the continuing economic development of the city. 
D.  Junk vehicles are determined to be public nuisances. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  2) 
10-5.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck which is at least thirty-five (35) years old and is being preserved or restored by a collector for its historical value. 
    Collector means an individual, association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which buys or otherwise acquires, maintains, shows, restores, sells, dismantles, or otherwise disposes of antique or special interest vehicles for the purpose of maintaining one (1) or more antique and/or special interest vehicles for reasons of historical interest. 
    Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle, other than antique or special interest vehicle which is: 
A.  Inoperative; and 
B.  Has been continuously inoperative for at least one hundred twenty (120) days or has been wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or abandoned; and 
C.  Does not bear a valid, unexpired license plate; and 
D.  Does not meet minimum safety standards for operation on the public streets and highways of this state. 
    Occupant means the individual, association, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity legally in possession of the premises where there is a junk vehicle. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle not less than twenty-five (25) years old which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications, which is being preserved or restored by a collector for its historical value. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  3) 
10-5.4 - Notice. 
A.  Upon receiving a report of the existence of a junk vehicle, the city manager or his designee shall serve written notice to the occupant of the premises upon which the junk vehicle is located. Written notice shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall be on a form approved by the city manager and shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
(1)  A statement of the nature of the nuisance which refers to this section; 
(2)  A demand that the junk vehicle be removed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice; 
(3)  A statement indicating that failure to remove the junk vehicle within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice may expose the occupant to a fine not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) a day for every day the vehicle remains unremoved after the thirtieth day following the occupant's receipt of the notice. 
(4)  A statement indicating that if the occupant does not comply within the thirty (30) days, the city may file civil penalty charges against the occupant in municipal court; and 
B.  If any notice is returned as undeliverable, the city manager or his designee shall cause notice to be published as elsewhere provided by law. Published notice shall have the same force and effect as mailed notice. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  4) 
10-5.5 - Disposal. 
    A licensed dismantler receiving any junk vehicle or vehicles shall notify the motor vehicle division as required by Section 66-3-115 NMSA 1978. In no event shall a junk vehicle be reconstructed or rendered operable following removal except as provided by Section 66-3-5(A) NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  5) 
10-5.6 - Applicability. 
    This section shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from a street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or 
C.  An unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique vehicle or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on their property, provided that such vehicle and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a solid fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or combination thereof or other appropriate means; or 
D.  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways; or 
E.  Any motor vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  6) 
10-5.7 - Removal. 
    The court shall, upon conviction of the defendant, impose sentence as herein provided. The court may order the defendant to remove the junked vehicle and dispose of it as provided herein. The court may also order that the defendant pay the city for the costs of removal, disposition, court costs, reasonable attorney's fees and fines, and forfeit all proceeds of the motor vehicle or accessory to the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  7) 
10-5.8 - Effective date. 
    Provisions of this section shall become effective on October 30, 1997. 
(Ord. #1997-10,  8) 
10-6 - SANTA FE SMOKE FREE ORDINANCE. 

10-6.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the Santa Fe Smoke Free Ordinance. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  1; Ord. #2006-20,  2) 
10-6.2 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  Numerous studies have determined that environmental tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution and is now classified by the EPA as a Class A carcinogen. The studies have also found that breathing secondhand smoke can cause heart disease, lung cancer, respiratory infection and a loss of respiratory function in nonsmokers. At special risk are children, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; and health hazards induced by breathing secondhand smoke include emphysema, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm. 
B.  Nonsmokers who suffer ill effects from secondhand smoke may experience a drop in productivity and an increase in sick leave. 
C.  The separation of people and tobacco smoke within the same air space may reduce but does not eliminate exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. 
D.  The increasing popularity and use in public buildings of electronic smoking devices has led the United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") to propose regulating electronic smoking devices as tobacco products, a move supported by forty (40) state attorneys general, including the New Mexico attorney general. The FDA and healthcare providers question the safety of electronic smoking devices to both users and those in close proximity to users, despite the claims of harmlessness by manufacturers, similar to claims made by the tobacco industry in years past. The governing body believes it should be proactive in protecting the health of all residents of Santa Fe. 
E.  The use of electronic smoking devices, with or without nicotine as an ingredient, models smoking behavior to our youth in a way that suggests smoking any substance is acceptable, regardless of potential or unknown health threats to the user and others. 
F.  It is necessary to restrict smoking in areas not covered by the 1995 New Mexico State Clean Indoor Air Act, which calls for no smoking in state, county and city-owned buildings except in certain designated areas. 
G.  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this section are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  2; Ord. #2014-6,  1) 
10-6.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food generates fifteen percent (15%) or less of the total gross annual income of the bar in any calendar year. Bars include, but are not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. "Bar" does not include the dining areas of a restaurant, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served therein. 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations or other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
    Cigar bar means an establishment that: 
A.  Is a bar, as defined in this section, except that it serves only complementary snacks; and 
B.  Is engaged in the business of selling cigars for consumption by patrons on the premises and generates ten percent (10%) or more of its total annual gross revenue or at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in annual sales from the sale of cigars, not including any sales from vending machines. A cigar bar that fails to generate at least ten percent (10%) of its total annual sales from the sale of cigars in the calendar year after December 31, 2006, not including sales from vending machines, shall not be defined as a cigar bar and shall not thereafter be known as such regardless of sales figures. A cigar bar shall agree to provide adequate information to demonstrate to the city's satisfaction compliance with this definition. 
    Cigarette vending machine means any self-service device, which, upon insertion of money or tokens, dispenses cigarettes without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation. 
    Electronic smoking device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. Electronic smoking device includes any component part of such product whether or not sold separately. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of one (1) or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by walls, partitions or windows (exclusive of doors or passage ways), whether partially or fully extending from the floor towards to ceiling, and whether the walls or partitions are solid or not and compose a room, vestibule or cubicle. 
    Group home means a dwelling unit where full-time shelter, habilitation, care and supervision is given on a non-institutional basis to neglected, abandoned, physically handicapped, retarded, mentally disabled and substance or alcohol dependent children or adults on a private, nonprofit basis licensed by the appropriate governing body. 
    Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
    Health spa or health club means any place where therapeutic, rehabilitative or health maintenance services or equipment, with or without swimming facilities, saunas, steam rooms, and similar facilities, are available for use by patrons whether membership is required or not. 
    Hotel or motel means any building, or portion thereof, containing six (6) or more guest rooms designed, used or intended to be used by six (6) or more guests. 
    Nursing care facilities means any establishment devoted and maintained for the long term or hospice care of the aged, infirm, chronic or terminally ill. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment. The area shall include but not be limited to work areas, lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee or public cafeterias, snack stands and coffee shops, and hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
    Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
    Public places or public spaces means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to banks and credit unions, bars, taverns and pubs, educational facilities, health facilities, commercial laundries, self-serve laundries, and dry cleaning establishments, public transportation facilities including airports, bus stations, buses, taxi cabs and paratransit vehicles, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters, museums and galleries, hospital, medical clinic and laboratory waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
    Restaurant or eating establishment means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, luncheonette, short-order cafe, soda fountain, private or public school cafeteria and any other indoor eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for service elsewhere, including catering facilities. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant as well as all outdoor eating areas. 
    Retail store means a store which carries, as its principal business, the selling of tangible commodities in small quantities directly to consumers. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories in which the sale of other product is merely incidental. 
    Service line means any indoor line at which one (1) or more people are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
    Smoke or smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, holding or carrying any lighted or activated cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, pipe, or other lighted or activated tobacco product in any manner or in any form. "Smoke" also means the gaseous products, vapor or particles created by the use of a lighted cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, pipe or any other kind of smoking equipment. 
    Sports arena means enclosed sports pavilions, stadiums, coliseums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice skating rinks, bowling alleys or similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
    Tobacco product means any product that is made from or derived from tobacco or contains nicotine or any substance intended to be inhaled or ingested in a way that simulates smoking, and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus or an electronic smoking device. 
    Transitional living facility, halfway house or shelter means a dwelling unit providing temporary shelter to the homeless, mentally disabled, substance or alcohol dependent individuals undergoing treatment, or abused or neglected adults. In addition, the facility shall provide referrals to appropriate agencies for assistance, treatment and follow-up care as required by the individual. 
    Truck stop means any facility located within the city primarily catering to and frequented by interstate cargo haulers for the purpose of obtaining rest or food, with or without showering facilities and having sufficient open space for parking large vehicles. 
    Vaping bar means an establishment that: 
A.  Is a bar, as defined in this section, except that it serves only complementary snacks; and 
B.  Is engaged in the business of selling electronic smoking devices for consumption by patrons on the premises and generates ten percent (10%) or more of its total annual gross revenue or at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in annual sales from the sale of electronic smoking devices, not including any sales from vending machines. A vaping bar that fails to generate at least ten percent (10%) of its total annual sales from the sale of vaping devices in the calendar year after December 31, 2014, not including sales from vending machines, shall not be defined as a vaping bar and shall not thereafter be known as such regardless of sales figures. A vaping bar shall agree to provide adequate information to demonstrate to the city's satisfaction compliance with this definition. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  3; Ord. #2006-20,  3; Ord. #2007-7,  1; Ord. #2014-6,  2) 
10-6.4 - Application of section to city-owned facilities. 
    All city of Santa Fe property shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  4) 
10-6.5 - Smoking prohibited in public places. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city of Santa Fe including, but not limited to, the following places: 
A.  The Santa Fe Municipal Airport, and ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
B.  Elevators and stairwells. 
C.  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, waiting rooms, hallways and any other common-use areas in all buildings open to the public. 
D.  Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city of Santa Fe. 
E.  Service lines. 
F.  Retail stores and enclosed shopping malls. 
G.  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, hotels and motels, and convention halls. 
H.  Restaurants and other eating establishments. 
I.  Public telephone booths, stalls and phone bank areas. 
J.  Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums. 
K.  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage performance, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except performers when smoking is part of a stage production. 
L.  Enclosed sports arenas including bowling facilities. 
M.  Health care facilities. 
N.  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
O.  Lobbies, party rooms, common rooms, hallways, and other areas used for social events in apartment houses, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing care facilities, group homes, transitional living facilities, shelters, halfway houses and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
P.  Polling places. 
Q.  Bingo games. 
R.  Schools, academies and institutions of learning instruction. 
S.  Bars. 
T.  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
U.  Licensed child care and adult day care facilities. 
V.  Outdoor patios of restaurants and bars. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  5; Ord. #2005-20,  4; Ord. #2007-7,  2) 
10-6.6 - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
A.  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums,, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
B.  This prohibition of smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees within three (3) weeks of its adoption and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  6; Ord. #2006-20,  5) 
10-6.7 - Prohibition of smoking near entrances, windows and ventilation systems. 
A.  Smoking is prohibited within twenty-five feet (25') of an opening into any enclosed area where smoking is prohibited to ensure that persons entering or leaving the building or facility are not subjected to breathing tobacco smoke and that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or any other means. 
B.  Smoking is prohibited within twenty-five feet (25') of an outdoor eating or drinking area of a restaurant or bar. The owner, manager or operator of a restaurant or other easting establishment shall be responsible for ensuring that all outdoor eating areas under the control of the establishment are designated as nonsmoking areas, and shall post appropriate signs as necessary clearly indicating where smoking is prohibited under the provision of this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  7; Ord. #2006-20,  7; Ord. #2007-7,  3) 
10-6.8 - Where smoking not regulated. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to smoking restrictions of this section: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests that are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty percent (20%) of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor shall be contiguous and smoke from these rooms shall not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Enclosed areas in restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions, provided that smoke from these areas does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Above-ground open air parking lots and parking structures, truck stops and rest stops. 
(6)  Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(7)  Private clubs organized by December 31, 2005, for the sole purpose of providing a venue for smoking cigars. 
(8)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of subsections 10-6.5 and 10-6.7 SFCC 1987. 
(9)  Cigar bars, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section, and provided that no one under the age of eighteen (18) is permitted entry at any time. A cigar bar shall display a sign, at least four inches by six inches (4" x 6") in size in at least one (1) conspicuous place, stating: "Smoking allowed. No one under the age of 18 is permitted." 
(10)  Vaping bars, provided that no one under the age of eighteen (18) is permitted entry at any time. A vaping bar shall display a sign, at least four inches by six inches (4" x 6") in size in at least one (1) conspicuous place, stating: "No one under the age of 18 is permitted." 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  8; Ord. #2006-20,  7; Ord. No. 2014-6,  3) 
10-6.9 - Posting of signs. 
A.  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is totally prohibited by this section shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
B.  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this section by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such area. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to serve food or beverages to any person smoking within an enclosed eating establishment or an enclosed area of an eating establishment where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  9; Ord. No. 2006-20,  8) 
10-6.10 - Prohibition of cigarette vending machines in certain locations. 
    No person shall install, maintain or operate any cigarette vending machine within buildings open to the public in any location which provides easy access to minor children, or in open air recreation sites where minor children may congregate. Exceptions to this will be as follows: 
A.  Fraternity houses and secret order societies. 
B.  Truck stops, rest areas and adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  10) 
10-6.11 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement of this section shall be implemented by the city manager, or his or her designee. 
B.  Notice of the provisions set forth in this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city of Santa Fe. 
C.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the city manager. 
D.  All city of Santa Fe departments shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a "self certification" from the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this section have been complied with. 
E.  Any owner, operator, manager or employee of any establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this section of the appropriate provisions thereof. If the owner, operator, manager or employee of such establishment purposely gives incorrect information regarding this section to a patron of the establishment, such person shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  11; Ord. #2006-20,  9; Ord. #2007-7,  4) 
10-6.12 - Non-Retaliation. 
    No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  12) 
10-6.13 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this section to fail to comply with any of its provisions. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this section. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this section within one (1) year. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  13) 
10-6.14 - Public education. 
    The city manager shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this section to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, managers or other person who controls any establishment or facility in their compliance with it. Such a program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  14) 
10-6.15 - Other applicable laws. 
    This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  15) 
10-6.16 - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held as invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this section. The section can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. #1999-47,  16) 
10-6.17 - Effective date. 
    The revisions made to Section 10-6 SFCC 1987 adopted by Ordinance No. 2006-20 shall be effective June 30, 2006, (thirty (30) days from the date of its adoption). 
(Ord. #1999-47,  17; Ord. #2006-20,  10) 
10-7 - INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT PROGRAM FOR CITY PROPERTY. 

10-7.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as "The City of Santa Fe Integrated Pest Management Policy". 
(Ord. #2001-10,  1) 
10-7.2 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  The governing body of the city of Santa Fe hereby finds and declares that it shall be the policy of the city of Santa Fe to eliminate or reduce pesticide applications on city property to the maximum extent feasible. 
B.  Under this section, the city of Santa Fe wishes to exercise its power to make economic decisions involving its own funds as a participant in the marketplace and to conduct its own business as a municipal corporation to ensure that purchases and expenditures of public monies are made in a manner consistent with integrated pest management policies and practices. 
C.  This section concerns the application of pesticides to property owned, controlled or operated by the city of Santa Fe only, and does not concern the application of pesticides to property that is not owned, controlled or operated by the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  2) 
10-7.3 - City integrated pest management policy. 
    The city shall implement the following city integrated pest management (IPM) policy. The city, in carrying out its operations, shall assume pesticides are potentially hazardous to human and environmental health. The city shall give preference to preventing pest problems through nonpesticide means and using reasonably available nonpesticide alternatives before considering the use of pesticides on and in city property. For all pest problems on city property, the city shall follow the integrated pest management (IPM) approach outlined below. 
A.  Prevent pest problems through nonpesticide means as much as possible; 
B.  Monitor each pest habitats to determine pest population, size, occurrence, and natural enemy population, if present. Identify decisions and practices that could affect pest populations. Keep records of such monitoring; 
C.  Set for each pest at each site and identify in an IPM implementation plan, an injury level, based on how much biological, aesthetic or economic damage the site can tolerate; and 
D.  Consider a range of potential treatments for the pest problem. Employ nonpesticide management tactics first. Consider the use of pesticides only as a last resort and select and use pesticides only within an IPM program and in accordance with the provisions of this section. No regulated pesticides or pest control devices may be used on city property unless they are applied by persons certified and licensed in the applicable pesticide applicator category by the New Mexico department of agriculture, with the exception of licensed employees of commercial pest control companies working under the direct supervision of a certified and licensed applicator. 
(1)  Determine the most effective treatment time, based on pest biology and other variables, such as weather, seasonal changes in wildlife use, and local conditions, including the amount and timing of human occupation of or near the proposed treatment area; 
(2)  Design and construct indoor and outdoor areas to reduce and eliminate pest habitats; 
(3)  Modify management practices, including watering, mulching, waste management, and food storage to reduce pests and weeds; 
(4)  Modify pest habitats to reduce food and living space; 
(5)  Preferentially use physical and mechanical controls such as mowing, hand weeding, and the use of traps, barriers, and other exclusion methods; 
(6)  Use biological controls when applicable, such as introducing or enhancing pests natural enemies; 
(7)  Use the least toxic pesticidal controls only when other methods of control have failed; and 
(8)  Use pesticides in or outside of city buildings only when a pest is present and not on a regular or calendar basis. 
E.  Conduct ongoing educational programs: 
(1)  Acquaint staff with the IPM approach and the toxicity of pesticides, 
(2)  Inform the public of the city's attempt to reduce pesticide use and respond to questions from the public about the city's pest management practices. 
F.  Monitor treatment to evaluate effectiveness. Keep monitoring records and include them in the IPM implementation plan. 
G.  Nothing in this section is intended to apply to pesticide applications that are required to comply with federal, state, or local laws or regulations. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  3) 
10-7.4 - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below. 
    Antimicrobial agent means any substance or mixture of substances intended for inhibiting the growth of, or destroying any bacteria, fungi, viruses, or other microorganism pathogenic to humans and other animals other than those in or on other living organisms. These agents include disinfectants, sanitizers, bacteriostats, sterilizers, fungicides and fungistats applied to inanimate surfaces and used in swimming pools. 
    City integrated pest management coordinator means the integrated pest management coordinator designated in subsection 10-7.15 to implement the city IPM policy as set forth in subsections 10-7.2 through 10-7.12 of this section, herein referred to as the IPM coordinator. 
    Contractor means a person, firm, corporation or other entity, including a governmental entity, that enters into a professional services agreement with the city to apply pesticides or perform other pest management activities on property that is owned, controlled or operated by the city. 
    Department director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to administer the integrated pest management program. 
    Division director means the director of the division designated by the city manager to administer the integrated pest management program. 
    Emergency means any unforeseen combination of circumstances or a resulting state that calls for an immediate action such as major economic impact over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
    Integrated pest management means a decision-making process for managing pests that uses monitoring to determine pest injury levels and primarily uses cultural, mechanical, physical, and biological tools to minimize health, environmental, and financial risks. The method uses extensive knowledge about pests, such as infestation thresholds, life histories, environmental requirements and natural enemies to complement and facilitate biological and other natural control of pests. The method uses the least toxic synthetic pesticides only as a last resort to manage pests. 
    Lease agreement means a binding written agreement, including but not limited to a contract, lease, permit, license or easement between a person, firm, corporation or other entity, including a governmental entity, and the city, which grants a right to use or occupy property of the city of Santa Fe for a specified purpose or purposes. 
    Lessee means a person, firm, corporation or other entity, including a government entity that enters into a lease agreement with the city as lessor. 
    Pest means any living organism except humans and viruses, bacteria or other microorganisms that reside in or on other living non-plant organisms which are injurious to other living organisms or property. Pests may include but are not limited to insects, weeds, rodents and fungi. 
    Pesticide means any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest as defined in Section 76-4-3 of the New Mexico Pesticide Control Act. The term pesticide includes, but is not limited to, herbicide, insecticide, fungicide, and rodenticide. 
    Toxicity Category I Pesticide Product means any pesticide product that meets United States Environmental Protection Agency criteria for Toxicity Category I under Section 156.10 of Part 156 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations. These products have the toxicity signal word "Danger" on the label. 
    Toxicity Category II Pesticide Product means any pesticide product that meets United States Environmental Protection Agency criteria for Toxicity Category II under Section 156.10 of Part 156 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations. These products have the toxicity signal word "Warning" on the label. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  4; Ord. #2007-26,  1) 
10-7.5 - Ban on use of Toxicity Category I Pesticide Products. 
    Except for pesticides granted an exemption pursuant to subsection 10-7.10, effective upon the effective date of this section, the city shall refrain from using any Toxicity Category I Pesticide Product, any pesticide containing a chemical identified by the state of California as a chemical known to the state to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity pursuant to the California Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986, and any pesticide classified as a known or likely human carcinogen by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  5) 
10-7.6 - Use of other pesticide products. 
A.  Except for pesticides granted an exemption pursuant to subsection 10-7.10, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section, the city shall refrain from using any Toxicity Category II Pesticide Product. 
B.  Except for pesticides granted an exemption pursuant to subsection 10-7.10, April 1, 2001, any city department that uses one (1) or more pesticides not banned under subsection 10-7.5 and section 10-7.6A, shall reduce by one hundred percent (100%) the cumulative volume of such pesticides that it used in calendar year 2001. 
(Ord. #2001-10  6) 
10-7.7 - Notice of pesticide use. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section, the city shall comply with the following notification procedures, unless the pesticide is an antimicrobial agent or is exempted from this requirement pursuant to paragraphs C. through E. hereof. 
(1)  Signs shall be posted at least one (1) day before application of the pesticide product and remain posted at least five (5) but no longer than seven (7) days after application of the pesticide. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted at every entry point where pesticide is applied if the pesticide is applied in an enclosed area and in highly visible locations around the perimeter of the area where pesticide is applied if the pesticide is applied in an open area. 
(3)  Signs shall be of a standardized design that is readily visible and easily recognizable, readable, and understandable to the public and workers. 
(4)  Signs shall be orange, wholly or in part, with black lettering and contain the signal word "caution/precaution" unless otherwise specified by the city safety director. 
(5)  Signs shall contain the name and active ingredient of the pesticide product, the target pest, the date and time of pesticide application, the phone number of the IPM coordinator, and the hotline phone number as set forth in paragraph B. herein. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section, the IPM coordinator shall develop and maintain a twenty-four-hour pesticide hotline to inform the public about the city's pesticide applications, with the exception of applications of antimicrobial agents and pesticides exempted according to paragraphs C. through E. hereof. The following information shall be readily available by calling the hotline and shall include for any pesticide that will be applied within the next three (3) days, unless exempted by paragraph E. hereof, or has been applied within the last ten (10) days: 
(1)  A description of the area of the pesticide application with sufficient specificity to reasonably assure the identification of the intended area of pesticide application or the area which has been treated; 
(2)  Name and active ingredient of the pesticide product; 
(3)  The target pest; 
(4)  The date and time of pesticide application; 
(5)  The name and phone number of the IPM coordinator. 
    Information about the pesticide hotline number shall be posted in public locations in city buildings, listed in the phone book, and advertised with other city telephone numbers. 
C.  The department director and/or division director may grant exemptions from or modifications of the signage and hotline notification requirements on a case-by-case basis or authorize alternative or no requirements for notification of the use of certain pesticides used in specific types of circumstances, upon a finding that a good cause exists to allow an exemption to be made. The city may use modified notification requirements if the department director and/or division director has previously granted such an exemption or modification for the specific product and circumstances of the pesticide application. If the department director and/or division director has not previously granted such an exemption or modification, the IPM coordinator or other city staff may request one from the department director and/or division director. The request shall include the identification of the specific situations in which it is not possible or practical to comply with the notification requirements and propose alternative notification procedures. The department director and/or division director shall decide whether to deny the request, grant an exemption, or approve alternative notification procedures. Exemptions or modifications are in effect until rescinded by the department director and/or division director. 
D.  The department director and/or division director may approve under paragraph C. herein that permanent signs be posted for the regular application of contained baits or other least toxic pesticides. Posting of signs may be required: 
(1)  In each building or city-owned bus or other vehicle where certain pesticides are used, stored, or transported, 
(2)  At the main office or a similar location where the public obtains information regarding the building or vehicle, 
(3)  When such pesticides are used outdoors to control rodents and other pests, in a conspicuous location outside of the area where they are used. 
    The sign may be required to indicate the name and active ingredient of the pesticides used outdoors or in and around the building or vehicle, the target pests, the area or areas where the pesticides are commonly placed or applied, and the phone number of the IPM coordinator. 
E.  In the event of a public health emergency, to comply with worker safety, economic requirements, or to take advantage of a vulnerable time in a pest's life cycle, the IPM coordinator may authorize the application of a pesticide without providing a one-day advance notification. Signs meeting the requirements of paragraph A. herein or otherwise established by the department director and/or division director for that pesticide according to paragraph C. and D. shall be posted at the time of application and remain posted for at least five (5) but no longer than seven (7) days following the application. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  7; Ord. #2007-26,  2) 
10-7.8 - Implementation of city integrated pest management policy. 
A.  Within six (6) months of the effective date of this section, the IPM coordinator shall have a plan for implementing the city integrated pest management (IPM) policy pursuant to subsection 10-7.3. The IPM coordinator shall provide periodic IPM plan updates. The IPM implementation plans and periodic updates shall be consistent with the requirements of this section and any guidelines developed by the department director and/or division director pursuant to this section. 
B.  The city IPM implementation plan shall outline the ways in which the city shall comply with the city IPM policy pursuant to subsection 10-7.3. The city IPM implementation plan shall include pesticide applications performed by commercial pesticide applicators at the request of the IPM coordinator or other city staff. 
C.  The IPM coordinator, with the assistance of appropriate city staff, shall: 
(1)  Identify the types of pest problems that the city has; 
(2)  Identify to the maximum extent possible the types and quantities of pesticides used by the city and for which pests each pesticide was used in the past three (3) years; 
(3)  Identify alternative pest management techniques or products that have been used and for which pests they were used in the past three (3) years or are proposed to be used; 
(4)  Assess the efficacy and cost of pesticide use and alternative interventions in the past three (3) years and regularly assess thereafter; 
D.  The department director and/or division director may determine that a city's IPM implementation plan is not in conformity with the city IPM policy. Upon a determination of nonconformity, the IPM coordinator shall submit a revised plan within thirty (30) days or in accordance with a schedule otherwise specified by the department director and/or division director or submit the plan to the governing body. 
E.  No later than six (6) months of the effective date of this section and quarterly thereafter, the IPM coordinator shall report to the department director and/or division director on the status of the city's implementation of the city IPM policy. Such report shall include a summary of emergency exemptions granted by the IPM coordinator during the reporting period. The IPM coordinator shall provide an annual report to the governing body of the city of Santa Fe on the status of city's program. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  8; Ord. #2007-26,  3) 
10-7.9 - Recordkeeping and reporting. 
A.  The IPM coordinator shall keep written records of all pest management activities for at least two (2) years in the IPM coordinator's department and for five (5) years or the maximum time allowed by law, whichever is longer, in the city archives. Each record shall include the following information: 
(1)  The target pest; 
(2)  The name, active ingredient, EPA registration number, and quantity of pesticide used; 
(3)  The site of the pesticide application with sufficient specificity to reasonably assure the identification of treated areas; 
(4)  The date and time a pesticide was used; 
(5)  The temperature and wind speed and direction if application is made outdoors; 
(6)  The name and applicator license number of the pesticide applicator; 
(7)  The method of application and application equipment used; 
(8)  Prevention and other nonchemical methods of control used; and 
(9)  Exemptions granted by the IPM coordinator pursuant to subsection 10-7.7E. or 10-7.10E. 
B.  Pest management records that are kept by the IPM coordinator shall be made available to the public within twenty-four (24) hours of a request. Pest management records in the city archives shall be made available to the public according to the Inspection of Public Records Act. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  9) 
10-7.10 - Exemptions. 
A.  Improving and maintaining water quality. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, this section shall not apply to the use of any pesticide for the purpose of improving or maintaining water quality at: 
(1)  Drinking water treatment plants; 
(2)  Wastewater treatment plants; 
(3)  Reservoirs; and 
(4)  Related collection, distribution and treatment facilities. 
B.  Reduced-risk pesticide. The department director and/or division director may exempt a reduced-risk pesticide from the ban imposed by subsection 10-7.5 or 10-7.6 upon a finding that the reduced-risk pesticide is compatible with an ecologically sound and least toxic IPM strategy. Decisions on whether or not to exempt a reduced risk pesticide will use the following criteria: 
(1)  Need for control of the pest or vegetation, 
(2)  The potential hazard to human, animal, and environmental health of using the pesticide, 
(3)  The effectiveness of the pesticide, 
(4)  Whether the use of the pesticide is consistent with IPM principles and will contribute to long term least toxic pest control. 
    The department director and/or division director shall maintain a list of reduced-risk pesticides granted an exemption pursuant to this subsection. The department director and/or division director shall review the list annually and make necessary changes. The department director and/or division director may review and revise the list more frequently. 
C.  One-year exemptions. The IPM coordinator may request from the department director and/or division director up to a one-year exemption from the pesticide ban imposed by subsection 10-7.5 or 10-7.6 for use of a particular pesticide for a particular use. The department director and/or division director may grant the one-year exemption upon a finding that the IPM coordinator has: 
(1)  Made a documented good-faith effort to find alternatives to the banned pesticide; 
(2)  Demonstrated that effective, economic alternatives to the banned pesticide do not exist for the particular use; and 
(3)  Developed a reasonable plan for investigating alternatives to the banned pesticide during the exemption period. 
D.  Limited use exemption. IPM coordinator may apply to the department director and/or division director for a limited use exemption for a particular pesticide banned pursuant to subsection 10-7.5 or subsection 10-7.6 and not covered by a one-year exemption. The department director and/or division director may grant a limited-use exemption provided that the department director and/or division director finds that the pesticide will be used for a specific and limited purpose for a short and defined period and the IPM coordinator has identified a compelling need to use the pesticide, has not yet found cost-effective alternatives, and has developed a reasonable plan for continuing to investigate alternatives for future use. 
E.  Emergency exemption. In the event that a pest outbreak poses an immediate threat to public or staff health or safety, major property damage or major damage to plant life, city staff shall contact the IPM coordinator or his/her designee whenever possible. The IPM coordinator or his/her designee shall respond to the emergency in a timely manner. The IPM coordinator and other city staff shall give preference to managing emergency pest non-chemical means or the use of approved pesticides. Should it be necessary, the IPM coordinator may grant an emergency exemption for the use of pesticides banned pursuant to subsection 10-7.5 or subsection 10-7.6. Signs meeting the requirements of paragraph A. of subsection 10-7.7 or otherwise specified by the department director and/or division director for that pesticide according to paragraphs C. and D. of subsection 10-7.7 shall be posted at the time of application and remain posted for at least five (5) but no longer than seven (7) days following the application. Information of an emergency pesticide application will also be posted on the pesticide hotline at the time of application. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  10; Ord. #2007-26,  4) 
10-7.11 - Lease agreements. 
A.  When the city enters into a new lease agreement or extends the term of an existing lease agreement, the lease agreement shall obligate the lessee to comply with provisions of this subsection 10-7.11A: 
(1)  Effective upon the effective date of this section, the lessee shall comply with subsection 10-7.5 (Ban on Use of Toxicity Category I Pesticide Products); 
(2)  Effective thirty (30) days after the effective date of this subsection, the lessee shall comply with subsection 10-7.7 (Notice of Pesticide Use) and identify the lessee's IPM contact person; 
(3)  Effective thirty (30) days from the effective date of this section, the lessee shall comply with subsections 10-7.6A.; and 
(4)  A lessee or IPM coordinator on behalf of a lessee may apply for any exemption authorized under subsection 10-7.10 or use any reduced-risk pesticide for purposes approved by the department director and/or division director. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  11; Ord. #2007-26,  5) 
10-7.12 - Pest management contracts. 
A.  Effective thirty (30) days from the effective date of this section, when the city enters into a new pest management contract or extends the term of an existing pest management contract, the IPM coordinator shall submit an IPM implementation plan update to the department director and/or division director that incorporates the proposed pesticide usage of the contractor into the city department's implementation plan. 
B.  When the city enters into a new pest management contract or extends the term of an existing contract, the contract shall obligate the contractor to comply with provisions of this subsection 10-7.12B: 
(1)  Effective upon the effective date of this section, the contractor shall comply with subsection 10-7.5 (Ban on Use of Toxicity Category I Pesticide Products); 
(2)  Effective thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section, the contractor shall comply with subsection 10-7.7 (Notice of Pesticide Use); 
(3)  Effective thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section, the contractor shall comply with subsection 10-7.6A. 
C.  A contractor who is hired to apply pesticides or perform other pest management activities, or city department on behalf of a contractor, may apply for any exemption authorized under subsection 10-7.10 or use any reduced-risk pesticide for purposes approved by the department director and/or division director. 
D.  A contractor who is hired to apply pesticides or perform other pest management activities shall have liability insurance in the amount required by the city of Santa Fe risk management division. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  12; Ord. #2007-26,  6) 
10-7.13-10-7.14 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsections 10-7.13, Creating an Integrated Pest Management Board and 10-7.14, Powers and Duties of the Integrated Pest Management Board, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2001-10, were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 2007-26. 
10-7.15 - Designating a city integrated pest management coordinator. 
    There is designated a city integrated pest management coordinator to fulfill the duties and responsibilities as set forth in subsections 10-7.2 through 10-7.12 of this section, which will include, but are not limited to the following: 
A.  Work with appropriate staff to help create, implement, and coordinate the city's IPM plan; 
B.  Educate staff, contractors, businesses, other government entities, and the public about IPM and the city's IPM policy; 
C.  Provide technical assistance on IPM to appropriate staff or arrange for the provision of such assistance; 
D.  Maintain a database of the city IPM plan, pest problems, pesticides used, and efficiency and costs of interventions; 
E.  Grant emergency exemptions to use banned pesticides or apply pesticides without prior notification in the event that the exemption is required to protect the public or staff health or safety, major property damage or major damage to plant life; 
F.  Provide at least a quarterly report to the department director and/or division director on the status of the city's IPM policy, including a summary of emergency exemptions granted by the IPM coordinator during the reporting period; 
G.  Assist capital improvements program division in developing criteria for new or remodeled landscape and building designs which will minimize maintenance and pest management requirements; 
H.  Determine the cost of maintaining the IPM program; and 
I.  Submit an annual report to the governing body on the status of the city IPM program. 
(Ord. #2001-10,  15; Ord. #2007-26,  9) 
10-8 - ANTIFREEZE SAFETY ORDINANCE. 

10-8.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the Antifreeze Safety Ordinance. 
(Ord. #2004-31,  2) 
10-8.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body finds the following: 
A.  Antifreeze contains ethylene glycol, an extremely toxic yet sweet-tasting substance that injures many children and kills thousands of animals every year in the United States. 
B.  The national safety council, the American medical association and the American association of poison control centers have noted that the addition of nontoxic bittering agents to toxic household products can make these products so unpalatable that many children reject the products upon, or shortly after, tasting them. 
C.  Organizations that support the health and safety of animals favor the passage of legislation that requires a bittering agent to be added to antifreeze. 
D.  The cost to add the most common bittering agent, denatonium benzoate, to antifreeze is approximately two cents (.02) per gallon, and by law the antifreeze manufacturers already blend antifreeze with this bittering agent for sale in Oregon and California and Albuquerque. 
(Ord. #2004-31,  3) 
10-8.3 - Bittering agent required in antifreeze. 
A.  Any engine coolant or antifreeze sold in the city of Santa Fe after December 6, 2004 (three (3) months after the effective date of this section) and that contains more than ten percent (10%) ethylene glycol, shall include denatonium benzoate at a minimum of thirty (30) parts per million as a bittering agent within the product so as to render it unpalatable. Another aversive agent may be used if it meets or exceeds the degree of aversion in test subjects obtained by utilizing the formulation of thirty (30) parts per million of denatonium benzoate in antifreeze. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The sale of a motor vehicle that contains engine coolant or antifreeze; 
(2)  Wholesale containers of antifreeze containing fifty-five (55) gallons or more of the antifreeze; 
(3)  Antifreeze that was, prior to the effective date of this Antifreeze Safety Ordinance, in the possession of a retail merchant, possession of an automotive repair or similar business, or possession of a governmental unit within the city of Santa Fe. The exemption provided by this paragraph (3) shall expire on September 6, 2005 (one (1) year after the effective date of this section). 
C.  The exemption created in paragraph B. above for containers of fifty-five (55) gallons or more shall expire on March 6, 2005 (six (6) months after the effective date of this section) unless any interested party can establish that eliminating the exemption is unfeasible or would unreasonably burden interstate commerce. The city may, by administrative policy, continue the exemption for containers of fifty-five (55) gallons or more only to the extent necessary to avoid placing unreasonable burdens on commercial users of antifreeze. 
(Ord. #2004-31,  4) 
10-8.4 - Recordkeeping. 
    Any manufacturer or packager of a product subject to this section shall maintain a record of the trade name, scientific name, and active ingredients of any bittering agent used pursuant to this section. Information and documentation maintained pursuant to this section shall be furnished to any member of the public upon request. 
(Ord. #2004-31,  5) 
10-8.5 - Penalty. 
    Each sale of antifreeze in violation of this Antifreeze Safety Ordinance is a separate violation of Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2004-31,  6) 
10-9 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT ORDINANCE. 

10-9.1 - Short title; applicability. 
    This section may be cited as the Nuisance Abatement Ordinance. This section is in addition to any other nuisance abatement procedures provided for under state law, city ordinance or under the common law. 
(Ord. #2005-1,  8; Ord. #2011-2,  1) 
10-9.2 - Intent. 
A.  The abatement of public nuisances for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare is a matter of local concern. The purpose of this section is not to punish, but to abate public nuisances. The remedies provided in this section are directed at the property involved without regard to ownership, title or right of possession and the culpability or innocence of those who hold these rights. The remedial actions provided in this section are intended to be civil in nature. 
B.  The purpose of this section is to reduce the costs of providing police, fire and other emergency response services by imposing a civil fee against person responsible for conducting, aiding, allowing, permitting or condoning a public nuisance at a residence or other private property for the recovery of costs associated with providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services to public nuisances. 
(Ord. # 2005-1,  9; Ord. #2011-2,  2) 
10-9.3 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Abate means to bring to a halt, eliminate or, where that is not possible or feasible, to suppress, reduce, or minimize. 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent (.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
    Building means a structure, as defined herein, which is enclosed with walls and a roof so that there are no sides left open. 
    Contraband means any personal property which is illegal to own. 
    Juvenile means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Loud or unruly gathering means a party or gathering of two (2) or more persons at or on a residence or other private property upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Loud or unruly conduct includes, without limitation the following as further defined in city code or state law: 
A.  Excessive noise; 
B.  Obstruction of public streets or crowds that have spilled into public streets; 
C.  Public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages; 
D.  Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any underage person, except as permitted by state law; 
E.  Assaults, batteries, fights, disorderly conduct, or other disturbances of the peace; 
F.  Vandalism; 
G.  Litter; and 
H.  Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare, including that conduct defined under public nuisance herein. 
    Person means natural persons and every legal entity whatsoever, including but not limited to sole proprietors, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, limited partnerships, and associations. 
    Personal property means all property of every kind and nature whatsoever including cash, vehicles, animals, intangible property and contraband, but not including real property of any kind. 
    Property means property of all kinds, including real property and personal property as defined herein. 
    Public nuisance or nuisance means: 
A.  Any building or structure which is ruined, damaged or dilapidated to such an extent, or any real property which is covered with ruins, rubbish, wreckage or debris to such an extent that the building, structure or real property threatens harm to the public comfort, health, peace or safety; or 
B.  Any property or vehicle on or in which any of the following illegal activities occur, or which is used to commit, conduct, promote, facilitate any of the following activities and because of such activity the property threatens harm to the public comfort, health, peace or safety. For purposes of this section, the illegal activity shall have the same definition as that contained in the section of the New Mexico Statutes Annotated (NMSA), as amended, or Chapters XII or XX SFCC 1987, as amended, listed after the illegal activity: 
(1)  Prostitution, Section 30-9-2 NMSA; patronizing prostitutes, Section 30-9-3 NMSA, promoting prostitution, Section 30-9-4 NMSA; or accepting earnings of a prostitute, Section 30-9-4.1 NMSA; 
(2)  Sexual exploitation of children by prostitution, Section 30-6A-4 NMSA; 
(3)  Sexual exploitation of children, Section 30-6A-3 NMSA; 
(4)  Trafficking in controlled substances, Section 30-31-20 NMSA; distributing controlled substances to a minor, Section 30-31-21 NMSA; distribution of a controlled substance, Section 30-31-22 NMSA; possession of a controlled substance, Section 30-31-23 NMSA; distributing a counterfeit controlled substance, Section 30-31-22B NMSA; distributing, manufacture, or possession of an imitation controlled substance, Section 30-31A-4 NMSA; sale of an imitation controlled substance to a minor, Section 30-31A-5 NMSA; 
(5)  Unlawful possession, delivery, manufacture or delivery to a minor of drug paraphernalia, Section 30-31-25.1 NMSA; 
(6)  Commercial gambling, Section 30-19-3 NMSA; permitting premises to be used for gambling, Section 30-19-4 NMSA; dealing in gambling devices, Section 30-19-5 NMSA; 
(7)  Unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon, Section 30-7-2 NMSA and Section 20-19 SFCC 1987; unlawful possession of a handgun, Section 30-7-2.2 NMSA; negligent use of a weapon, Section 30-7-4 NMSA; unlawful possession of a switchblade, Section 30-7-8 NMSA; receipt, transportation or possession by a felon of a firearm or destructive device; 
(8)  Dangerous use of explosives, Section 30-7-5 NMSA; negligent use of explosives, Section 30-7-6 NMSA; unlawful sale, possession or transportation of explosives, Section 30-7-7 NMSA; possession of explosives, Section 30-7-19 NMSA; possession of explosive device or incendiary device, Section 30-7-19.1 NMSA; 
(9)  Shooting at a dwelling or occupied building or shooting at or from a motor vehicle, Section 30-3-8 NMSA; 
(10)  Selling, serving, giving away, disposing of, exchanging, delivering, procuring, possessing or permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages to, for or by any person under lawful age or to an intoxicated person, Sections 60-7A-16 and 60-7B-1 NMSA; using property to provide, offer or permit the consumption of intoxicating liquors by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) without a parent's or guardian's knowledge or consent or the order of a practicing physician, or as part of a religious ceremony, or failing to use reasonable control and ordinary care to keep persons under the age of twenty-one (21) from consuming intoxicating liquors on one's property. 
(11)  The sale of alcoholic beverages at any place other than a valid (not suspended or revoked) licensed premises, Section 60-7A-4.1 NMSA; or the unlawful manufacture of alcoholic beverages, Section 60-7A-7 NMSA; or 
(12)  Dog fighting, Section 30-18-9 NMSA; or 
C.  A loud or unruly gathering as defined in this subsection. 
D.  A nuisance as defined or described in any other section of the city code. 
E.  A nuisance consists of knowingly creating, performing or maintaining anything affecting any number of citizens without lawful authority which is either: 
(1)  Injurious to public health, safety, morals or welfare; or 
(2)  Interferes with the exercise and enjoyment of public rights, including the right to use public or private property. 
    Real property means land and all improvements, buildings, and structures, and all estates rights and interests, legal and equitable, in the same, including, but not limited to, all forms of ownership and title, future interests, condominium rights, time-share rights, easements, water rights, mineral rights, oil and gas rights, space rights, and air rights. 
    Residence or other private property means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
    Response costs means the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly gatherings including, but not limited to: 
A.  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with loud or unruly gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 
B.  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering; 
C.  The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering. 
    Responsible person means a person or persons with a right of possession in the residence or other private property on which a public nuisance is located, including, without limitation: 
A.  An owner of the residence or other private property; 
B.  A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property; 
C.  The landlord of another person responsible for the gathering; 
D.  The person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property; and 
E.  The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering. 
    Structure means anything constructed, erected, or placed upon real property which is so firmly attached to the land as to be reasonably considered part of the real estate, and includes building of every type and nature whatsoever. 
    Underage person means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including any frame, chassis or body of any vehicle or motor vehicle, except devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. #2005-1  10; Ord. #2011-2,  3) 
10-9.4 - Responsibility. 
A.  Every owner, occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest of a residence or other private property within the city of Santa Fe is required to maintain, manage and supervise the property and all persons thereon in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this section. The owner of the property remains liable for such violations regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the property. 
B.  The responsible person shall not conduct, aid, allow, permit or condone a public nuisance at a residence or other private property. 
C.  If a responsible person for the nuisance is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this section. 
D.  To incur liability for response costs imposed by this section, the responsible person for the nuisance need not be present when the nuisance occurs which results in the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. This section therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a responsible person. 
(Ord. #2011-2,  4) 
10-9.5 - Warning issued. 
A.  When a law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider official makes an initial response to a nuisance at a residence or other private property within the city of Santa Fe, the official shall inform any responsible person(s) for the nuisance at the scene that: 
(1)  The official has determined that a nuisance exists; and 
(2)  Responsible person(s) will be charged for any response costs required for subsequent responses to the scene for a nuisance within a twelve-month period. Only one (1) warning will be given to a responsible person(s) pursuant to this subsection before the city of Santa Fe assesses response costs pursuant to subsection 10-9.6 SFCC 1987. If a responsible person cannot be identified at the scene, the official may issue a warning to one (1) or more persons identified in subsection 10-9.4 SFCC 1987 or subsequently return to the residence or other private property and issue the warning to a then-present responsible person. Warnings given to responsible persons who do not reside at the residence or other private property in question shall be delivered by certified mail. 
B.  A warning given pursuant to this subsection shall remain in effect for the residence or other private property at a given address until a full twelve-month period has elapsed during which there have been no response to a nuisance at that residence or other private property. 
(Ord. #2011-2,  5) 
10-9.6 - Recovery of response costs. 
    When law enforcement, fire or other emergency response provider responds to a nuisance at a residence or other private property within the city of Santa Fe within a twelve-month period of a warning given to a responsible person for a nuisance, all responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the city's costs of providing response and for all subsequent responses during the warning period according to the schedule of cost recovery established by the police department. The cost recovery schedule shall be available at the city's police department and at the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. #2011-2,  6) 
10-9.7 - Billing and collection. 
A.  The amount of response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the city of Santa Fe by the responsible person held liable in subsection 10-9.4 SFCC 1987 for the nuisance and, if a juvenile, by the juvenile's parents or guardians. Notice of the costs for which the responsible person is liable shall be mailed via certified mail within fourteen (14) days of the response giving rise to such costs. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such costs; 
(2)  The address of the residence or other private property where the nuisance occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the response; 
(4)  The law enforcement, fire or emergency service provider who responded; 
(5)  The date and time of any previous warning given pursuant to subsection 10-9.5 SFCC 1987 and previous responses to nuisances at the residence or other private property in question within the previous twelve (12) months; and 
(6)  The recovery cost assessed as set forth in the cost recovery schedule. 
B.  The responsible person shall remit payment of the noticed response cost to the city of Santa Fe within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice. 
C.  The city may place a lien upon property where the nuisance occurred for any costs not paid within three (3) months of notice in paragraph A. above. 
(Ord. #2011-2,  7) 
10-9.8 - Reservation of legal options. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver by the city of Santa Fe of any right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of response services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedures provided for in this section are in addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This section in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section. 
(Ord. #2011-2,  8) 
10-9.9 - Appeals. 
    Any person upon whom is imposed response costs pursuant to subsection 10-9.4 SFCC 1987 shall have the right to petition district court for writ of certiorari pursuant to Rule 1-075 NMRA. 
(Ord. #2011-2,  9) 
10-9.10 - Procedures in general. 
A.  The remedies provided in this section are cumulative and supplementary to each other to the criminal remedies provided by any criminal ordinance or statute, other civil remedies, and any administrative proceedings to revoke, suspend, fine, or take other action against any license. The city may pursue the remedies provided in this section, or other ordinances or statutes, other civil actions or remedies, administrative proceedings against a license, or any one (1) or more of them, and may do so simultaneously or in succession. 
B.  All actions under this section are civil and remedial in nature. 
C.  The city attorney for the city of Santa Fe may file a civil action to abate any nuisance in the District Court for the First Judicial District. Investigation and assistance to the city attorney shall be by persons designated by the city manager. A private citizen, in the name of the city may also bring an action under this section. 
D.  Actions under this section may affect the use, possession, enjoyment, and title to real property. Accordingly, the city may file and record a notice of lis pendens against the real property involved. 
E.  The defendants to an action under this section and the persons liable for the remedies in this section may include the property itself and any persons owning or claiming any legal or equitable interest or right of possession in the property. 
F.  In addition to remedies necessary to abate the nuisance, the city shall be entitled to costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. #2005-1,  11; Ord. #2011-2,  10) 
10-9.11 - Supplementary remedies for public nuisances. 
    In any action in which the existence of a public nuisance is established, the city may request in addition to other remedies permission to enter upon the real property, or take action with respect to personal property, and abate the nuisance or take steps to prevent public nuisances from continuing. The city shall be entitled to recover the costs incurred in abating the nuisance. 
(Ord. #2005-1,  12; Ord. #2011-2,  11) 
10-9.12 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose of abating public nuisances. 
(Ord. #2005-1,  13; Ord. #2011-2,  12) 
10-9.13 - Right of entry of inspection officer for examination of premises. 
    The inspection officer may enter, at all reasonable times, if the inspection officer has the occupant's or custodian's consent, any house or premises within the city to ascertain the existence of any nuisance. If the occupant's or custodian's consent is refused or is otherwise unobtainable, an inspection order may be sought or an emergency inspectorial search conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 24-1-16 through 24-1-19 NMSA 1978 of the Public Health Act. The inspection officer may investigate the conditions found and make reports provided, that such entering and investigation are for the sole purpose of ascertaining the conditions entrusted to their supervision; provided further that their reports are limited to matters pertaining to their duties. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8,  4; Ord. #2011-2,  13) 
10-10 - COAL BURNING. 

10-10.1 - Coal burning prohibited. 
    The burning of coal for the purpose of space heating is prohibited within the city limits of Santa Fe with the exception of stoves that have been specifically designed and manufactured to use coal, provided that the stove is correctly installed and maintained and that the correct fuel type for that stove is used. 
(Ord. #2007-16,  2) 
10-11 - SINGLE-SERVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 10-11 (Ordinance 2015-11, adopted on April 8, 2015) was struck down under City of Santa Fe vs. The Liquid Company, Inc., et al. , No. D-101-CV-2015-01330. Per the Order , the Ordinance is preempted by the Liquor Control act. 

CHAPTER XI - FINANCE AND BUDGET 
11-1 - FISCAL YEAR. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1953,  2-62; Code 1973,  8-1; SFCC 1981,  9-3-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Sec. 6-10-1 NMSA 1978. 
11-2 - PREPARATION AND APPROVAL OF ANNUAL BUDGET. 

11-2.1 - Appropriation. 
    Upon preparation and submission of an annual budget by the city manager, the governing body shall adopt the next fiscal year's budget by resolution. The final budget document shall include summaries of the following: 
A.  Anticipated revenues by fund; 
B.  Planned expenditures by fund, department and category; 
C.  Planned cash transfers between funds; 
D.  Estimated beginning and ending cash balances; 
E.  Costs for personnel salaries and benefits by fund and department; 
F.  General obligation and revenue bonded debt service; and 
G.  Schedules of lease purchase agreements and capital outlay. 
    The annual budget includes all line-item detailed reports for all funds and detailed personnel schedules, which must be prepared and be available upon request. 
(Code 1953,  2-65; Code 1973,  8-2; SFCC 1981,  9-3-2; Ord. #2008-20,  1) 
11-2.2 - Limitation on amount appropriated. 
    The total amount appropriated by the governing body in any particular fiscal year shall not exceed the probable amount of available money at the beginning of the year plus anticipated revenue during the fiscal year. 
(Code 1953,  2-65; Code 1973,  8-4; SFCC 1981,  9-3-3) 
11-2.3 - State approval required. 
    The governing body shall submit its adopted budget to the local government division of the department of finance and administration for review, amendment, if required, and approval. Upon receipt of the approved budget the governing body shall cause such budget to be made a part of the minutes of the governing body. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Sec. 6-6-5 NMSA 1978. 
11-2.4 - Annual audit. 
A.  The finance director shall complete an annual comprehensive financial report including all city funds. The finance director shall also ensure an annual audit is contracted with the state auditor or an independent auditing firm in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, state statutes, and other written state auditor's office policies and procedures. 
B.  A copy of the annual comprehensive financial report shall be distributed to all members of the governing body when released by the state auditor. The auditors completing the audit shall present a summary of the audit report to the finance committee. 
C.  The city manager shall direct department directors to resolve the findings included in the audit report, and report to the finance committee within ninety (90) days of the presentation of the audit report. Findings not resolved shall be brought back to the finance committee every ninety (90) days until resolutions are final. 
(Ord. #2001-37,  1) 
11-2.5 - Review of fees and charges. 
    Prior to the city manager's recommendation of the annual budget to the governing body, the city manager shall direct all departments to review all fees and charges assessed by that department. 
(Ord. #2003-27,  1) 
11-3 - CLAIMS OR PAYMENTS IN EXCESS OF APPROVED BUDGET; LIABILITY. 
A.  When the budget has been approved and received by the city, it shall be binding upon all officials and the governing body. The governing body shall not allow or approve claims in excess thereof, and no official shall make any payment in excess thereof; such allowances or claims or payments so allowed or paid shall be a liability against the officials so allowing or paying such claims or payments, and recovery for such excess amounts so allowed or paid may be had against the bondsmen of such officials. 
B.  The determination of expenses or expenditures in excess of the approved budget shall be by fund, function, department and division. 
C.  In the event that operations for the public health, safety and welfare require a service to be continued without interruption, the department director shall present the fund deficit within thirty (30) days of discovery to the finance committee for recommendation of action to the governing body. If the department director fails to take this action, the finance director shall bring the deficit to the finance committee within the next thirty (30) days. 
D.  For enterprise fund operations supported by revenues, quarterly reports also shall be made to the finance committee indicating the status of the revenues to date compared to the expenses to date. If the revenues are not in excess of expenses, and are not anticipated to be by the end of the fiscal year, the finance committee shall recommend action to the governing body of the proposed funding source to cover the deficit. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-5; Ord. #2001-37,  2; Ord. #2008-20,  2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Sec. 6-6-6 NMSA 1978. 
11-4 - BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS. 
    When budget adjustments are needed during the fiscal year, the following procedures shall apply: 
A.  The finance director has the authority to approve budget increases or decreases in revenue or transfers-in or in expenditures, expenses or transfers-out, that reflect increases or decreases in the budget up to and including five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
B.  The city manager has the authority to approve budget increases or decreases in revenue or transfers-in or in expenditures, expenses or transfers-out, that reflect increases or decreases in the budget from five thousand dollars and one cent ($5,000.01) up to and including sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). 
C.  The governing body shall approve budget increases or decreases in revenue or transfers-in or in expenditures, expenses or transfers-out, that reflect increases or decreases in the budget that are over sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). 
D.  Budget adjustments approved by the city manager and the governing body shall be included by fund in a quarterly budget resolution approved by the governing body. 
E.  Budget adjustment requests will conform to the rules and regulations adopted by the local government division of the department of finance and administration. 
F.  For budgets associated with grants and grant agreements, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The city manager may approve grant applications, awards, grant match requirements, and agreements from five thousand dollars and one cent ($5,000.01) up to and including sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). 
(2)  The city manager may approve budget revenue and related expenditure/expense increases (including budget adjustments or decreases, as applicable), for grants provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The governing body has already approved the grant application including the recommended match (if applicable); and 
(b)  The final grant award does not significantly differ from the grant application in the amount, match, requirements, or other requirements on the part of the city; and 
(3)  Any city department receiving a grant shall submit a copy of the final award agreement and documentation for the grant to the finance department for financial tracking, reporting and auditing purposes. 
(Code 1953, Sec. 2-66; Code 1973, Sec. 8-5; SFCC 1981,  9-3-6; Ord. #2002-25,  1; Ord. #2003-3,  1; Ord. #2008-20,  3; Ord. #2011-3,  1; Ord. # 2018-1 ,  1) 
11-5 - BATEMAN ACT. 

11-5.1 - Yearly expenditures limited to income. 
    The governing body cannot for any purpose become indebted or contract any debts of any kind during any fiscal year which, at the end of the fiscal year, cannot then be paid out of the money actually available at the beginning of the year or collected and belonging to that fiscal year. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Sec. 6-6-11 NMSA 1978. 
11-5.2 - Exemptions. 
    Insurance contracts not exceeding five (5) years, lease purchase agreements and lease agreements entered into by the governing body are exempt from the provisions of Section 6-6-11 NMSA 1978, and such contracts, base purchase agreements and lease agreements do not constitute the creation of debt. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Sec. 6-6-12 NMSA 1978. 
11-6 - COMMITMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS AND PAYMENT OF EXPENDITURES. 
A.  The governing body shall adopt, and amend as needed, by resolution, rules and regulations governing the commitment of public funds and payment of expenditures within the approved budget, not inconsistent with state law. 
B.  It is unlawful for any city employee or official of the city to make any commitment for or on behalf of the city without proper authorization or as prescribed in the rules and regulations. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-9) 
11-7 - LIABILITY OF EMPLOYEE OR OFFICIAL. 
    Every employee, officer or official of the city who participates in any violation of any of the preceding provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed, be liable personally and on his official bond, if bonded, for all money expended contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1953,  2-72; Code 1973,  8-11; SFCC 1981,  9-3-10) 
11-8 - INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS. 
A.  The city shall invest to the fullest extent all available funds, at the highest rate of return, pursuant to Sections 6-10-10 through 6-10-40 NMSA 1978, and state board of finance directives which set forth the interest rate policy on public funds. 
B.  The governing body shall adopt by resolution an investment policy designating as a minimum: 
(1)  An investment fund; and 
(2)  An investment portfolio. 
C.  The governing body shall authorize the city manager to appoint an employee to invest money held in demand deposits, not immediately needed for the operation of city government. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-11) 
11-9 - BONDED INDEBTEDNESS. 

11-9.1 - General obligation bonds. 
A.  The governing body may secure funds for projects or activities authorized by Section 3-30-5 NMSA 1978 or other applicable state law by: 
(1)  Submitting to a vote of the qualified electors the question of issuing the bonds; and 
(2)  Upon approval by a majority of those voting on the question favoring the creation of the debt, issuing and disposing of negotiable bonds pursuant to state law. The debt and interest on the debt will be paid for by assessing real estate property taxes over the life of the bonds. 
B.  The city shall use the money received from the issuance of the bonds only for the purpose for which the bonds were issued and all bond campaign public information materials generated by the city, shall be consistent with that purpose. 
C.  The city shall pledge its full faith and credit to the payment and debt retirement of the bonds. The city shall designate and maintain sinking and interest funds for the payment of interest on and principal of the bonds as the payments become due. Provided, however, that the city may pay the principal and interest on the bonds from any available revenues, and the levy or levies of taxes may be diminished to the extent such other revenues are available for the payment of such principal and interest. 
D.  Within thirty (30) days of passage of an election resolution authorizing the placement of general obligation bond questions on the ballot, the city shall provide information to the electorate regarding the purpose(s) of the general obligation bonds. 
E.  Any reallocation of proceeds from a voter-approved general obligation bond that deviates materially from the information provided to the electorate by the city of Santa Fe pursuant to paragraph D, above, shall be voted upon by the governing body through the adoption of an ordinance. For the purposes of this paragraph E, a change order reallocating such proceeds due to unforeseen or latent conditions is not a material deviation. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-12; Ord. #2013-33,  1; Ord. #2014-30,  1; Ord. #2015-24,  1) 
11-9.2 - Revenue bonds. 
A.  The governing body may authorize the issuance of revenue bonds pursuant to Sections 3-31-1 through 3-31-12 NMSA 1978, for the purposes specified by law. 
B.  At a regular or special meeting called for the purpose of issuing revenue bonds, the governing body may adopt an ordinance that: 
(1)  Declares the necessity for issuing revenue bonds; and 
(2)  Authorizes the issuance of revenue bonds by an affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the governing body. 
C.  If a majority of the governing body, but less than three-fourths (3/4) of all the members, vote in favor of adopting the ordinance authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds, the ordinance is adopted but shall not become effective until the question of issuing the revenue bonds is submitted to a vote of the qualified electors for their approval at a special or regular municipal election. 
D.  It is unlawful to divert, use or expend any money received from the issuance of bonds for any purpose other than the purpose for which the bonds were issued and to meet the Art in Public Places Ordinance as set forth in subsection 6-1.4 SFCC 1987. 
E.  Revenue bonds are not general obligations of the municipality and are collectible only from the proper pledged revenues. Each bond shall state that it is payable solely from the pledged revenues and that the bond holders may not look to any other municipal fund for the payment of the interest and principal of the bond. The term "pledged revenues" means the revenues, net income or net revenues authorized to be pledged to the payment of particular revenue bonds. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-13; Ord. #2006-05,  3) 
11-9.3 - Fund balances. 
    If a balance remains in an interest or sinking fund after the retirement and payment in full of the bonded indebtedness for which the fund was created, the governing body may request from the secretary of finance and administration the transfer of the balance to a fund requested by the city. Any balance transferred shall be used for non-recurring expenditures only. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Section 6-10-43 NMSA 1978. 
11-10 - SALE OR LEASE OF CITY PROPERTY. 

11-10.1 - Personal property. 
    The city may dispose of any item of personal property belonging to the city pursuant to the requirements set forth in Article 6, Chapter 13 NMSA 1978, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-15) 
11-10.2 - Real property or municipal utility. 
    The city may lease or sell and convey any municipal utility or real estate pursuant to the requirements of Article 54, Chapter 3, NMSA 1978, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-3-15) 
11-11 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN. 

11-11.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Economic Development Plan Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1996-21,  1) 
11-11.2 - Authority. 
    The Economic Development Plan Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred by the Local Economic Development Act to allow public support of economic development (N.M. Stat. Ann. Section 5-10-1 through Section 5-10-13 (1978)). This section is adopted as part of the city's community economic development plan. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  2; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  1) 
11-11.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Economic Development Plan Ordinance is to allow public support of economic development projects to foster, promote and enhance local economic development efforts while continuing to protect against the unauthorized use of public money and other public resources. Further, the purpose of the section is to allow the city to enter into one (1) or more joint powers agreements with other local governments to plan and support regional economic development projects. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  3) 
11-11.4 - Definitions. 
    Definitions in the Local Economic Development Act, Section 5-10-3 NMSA (1978), as may be amended, are incorporated by reference into this Economic Development Plan Ordinance with the following additions and amendments: 
    Compliance period means the date when the qualifying entity has fulfilled all enforceable obligations as articulated in its project participation agreement with the city of Santa Fe. 
    Cultural facility means a facility that is owned by the state, a county, a municipality or a qualifying entity that serves the public through preserving, educating and promoting the arts and culture, including but not limited to history, creativity and design, of a particular locale, including theaters, museums, libraries, galleries, cultural compounds, educational organizations, performing arts venues and organizations, fine arts organizations, including but not limited to folk, traditional, fine and experiential art, studios and media laboratories and facilities, and live-work housing facilities. 
    Economic development plan means any current plan setting forth goals, strategies or approaches for improving the economy of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico, as adopted by ordinance by the governing body or other authorized person or persons, and managed by the office of economic development or any subsequent division or department that may replace or become responsible for the office of economic development ("OED"). The economic development plan shall be printed and made available to the residents of the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  4; Ord. #2007-8,  1; Ord. #2008-42,  1; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  2) 
11-11.5 - Economic development assistance. 
    The governing body may assist economic development projects in any legally permissible manner that create new job opportunities by providing for or using public money and resources for the provision of land, buildings or infrastructure for facilities to support new or expanding businesses, provided that all the requirements of this ordinance are met. The city may provide land, buildings or infrastructure it already owns, or it may build, purchase or lease the facilities needed for an economic development project. The city at its discretion may bear the full cost or contribute a portion of the costs of impact fees, permitting fees, inspection or any other fees that are part of the construction or building process. Additionally, the city, at its discretion, may include the full or partial waiver of wastewater utility expansion charges ("UEC") fees, water adjustment fees, or a combination of both, pursuant to Subsection 7 of Exhibit A, Section 22 SFCC 1987. The city, at its discretion, may also contribute to the payment of costs for professional services contracts such as industry feasibility studies and planning and design services needed to implement a project. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  5; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  3) 
11-11.6 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2018-27 ,  3, adopted December 12, 2018, repealed  11-11.6, which pertained to economic development review subcommittee and derived from Ord. #1996-21,  6; Ord. #2004-37,  1; Ord. #2008-16,  5; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  4. 
11-11.7 - Application requirements. 
A.  Any qualifying entity meeting the definition set forth in subsection 11-11.4 SFCC 1987 may propose an economic development project to the city. Meeting the definition of a qualifying entity does not create any obligation on the part of the city. 
B.  Applications from qualifying entities shall be submitted to the OED on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  7; Ord. #2007-45,  26; Ord. #2008-16,  6; Ord. #2008-42,  2; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  5) 
11-11.8 - Application review process. 
A.  The economic development division, finance department, and such other city staff as are necessary and appropriate shall review the application. 
B.  If the application does not exceed the maximum threshold allowed under city procurement provisions for city manager's approval and the proposed project meets the definitions of this section and the policies and objectives of the city's economic development plan, staff shall make a recommendation to the city manager who may approve the application. Staff shall report to the economic development advisory committee on a periodic basis, no more than quarterly and no less than annually, regarding the progress and results of all applications approved by the city manager, with the period of reporting being set forth in the relevant project participation agreement. All other requirements of Section 11-11 shall apply. 
C.  If the application exceeds the maximum threshold allowed under city procurement provisions for city manager's approval, staff shall advise the economic development advisory committee if the entity and the proposed project meet the definitions of this section and the policies and objectives of the city's economic development plan. The city may at its discretion engage independent consultants to assist in the review of applications. 
D.  The economic development advisory committee shall determine at a public meeting whether the entity and the proposed project qualify under this section. 
E.  City staff shall then coordinate with the qualifying entity to develop a project participation agreement as set forth in subsection 11-11.11 SFCC 1987. 
F.  The economic development advisory committee shall consider the economic development project and the project participation agreement at a public meeting in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection 11-11.9 SFCC 1987. 
G.  The recommendation will be forwarded with the project participation agreement, minutes of the economic development advisory committee meetings and any other pertinent information to the governing body for final consideration at a public hearing. Review of the application by the finance committee shall be required in lieu thereof. 
H.  Information obtained by the city of Santa Fe that is proprietary technical or business information or related to the possible relocation or expansion of a qualifying entity shall be confidential and not subject to inspection pursuant to the Inspection of Public Records Act 14-2-4 NMSA 1978. 
I.  It is unlawful for any employee of the city, or any former employee of the city to reveal to any person other than another employee of the city any confidential information obtained by the city that is proprietary technical or business information or related to the possible relocation or expansion of a qualifying entity and not available from public sources, except in response to an order of a district court, an appellate court or a federal court. 
J.  Any employee or former employee of the city who reveals to another person any information that employee or former employee is prohibited from lawfully revealing is in violation of this section and shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  8; Ord. #2007-45,  27; Ord. #2008-16,  7; Ord. #2008-42,  3; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  6; Ord. # 2018-27 ,  4) 
11-11.9 - Application review criteria. 
A.  Applications for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the city which focus on targeted industries identified in the city's economic development plan shall receive priority. Similarly, businesses who are incorporated as a benefit corporation and whose social or environmental impact commitments are directed to the city of Santa Fe or to New Mexico shall receive priority. All other qualifying entities are eligible to apply, as well. The intention is to retain flexibility in the use of incentives. Qualifying entities with existing agreements or projects with the city when the city of Santa Fe economic development implementation strategies are adopted may propose a restructuring of their project as an economic development project. 
B.  All applications for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the city shall submit a cost-benefit analysis. Preparing the cost-benefit analysis shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be performed in a professional manner by a person or organization with relevant skills and knowledge. The city retains the right to specify a format and methodology for the cost-benefit analysis. City staff shall review and approve of the methodology used. The source and rationale for any multiplier effects shall be identified. The cost-benefit analysis shall show that the city will recoup the value of its donation within the compliance period as required in Section 11-11.10(D). For an application to be acceptable, the analysis must show a reasonable return on investment by examining criteria such as: 
(1)  The number and types of jobs to be created; 
(2)  Pay scales of jobs; 
(3)  Percentage of jobs expected to be filled by local residents and former residents who return to Santa Fe; 
(4)  Anticipated impact of project on local tax base; 
(5)  Anticipated impact on local school system; 
(6)  Anticipated contribution to the vision, culture, community, environment, brand and economic strategy of the city of Santa Fe; 
(7)  Anticipated development and sharing job training and career development plan for its employees; and 
(8)  Anticipated internships, cooperative education and internship programs for current or future employment. 
C.  All applications for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the city shall require the same review required of industrial revenue bond applications as set forth in Resolution No. 2012-4 as may be amended. Projects shall demonstrate a strong commitment to providing career opportunities for Santa Fe area residents. Cultural, community and environmental impacts of projects shall also be considered. 
D.  All applications for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the city shall clearly demonstrate the benefits which will accrue to the community as a result of the donation of public resources. The city has considerable flexibility in determining what is considered as adequate benefits. Benefits such as providing components or production capabilities which enhance a targeted industry sector or addressing critical deficiencies in the regional economy may be recognized. The benefits claimed of any proposal will receive careful scrutiny. However, it is the intent of this section to be flexible in the evaluation of these benefits, and to recognize the qualitative as well as quantitative impacts of a proposal. 
E.  All applications for economic development projects requesting economic assistance from the city shall clearly demonstrate how the qualifying entity is making a substantive contribution. The contribution shall be of value and may be paid in money, in-kind services, jobs, expanded tax base, property or other thing or service of value for the expansion or improvement of the economy. The city retains flexibility in defining the "substantive contribution." The benefits identified in the previous paragraphs may be accepted as adequate contribution on their own, or a cash donation may be required. Assistance in providing affordable housing to its employees or the community at large may also qualify. Determination of what constitutes an acceptable contribution for a given project shall be at the discretion of the governing body. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  9; Ord. #2008-42,  4; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  7) 
11-11.10 - Public safeguards. 
A.  All economic development projects receiving assistance from the city shall be subject to periodic performance review conducted by city staff, such period being the same as set forth in Section 11-11.8(B). This review shall evaluate whether the project is attaining the goals and objectives set forth in the project participation agreement. This review shall be presented to the economic development advisory committee for their consideration. The governing body at a public hearing may terminate assistance to the economic development project by passage of an ordinance which terminates the agreement and specifies the dispositions of all assets and obligations of the project as set forth in subsection 11-11.13 SFCC 1987. 
B.  The city shall retain a security interest which shall be specified in the project participation agreement. The type of security given shall depend upon the nature of the economic development project and assistance provided by the city. Types of security may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Letter of credit in the city's name; 
(2)  Performance bond equal to the city's contribution; 
(3)  A mortgage or lien on property or equipment; 
(4)  Pro-rated reimbursement of donation if company reduces work force or leaves the community before the term agreed to; and, 
(5)  Other security agreeable to both parties. 
C.  Should a qualifying entity move, sell, lease or transfer a majority interest in the economic development project before the expiration of project participation agreement, the city retains the right to deny any and all assignments, sales, leases or transfers of any interests in the economic development project until adequate assurances are made that the transferee, assignee or lessee is a qualifying entity and that the terms of the agreement will be satisfied by the transferee, assignee or lessee. At its discretion, the city may choose to deny said assignment, lease or transfer or may negotiate a new agreement with the new operator, or the city may reclaim the facility and enter into an agreement with a new qualifying entity. 
D.  Any qualifying entity seeking assistance from public resources shall commit to operate in accordance with its project participation agreement for the compliance period. The OED staff will conduct periodic performance review to ensure the qualifying entity has met its obligations required by the project participation agreement. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  10; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  8) 
11-11.11 - Project participation agreement. 
A.  The qualifying entity shall prepare with the city a project participation agreement. This agreement is the formal document which states the contributions and obligation of all parties in the economic development project. The agreement must clearly state the following items: 
(1)  The economic development goals of the project; 
(2)  The contributions of the city and the qualifying entity; 
(3)  The specific measurable objectives upon which the performance review will be based; 
(4)  A schedule for project development and goal attainment; 
(5)  The security being offered for the city's investment; 
(6)  The procedures by which a project may be terminated and the city's investment recovered; and, 
(7)  The time period for which the city shall retain an interest in the project. Each project agreement shall have a "sunset" clause after which the city shall relinquish interest in and oversight of the project. 
(8)  A time period to allow the qualifying entity to cure its non-compliance if it is non-compliant. 
(9)  Recapture provision to protect the city investment in case of non-compliance by the qualifying entity. 
B.  Each project participation agreement shall be adopted as an ordinance and adopted by the governing body at a public hearing. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  11; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  9) 
11-11.12 - Project monies. 
    All project monies shall be kept in separate accounts by the entity and the city, with such accounts clearly identified. These accounts shall be subject to an annual independent audit. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  12) 
11-11.13 - Termination. 
    The governing body may terminate this section and the city's community economic development plan and any or all project participation agreements undertaken under its authority. Termination shall be by ordinance at a public hearing or in accordance with the terms of the project participation agreement. If an ordinance or a project participation agreement is terminated, all contract provisions of the project participation agreement regarding termination shall be satisfied. Upon termination of the ordinance or any project participation agreement, any city monies remaining in city project accounts shall be transferred to the economic development fund. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  13; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  10) 
11-11.14 - Joint or regional projects. 
    The city may engage in economic development projects involving one (1) or more other governmental entities for projects which encompass more than one (1) municipality or county. In such instances, a joint powers agreement shall be adopted by the relevant governing bodies. This agreement will establish the application criteria and the terms of all project participation agreements. Criteria established under a joint powers agreement shall be consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  14) 
11-11.15 - Policies and procedures. 
    The community economic development plan and such other forms, policies and procedures as are deemed necessary by the city in order to implement this section are hereby adopted as a part of the city's economic development plan and are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  15) 
11-11.16 - Separability. 
    The provisions of this section are separable and the invalidity of any part of this section shall not affect the validity of the rest of the section. 
(Ord. #1996-21,  16) 
11-12 - ENTERPRISE FUNDS. 

11-12.1 - Enterprise fund expenditures. 
A.  All revenues generated by enterprise funds, including bond and grant proceeds, shall be expended solely for the purposes of their respective enterprise funds. 
B.  All revenues in excess of that needed to pay for operations and maintenance, capital outlays, bond debt service and similar revenue expenditures shall remain within their respective funds unless a failure to transfer the funds would constitute a violation of law or an impairment of an existing contract, or is made in accordance with paragraph D of this section. 
C.  Net revenue generated by enterprise funds shall be used for capital investment, repair and replacement, debt management, working capital, and transfers to the general fund. 
D.  On an annual basis, the governing body may authorize a transfer to the general fund in an amount not to exceed twelve percent (12%) of the three-year average total operating revenues based on the previous two (2) years' actual revenues reported in the city's annual audit, after allowing the enterprise to meet all of its operating expenses and debt service obligations, and providing for forty-five (45) days of working capital. Prior to such transfer of enterprise funds to the general fund, an analysis shall be performed to ensure that such a transfer would not require an enterprise fund rate increase; negatively affect bond ratings associated with the specific enterprise fund or be inconsistent with Section 3-23-4 NMSA 1978. The city may charge the enterprise fund for duly incurred non-routine costs of city services attributable to operation and maintenance of the enterprise or enterprise fund. 
E.  This ordinance is not intended to be construed to affect, amend or repeal any provision of any bond ordinance and is not intended to pertain to the collection of payments in lieu of taxes/fees or the convention center enterprise fund. 
(Ord. #1997-4,  1; Ord. #2011-14,  1; Ord. #2015-19,  1; Ord. No. 2016-14) 
11-13 - ADOPTION OF CITY'S PROCUREMENT CODE. 
A.  The city of Santa Fe hereby adopts the state of New Mexico Procurement Code ( 13-1-28 through 13-1-199 NMSA 1978) as the city of Santa Fe Procurement Code ("City Procurement Code"). Pursuant to its home-rule authority, and the city charter, the city may adopt rules specific to the city, which depart from state law. Any departures from the state law shall be adopted by ordinance. 
B.  Exemptions permitted by  13-1-98 through 13-1-98.2 NMSA 1978 are hereby adopted, in addition to the following exemptions: 
(1)  Purchases of publicly provided utilities including but not limited to: gas, electricity, water, telecommunications, and cable television; 
(2)  Bond attorneys, if approved by the city council as part of the underwriting team involved in the issuance, sale and delivery of public securities for city bonds or city-issued bonds; and 
(3)  Legal services for advice, consultation, and representation of the city. 
C.  The city manager's approval for contracts shall be consistent with the statutory "Small Purchases" amount currently set at sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), excluding applicable state and local gross receipts taxes, as defined by NMSA 1978,  13-1-125(2013), as it may be amended. The city manager's approval authority shall increase or decrease if and when the state changes the statutory amount for "small purchases". 
D.  The purchasing officer shall be the "Chief Procurement Officer of the City" as defined by NMSA 1978,  13-1-38.1(2013). 
E.  Local Preferences. Notwithstanding, NMSA 1978,  13-1-21(2016), the city shall apply the following definitions and preferences: 
(1)  "Resident business" means a business that has a valid resident business certificate issued by the taxation and revenue department pursuant to Section 13-1-22, and which shows that the resident business resides within the Santa Fe municipal limits. 
(2)  When the city makes a purchase using a formal bid process, the public body shall deem a bid submitted by a resident business to be three percent (3%) lower than the bid actually submitted. In addition, if the bid includes subcontractors who are also resident businesses, the public body shall deem a bid submitted by a resident business with resident business subcontractors to be six percent (6%) lower than the bid actually submitted. If a non-resident business hires all resident business subcontractors, the public body shall deem the bid to be three (3) percent lower than the bid actually submitted. 
(3)  When the city makes a purchase using a formal request for proposals process, not including contracts awarded on a point-based system, the city shall award an additional: 
(a)  Three percent (3%) of the total weight of all the factors used in evaluating the proposals to a resident business; and 
(b)  Three percent (3%) of the total weight of all the factors used in evaluating the proposals to a business with all resident business subcontractors. 
(4)  When the city makes a purchase using a formal request for proposals process, and the contract is awarded based on a point-based system, the city shall award additional points equivalent to: 
(a)  Three percent (3%) of the total possible points to a resident business; and 
(b)  Three percent (3%) of the total possible points to a business with all resident business subcontractors. 
(5)  The maximum available local preference shall be six percent (6%). 
F.  Competitive sealed proposals valued in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(1)  If the bid or proposal includes to subcontractors who are also resident businesses, the public body shall deem a bid or proposal submitted by a resident business to be six percent (6%) lower than the bid actually submitted, if and only if at least fifty percent (50%) of the subcontracted services go to subcontractors who are resident businesses. 
(2)  If a non-resident business hires resident business subcontractors, the public body shall deem the bid or proposal to be three percent (3%) percent lower than the bid actually submitted, if and only if at least fifty percent (50%) of the subcontracted services go to subcontractors who are resident businesses. 
G.  City employees shall endeavor to procure local goods and services that qualify as "small purchases" as defined by NMSA 1978,  13-1-125. 
H.  The Purchasing Manual may be amended as follows: 
(1)  The procurement officer, finance and budget director or any member of the governing body may propose amendments to the finance committee; 
(2)  The finance committee shall make its recommendation to the governing body; 
(3)  The governing body shall approve, modify or disapprove the proposed amendments. 
I.  At the beginning of each fiscal year, if amendments are made, the Purchasing Manual shall be re-published with the publication date clearly designated, and all amendments shall be incorporated therein. 
(Ord. #1999-1,  1; Ord. #2000-32,  1; Ord. #2012-12; Ord. #2012-16; Ord. # 2018-1 ,  2) 
11-14 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FUND. 

11-14.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Economic Development Fund Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2000-16,  1) 
11-14.2 - Authority. 
    The Economic Development Fund Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to allow public support of economic development (Section 5-10-1 through Section 5-10-13 NMSA 1978). This ordinance is adopted as part of the city's community economic development plan. 
(Ord. #2000-16,  1) 
11-14.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Economic Development Fund Ordinance is to identify the funds which shall be deposited into the economic development fund and to restrict the expenditure of monies in the economic development fund to those activities which implement the goals, strategies or approaches of the economic development plan and/or qualify as economic development projects as defined in Section 11-11.4 SFCC 1987. Furthermore, the fund is intended to support activities which serve to diversify the local economy, and which do not have access to other city funding sources such as, but not limited to, the lodgers tax through the occupancy tax advisory board or the arts commission and capital funds through the capital improvements program. Qualifying under the Santa Fe Economic Development Plan does not establish any obligation on the city's part to offer any specific type or level of assistance to any project or activity, nor does it imply that a project or activity must be funded solely or primarily from the economic development fund. The economic development fund is not intended to be the sole source of funding for economic development projects, and any activity or project eligible for support from the fund is strongly encouraged to develop additional sources of funds. 
(Ord. #2000-16,  3; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  11) 
11-14.4 - Definitions. 
    As used in this Economic Development Fund Ordinance: 
    Economic development fund means that fund in the City budget created by Resolution 1998-49, adopted on July 29, 1998. 
    Economic development project means a project or activity which meets the definition of a qualifying entity found in subsection 11-11.4 SFCC 1987, or serves to implement the goals, strategies and actions contained in the Santa Fe CEDP, or which originates or results from a regional project or activity with Santa Fe County or any other public entity. 
(Ord. #2000-16,  4) 
11-14.5 - Dedication. 
A.  An amount of the general fund equal to a minimum of one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the city's share of the state gross receipts tax shall be allocated annually to the economic development fund beginning in the fiscal year 2000/01 budget. This allocation shall be increased by one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) each subsequent year until an allocation of one percent (1%) is attained in FY 2003/04. Thereafter, the allocation shall be maintained at one percent (1%) unless increased by other annual allocations the governing body approves contingent upon sufficient appropriations and authorization by the governing body. 
B.  All net proceeds from any sale or lease of city-owned land shall be deposited in to the economic development fund, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Railyard Property. Proceeds from the sale or lease of property on the Railyard Property are exempted from the provisions of this section and shall not be deposited in the economic development fund. 
(2)  Santa Fe Estates. Only the net proceeds of the city's share of land sales in Santa Fe Estates, after the expenses incurred for infrastructure improvements or other associated costs have been deducted, shall be subject to this section. 
(3)  Tierra Contenta. Only the share of revenues from the sale of property in Tierra Contenta which had been designated to reimburse CIP funds used for the original purchase of Tierra Contenta shall be deposited in to the economic development fund (less funds already allocated for a new southside library in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). These funds shall be reserved for capital projects and their related expenses for projects authorized in subsection 11-14.5A SFCC 1987. 
(4)  Existing Agreements. Agreements, ordinances and resolutions in force at the time of adoption of this section which stipulate other uses for the proceeds of specific transactions will exempt those transactions from the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Enterprise Funds. Proceeds from the sale or lease of property belonging to or associated with enterprise funds are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(6)  Airport Industrial Park. Net proceeds from the sale or lease of property in the Airport Industrial Park or other airport property, after all costs to build out all phases of the park have been recovered, shall go to the support of the Santa Fe Municipal Airport. 
(7)  Other. Agreements for the sale or lease of city property which may be subject to other restrictions as to revenue designations or uses are not subject to the provisions of this section. Any such agreement must cite this subsection of this section in the agreement in order to qualify for this exemption. 
(Ord. #2000-16,  5) 
11-14.6 - Eligible uses. 
A.  All funds deposited into the economic development fund, including those in the fund at the time of the adoption of this section, shall be reserved for those activities which implement the goals, strategies and actions of the Santa Fe CEDP and/or qualify as economic development projects or activities as defined in subsection 11-11.4 SFCC 1987, or which originates or results from a regional project or activity with Santa Fe County or any other public entity. 
B.  Any agreement, contract or other undertaking which involves the use of funds from the economic development fund shall clearly state that the activity or project meets the purpose of this section. 
C.  Any use of funds in the economic development fund for projects or activities not authorized in subsection 11-14.6-A SFCC 1987 or not included as a goal, strategy or action in the community economic development plan shall require an amendment to this section at a public hearing. 
D.  Each activity or project funded shall incorporate adequate measures and criteria to evaluate effectiveness and benefit. 
(Ord. #2000-16,  6) 
11-14.7 - Separability. 
    The provisions of this section are separable and the invalidity of any part of this section shall not affect the validity of the rest of the section. 
(Ord. #2000-16,  7) 
11-15 - FRANCHISE FINANCIAL REVIEWS. 
A.  The city manager shall assign each franchise agreement to a department for contract administration, which shall be in place until otherwise changed. 
B.  The city of Santa Fe shall select at least one (1) franchisee each fiscal year for a financial review by either a city internal auditor or an independent audit firm. 
C.  The financial review shall be based on the fiscal operating year of the franchisee. 
D.  Generally accepted review standards shall be used and documented by the auditor. 
E.  Additional reviews by a city internal auditor or an independent audit firm may be directed or contracted by the city manager or the finance committee. The internal auditor or assigned contract administrator may recommend a financial review if concerns arise. A financial review shall be completed if a franchisee has changed ownership, is experiencing significant financial or operational difficulties or irregularities or if payments are regularly late or not paid. 
F.  The financial review shall be presented to the finance committee within thirty (30) days of the report being issued. 
(Ord. #2002-40,  1) 
11-16 - RESERVED.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 11-16, Affordable Housing Investment Loan Fund, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2006-33, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2007-23. 

CHAPTER XII - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
12-1 - RESERVED.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 12-1, Adoption of Life Safety Code 101, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1959-21,  1; 1964-28,  1; 1966-6,  1; 1972-16,  1; Code 1973  9-9; Ord. No. 1976-15,  2; SFCC 1981,  7-1.1; Ord. Nos. 1989-10,  1 and 1995-44,  1 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-53. 

12-2 - FIRE CODE.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1959-21, 1964-28, 1966-6, 1967-4, 1972-16, Code 1973  9-9 - 9-12, 9-14, Ordinance No. 1976-16, SFCC 1981  7-3-1 - 7-3-7, Ordinance Nos. 1981-64, 1983-62, 1986-3, 1995-11 and 1995-44. 

12-2.1 - Adoption of fire code. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 3-18-11 NMSA 1978, the city may adopt regulations for the prevention of fire. 
B.  For the purposes of reasonably safeguarding life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from hazardous conditions in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises, the 2009 International Fire Code (IFC) as published by the International Code Council (ICC) is adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out herein except as amended by the governing body. The amendments are set forth in Exhibit A attached to the end of this chapter. The 2009 International Fire Code as amended by the governing body shall be known as "the fire code of the city of Santa Fe." This paragraph shall be effective July 1, 2011. 
C.  A copy of the fire code of the city of Santa Fe shall be kept on file at the Santa Fe fire prevention bureau, 1751 Cerrillos Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504 and shall be, at all reasonable times, available and subject to inspection. A copy of the fire code of the city of Santa Fe shall be available to any individual upon request and payment of a reasonable charge as set by the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. #2004-53,  3; Ord. #2008-33,  1; Ord. #2011-20,  1) 
12-2.2 - Fees. 
    The fire department shall collect fees for inspections and plan reviews required by city code and conducted by the fire department for the purposes of fire prevention and protection. The governing body shall adopt a schedule of such fees by passage of a resolution. 
(Ord. #2004-53,  4, 5) 
12-2.3 - Annual fire inspections. 
    The following types of occupancies, as defined by the International Building Code, shall require an annual inspection by the fire department for compliance with the fire code of the city of Santa Fe. 
A.  Group A-1 occupancies (assembly occupancies including, but not limited to, motion picture theaters, and symphony and concert halls, theaters); 
B.  Group A-2 occupancies (assembly occupancies including, but not limited to, banquet halls, night clubs, restaurants, taverns and bars); 
C.  Group E occupancies (occupancies for educational purposes); 
D.  Group M occupancies, or greater, (mercantile occupancies including, but not limited to, department stores, drug stores, markets, motor fuel-dispensing facilities, retail or wholesale stores, sales rooms); and 
E.  Group R-1 occupancies (residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily transient in nature including, but not limited to, short term rental units, boarding houses, hotels and motels). 
(Ord. #2004-53,   6, 7; Ord. #2008-33,  2) 
12-2.4 - Storage of flammable liquids; additional limits. 
A.  No aboveground tanks for storage of flammable liquids which exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons capacity shall be constructed in the city except as set forth in this subsection. All designs and installations of aboveground storage tanks shall be in compliance with the fire code of the city of Santa Fe adopted as set forth in subsection 12-2.1 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Temporary permits must be received for any storage of flammable liquids outside of I-1 and I-2 industrial zones. Such permits shall be issued only for construction projects and shall limit the use of such storage to a time not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
C.  Nothing in paragraphs A and B of this subsection shall prohibit aboveground tanks for storage of flammable liquids in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons utilized in conjunction with aircraft refueling operations within the boundaries of the Santa Fe Municipal Airport. All designs and installations of aboveground storage tanks shall be in compliance with the fire code of the city of Santa Fe adopted as set forth in subsection 12-2.1 SFCC 1987. 
D.  Nothing in paragraphs A and B of this subsection shall prohibit the installation or construction of aboveground tanks in the city for the storage of liquefied petroleum gas at a distribution point. Tanks shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) gallon tank capacity. For the purposes of this subsection "liquefied petroleum gas" (also referred to as "lp gas" or "lpg") means and includes any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them: propane propylene, butanes (normal butane or iso-butane) and butylenes. "Distributing point" means a facility other than a distributing plant or industrial plant, which normally receives gas by tank truck and which fills small containers or the engine fuel tank of motor vehicles on the premises. An lp gas service station is one (1) type of distributing point. All equipment, tanks, and installations shall comply with the fire code of the city of Santa Fe adopted as set forth in subsection 12-2.1 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2004-53,  8; Ord. #2008-33,  3) 
12-3 - FIREWORKS. 

12-3.1 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in this section: 
    Dangerous fireworks means any firecracker, roman candle, skyrocket, torpedo, bomb, blank cartridge, cone-shape fountain, bottle rocket and flyer or any other type or form of explosive; any item that is self-propelling or the effect of which extends above fifteen feet (15') in height from the ground; or any article which produces a report by combustion, explosion or detonation. 
    Safe and sane fireworks means all fireworks that have no report, that are not self-propelling and the effect of which does not extend above fifteen feet (15') in height from the ground, including the following: 
(1)  Snakes, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed twenty (20) grams each in weight; 
(2)  Smoke devices and spray balls, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed twenty-five (25) grams each in weight; 
(3)  Wheels, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed sixty (60) grams in weight per driver unit, but any number of drivers may be on any one wheel. The inside bore of driver tubes shall not be over one-half inch (1/2"); 
(4)  Illuminating torches and colored fire in any form, total pyrotechnic composition of illuminating torches not to exceed one hundred (100) grams each in weight; 
(5)  Sparklers and dipped sticks, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed one hundred (100) grams in weight. Pyrotechnic composition containing any chlorate or perchlorate shall not exceed five (5) grams; 
(6)  Cylindrical fountains, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed seventy-five (75) grams each in weight. The inside tube diameter shall not exceed three-fourths inch (3/4"); 
(7)  Railway fuses, fuses, truck flares, hardship distress signals, smoke candles, smoke signals and smoke pots; and 
(8)  All other fireworks similar to the above, provided they are tested and approved by the chief of the fire department. 
B.  The terms "safe and sane fireworks" and "dangerous fireworks" do not include auto flares, toy pistols, toy guns or devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five hundredth ( 25/100 ) gains or less of explosive compounds are used, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  2; Code 1973,  9-30; SFCC 1981,  7-4-1) 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to regulate and prohibit the use of fireworks,  3-1811 NMSA 1978. 
12-3.2 - Manufacture, sale and discharge of fireworks. 
    Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell, offer to sell, own, possess or discharge any fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  1; Code 1973,  9-31; SFCC 1981,  7-4-2) 
12-3.3 - Public display. 
A.  The fire department may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised and controlled public displays of fireworks by the city, a civic organization, amusement park or other organization or group of individuals approved by the fire department. Such permits shall be granted on application to the fire department, approval by the governing body and the filing of a bond by the applicant as herein provided. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator duly approved by the fire department and shall be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired, as, in the opinion of the department, not to be hazardous to property or endanger life. 
B.  Application for permits shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the display. After the permit has been granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No such permit granted shall be transferable. 
C.  Applicants for permits shall furnish a bond of not less than one thousand dollars ($ 1,000) conditioned on compliance with this section and the rules and regulations of the fire department. The bond shall be approved by the city attorney. The city shall not be required to file a bond. 
D.  Before any permit for fireworks display shall be issued, the applicant shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy any claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of the applicant or any agent or employee in such amount, character and form as the city attorney determines necessary for the protection of the public. 
    Any fireworks that remain unfired after an approved display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a manner safe for the particular type of fireworks and approved by the fire department. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  3; Code 1973,  9-32; SFCC 1981,  7-4-3) 
12-3.4 - Other permitted activities. 
A.  Any person may sell, offer to sell, or store for sale safe and sane fireworks by obtaining a permit as provided in subsection 12-3.5 of this Chapter. 
B.  Wholesalers and jobbers may sell dangerous fireworks; provided, that they are shipped out-of-state in accordance with the interstate commerce commission and department of transportation regulations covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail and water. Wholesalers and jobbers shall store their supplies of fireworks in accordance with Section 12.6 of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 122 of this Chapter. Wholesalers and jobbers selling dangerous fireworks shall obtain a permit from the fire department and pay an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500) to the city treasurer. 
C.  This section does not prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, for signal purposes in athletics or sports or for use by military organizations. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  4; Code 1973,  9-33; SFCC 1981,  7-4-4) 
12-3.5 - Permit for sale or possession of fireworks. 
A.  Any person intending to sell, offer to sell or store for sale any safe and sane fireworks shall first obtain a permit by: 
(1)  Filing a written application on a form approved by the fire department which shall include the name and address of the wholesaler or jobber selling the fireworks and by paying a fee to the city treasurer in the following amounts: 
(a)  Wholesalers, one hundred dollars ($100.00); and 
(b)  Retailers, fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(2)  Demonstrating to the satisfaction of the fire department that the items to be handled under the permit comply with the terms and intent of this section; and 
(3)  Certifying that no person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be permitted by the applicant to sell or offer to sell any fireworks. 
B.  Any permit granted under this subsection to any person, wholesaler or jobber shall be for a period of one (1) year. 
C.  Any permit granted under this subsection to any person other than a wholesaler or jobber shall authorize the possession of safe and sane fireworks for the period of June 10 through July 15 of each year and the sale and display of such fireworks for the period of June 20 through July 5 of each year. 
D.  Any permit granted hereunder shall be valid only for the calendar in which issued and only for the premises or location for which issued. No permit shall be transferable, assignable or automatically renewable. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  6; Code 1973,  9-34; SFCC 1981,  7-4-5) 
12-3.6 - Sale, possession or use restricted to certain persons. 
A.  It is unlawful to sell, offer to sell or give any fireworks to any person under sixteen (16) years unless he is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
B.  Persons over the age of sixteen (16) years may purchase, use and possess safe and sane fireworks. 
(Ord. #1971-19,7; Code 1973,  9-35; SFCC 1981,  7-4-6) 
12-3.7 - Restrictions. 
A.  No fireworks approved for sale shall be stored, possessed or used within fifty feet (50') of gasoline or other flammable liquids unless such liquids are sealed in metal containers of not more than one (1) gallon capacity. 
B.  No fireworks shall be sold except from within a permanent structure at a recognized business location. The construction or use of fireworks stands outside of a permanent structure is prohibited. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  8; Code 1973,  9-36; SFCC 1981,  7-4-7) 
12-3.8 - Seizure of fireworks. 
    The fire department shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of dangerous fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this section. 
(Ord. #1971-19,  5; Code 1973,  9-37; SFCC 1981,  7-4-8) 
12-3.9 - Restrictions during severe or extreme drought conditions. 
A.  As per Section 60-2C-8.1 NMSA 1978, the governing body may determine and declare that severe or extreme drought conditions exist within the boundaries of the city of Santa Fe based upon current drought indices published by the national weather service and other relevant information supplied by the United States Forest Service limits. 
B.  Upon adoption of a resolution by the governing body pursuant to Section 602A-8.1 NMSA 1978 proclaiming that severe or extreme drought conditions exist, the sale or use of fireworks are immediately restricted to the maximum extent possible permitted in Section 60-2C8.1 NMSA 1978. 
(1)  The sale or use of the following fireworks is prohibited within the city: 
(a)  Aerial devices: 
i)  Aerial spinners; 
ii)  Helicopters; 
iii)  Mines; 
iv)  Missile-type rockets; 
v)  Roman candles; 
vi)  Shells; and 
vii)  Stick-type rockets. 
(b)  Ground audible devices; 
i)  Chasers; and 
ii)  Firecrackers. 
(2)  All fireworks within any lands covered wholly or in part by timber, brush or native grass are prohibited. 
(3)  The above restrictions do not apply to public displays of fireworks in strict conformance with the requirements and conditions set forth in subsection 12-3.3 SFCC 1987 and as approved by the city of Santa Fe fire chief. 
C.  Penalties. 
(1)  Any individual, firm, partnership or other entity found in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment for up to ninety (90) days or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(2)  Each and every occasion on which this section is violated shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. #2002-18,  2) 
12-4 - FIRE LANES. 

12-4.1 - Definitions. 
    Fire lane means the road, path, or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus through congested areas (both built-up and wildland). 
(Ord. # 1992-2 1,  1) 
12-4.2 - Required access for fire apparatus. 
    All premises, except owner occupied single-family dwellings, that the fire department may be called upon to protect in case of fire shall be provided with fire lanes as required by the fire chief. 
(Ord. #1992-21,  2) 
12-4.3 - Marking of fire lanes. 
    All required fire lanes shall be marked with curbing painted bright red and lettered at regular intervals, not exceeding thirty-five feet (35') with "FIRE LANE-NO PARKING" in contrasting block white letters. Letters shall be no less than three inches (3") in height with a stroke width of at least one-half inch (1/2"). In areas where curbing is not present, signs approved by the fire chief may be substituted. 
(Ord. #1992-21,  3) 
12-4.4 - Parking in fire lanes unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park motor vehicles on, or otherwise obstruct, any fire lane. Parking in a fire lane is a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. An illegally parked vehicle may also be towed away by duly authorized municipal officials or their designees. 
(Ord. #1192-21,  4) 
12-5 - ADOPTION OF ANY AND ALL CODES OR STANDARDS OF THE MOST CURRENT EDITION OF THE UNIFORM FIRE CODE NOT REFERENCED IN THE LIFE SAFETY CODE 101. 
    For the purposes of determining required fire flows for buildings in the city of Santa Fe, the city adopts the most current edition of the Uniform Fire Code, Division III Fire Protection Appendix III-A, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings. Copies of the Uniform Fire Code and referenced appendix shall be kept on file and available for inspection at all reasonable times in the office of the fire chief. 
(Ord. #1995-44  3) 
12-6 - ACCESS GATES. 

12-6.1 - Definitions. 
    Approved means acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. 
    Authority having jurisdiction means the organization, office, or individual responsible for approving equipment, an installation, or a procedure. (i.e., fire chief, fire marshal, or their designee) 
    Fire department access gate means a gate that fire department equipment would primarily use in case of an emergency that is designed as a security feature to restrict nonresidents from entering. 
    Gated community means any subdivision or private road that provides access to four (4) or more residences excluding guesthouses. 
(Ord. #1999-7,  1) 
12-6.2 - Gate openers. 
    All new and existing gated communities and commercial properties with automatic gate openers shall provide approved strobe light activated automatic gate opening receivers for each automatic gate. Manually operated gates are not required to comply with this section. 
(Ord. #1999-7,  2) 
12-6.3 - Installation. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or homeowners' association to purchase and install strobe light activated automatic gate opening receivers. Installation shall be completed by qualified personnel. 
(Ord. #1999-7,  3) 
12-6.4 - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or homeowners' association to maintain and provide an annual inspection completed by qualified personnel for all installed strobe light activated automatic gate opening receivers located within the gated community. 
(Ord. #1999-7,  4) 
12-6.5 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this section shall be one (1) year from the date of adoption. 
(Ord. #1999-7,  5) 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
CHAPTER 12 
EXHIBIT A 
AMENDMENTS TO THE 2009 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 
(SUBSECTION 12-2.1 SFCC 1987) 
ADOPTED: June 8, 2011 (effective July 1, 2011) 
AMENDED: 
  1. Section 101.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the city of Santa Fe, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
  2 Section 105.3.7 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
   105.3.7 Information on the permit. The fire code official may issue any permits required by this code on an approved form furnished for that purpose. The permit shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other information required by the fire code official. Issued permits shall bear the signature of the fire code official or other approved legal authorization. 
  3. Section 108.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code is repealed in its entirety and a new Section 108.1 is ordained to read: 
   108.1 Appeal of Department Decisions. When the fire department disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for as required by this code or when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire department to the city manager within thirty (30) days of the decision. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the governing body within ten (10) days of the city manager's decision. 
  4. Section 108.2 of the 2009 International Fire Code is repealed in its entirety. 
  5. Section 108.3 of the 2009 International Fire Code is repealed in its entirety. 
  6. Section 109.3 of the 2009 International Fire Code is repealed in its entirety and a new Section 109.3 is ordained to read: 
   109.3 Violation penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this code or failing to comply with any order made thereunder, building in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved, any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or failing to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the governing body or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time defined herein, shall severally for each noncompliance be punished as provided by Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violations or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
  7. Section 111.4 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
   111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as provided in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
 8.  A new Section 508.5.1.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code is ordained to read: 
   508.5.1. Fire Protection in Recreational Vehicles, Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing Parks, Sales Lots, and Storage Lots. Fire protection in recreational vehicles, mobile home and manufactured housing parks, sales lots, and storage lots shall provide and maintain fire hydrants and access roads in accordance with Sections 503 and 508.5. 
Exception: Recreational vehicle parks located in remote areas shall be provided with protection and access roadways as required by the fire code official. 
  9. Section 603.9 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
  603.9 Gas meters. Where required by the fire code official, above-ground gas meters, regulators and piping subject to damage shall be protected by a barrier complying with Section 312 or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
  10. The following definition of Section 902.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. Standpipe classes are as follows: 
Class I system. A system providing 2.5-inch (64 mm) hose connections to supply water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams. 
Class II system. A system providing 1.5-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use primarily by the building occupants or by the fire department during initial response. 1.5 inch hoses and hose cabinets shall not be provided, unless required by the New Mexico laws applicable to fire protection for class II and class III standpipe systems. 
Class III system. A system providing 1.5-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use by building occupants and 2.5-inch (64 mm) hose connections to supply a larger volume of water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams. 1.5-inch hoses and hose cabinets shall not be provided, unless required by the New Mexico laws applicable to fire protection for class II and class III standpipe systems. 
  11. Section 904.11 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
  904.11 Commercial cooking systems. The automatic fire-extinguishing system for commercial cooking systems shall be of a type recognized for protection of commercial cooking equipment and exhaust systems of the type and arrangement protected. Pre-engineered automatic dry- and wet-chemical extinguishing systems shall be tested in accordance with UL 300 and listed and labeled for the intended application. Other types of automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be listed and labeled for specific use as protection for commercial cooking operations. The system shall be installed in accordance with this code, its listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems of the following types shall be installed in accordance with the referenced standard indicated, as follows: 
1.  Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, NFPA 12. 
2.  Automatic sprinkler systems, NFPA 13. 
3.  Foam-water sprinkler system or foam-water spray systems, NFPA 16. 
4.  Dry-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17. 
5.  Wet-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17A. 
  12. Section 906.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
  906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the following locations. 
1.  In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R- 1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies. 
Exception: When allowed by the fire code official, in all Group A, B and E occupancies equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers, portable fire extinguishers shall be required only in locations specified in items 2 through 6. 
2.  Within 30 feet (9144mm) of commercial cooking equipment. 
3.  In areas where flammable or combustible liquids are stored, used or dispensed. 
4.  On each floor of structures under construction, except Group R-3 occupancies, in accordance with Section 1415. 1. 
5.  Where required by the sections indicated in Table 906. 1. 
6.  Special-hazard areas, including but not limited to laboratories, computer rooms and generator rooms, where required by the fire code official. 
  13. Section 3404.2.9.6.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
  3404.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and 11 liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by law in subsection 12-2.4 SFCC 1987. 
  14. Section 3406.2.4.4 of the 2009 International Fire Code is amended to read: 
  3406.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and 11 liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within the limits established by law in subsection 12-2.4 SFCC 1987. 
 1 5. Appendix B of the 2009 International Fire Code is adopted in its entirety. 
 1 6. Appendix D of the 2009 International Fire Code is adopted with the following amendments: 
  (a) D103.1 Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be 20 feet (6096mm). 
  (b) D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Where required by the fire code official, gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The minimum gate width shall be 20 feet (6096 mm). 
2.  Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type. 
3.  Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one person. 
4.  Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective. 
5.  Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the fire code official. 
6.  Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools. 
7.  Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official. 
  (c) D104.1 Buildings exceeding three stories or 30 feet in height. Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet (9144 mm) or three stories in height shall have at least two means of fire apparatus access for each structure. 
  (d) D104.2 Buildings exceeding 62,000 square feet in area. Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet (5760 m2) shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. 
Exception: When required by the fire code official, projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet (11520 m2) that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems. 
  (e) D105.1 Where required. Where required by the fire code official, buildings or portions of buildings facilities exceeding 30 feet (9144 mm) in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with approved fire apparatus access roads capable of accommodating fire department aerial apparatus. Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located within the aerial fire apparatus access roadway. 
(Ord. #2008-33,  4; Ord. #2011-20,  2) 
CHAPTER XIII - STORMWATER UTILITY 
13-1 - STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE. 

13-1.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Stormwater Utility Service Charge Ordinance". 
(Ord. #2003-22,  2) 
Sec. 13-1.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city has determined that: 
A.  The federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., requires certain political entities, such as the city of Santa Fe, to implement stormwater management programs within prescribed time frames, and the environmental protection agency, pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act, has published rules for stormwater outfall permits. 
B.  Section 3-49-5 NMSA 1978 authorizes cities to "open, construct, repair, keep in order and maintain water mains, laterals, reservoirs, standpipes, sewers and drains," and Section 3-27-4 authorizes cities to "levy by general ordinance a just and reasonable service charge" for "maintaining, enlarging, extending, constructing, and repairing water facilities." 
C.  The Santa Fe region will benefit from the city's efforts to maintain and improve the system of stormwater facilities and other efforts to improve and safeguard the water quality of the Santa Fe River and its tributary arroyos, due to their reliance on the Santa Fe River and groundwater for their long-term supply. 
D.  The stormwater system that provides for the collection, treatment, storage and disposal of stormwater provides benefits and services to the Santa Fe region. Such benefits include, but are not limited to: the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of stormwater; and improvements to the water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and its receiving waters. 
(Ord. #2003-22,  3) 
13-1.3 - Purpose. 
    The city shall impose a stormwater utility service charge on the monthly utility bills of its utility customers for the purpose of funding the operation, construction and maintenance of stormwater facilities, for stormwater system planning, and for review of stormwater development plans for compliance with stormwater management codes. 
(Ord. #2003-22,  4) 
13-1.4 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Construction means the erection, building, acquisition, alteration, reconstruction, improvement or extension of stormwater facilities; preliminary planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of stormwater facilities; the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and economic investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures, and other action necessary in the construction of stormwater facilities; and the inspection and supervision of the construction of stormwater facilities. 
    Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration, and drainage. 
    Stormwater management means the planning, design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, maintenance, and operation of facilities and programs relating to water, flood plains, flood control, grading, erosion, tree conservation, and sediment control. 
    Stormwater utility service charge means the charge established under this section and levied on utility customers to fund the costs of stormwater management and of operating, maintaining, and improving the stormwater system in the city. 
(Ord. #2003-22,  5) 
13-1.5 - Stormwater utility service charge established. 
    Each city utility customer account, except those set forth in subsection 13-1.6, shall be billed a monthly stormwater utility service charge as shown on the attached Exhibit A.* The governing body shall, by ordinance, periodically amend Exhibit A* based upon increased costs to the city for stormwater management. The stormwater utility service charge is in addition to any other charge that the city has the right to charge under any other rule or regulation of the city. 
(Ord. #2003-22,  6; Ord. #2010-17,  1) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
13-1.6 - Exemptions from charges. 
    Customers may be exempt from monthly stormwater utility service charge if they meet the following: 
A.  Any customer filing an affidavit setting out the following facts: 
(1)  The customer is the head of the household residing in the residence being assessed; 
(2)  The household's gross annual income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the most recent federal poverty guidelines issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; and 
(3)  The customer shall submit documents as required by city policy in order to verify income. 
B.  Any person filing an affidavit requesting exemption of the charge consents to any reasonable investigation and substantiation by the city of the facts stated in the affidavit. 
C.  The filing of a false statement or otherwise fraudulently obtaining the benefits of this subsection is a violation of the Santa Fe Code and is punishable pursuant to Section 1-3 of this Code and shall entitle the city to recover any fraudulently exempted amount and applicable interest penalties. 
(Ord. #2003-22,  7) 
13-1.7 - Use of revenues. 
    Stormwater utility service charge revenues shall be accounted for separately from other funds of the city. The charges and any interest earned on the fund shall be spent only for the following: 
A.  The acquisition, design, construction, maintenance and operation of the stormwater system, including capital improvements designated in the capital improvement program; 
B.  Administration and enforcement of this section and all regulations and procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance, operation and alteration of the stormwater system, including, but not limited to, the quantity and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed thereby; 
C.  Preparation and revision of comprehensive drainage infrastructure and monitoring plans; 
D.  Review of development plans for conformity with stormwater regulation and inspection and acceptance of extensions and connections to the stormwater system; 
E.  Enforcement of regulations to protect and maintain water quality and quantity within the system in compliance with water quality standards established by state, regional and/or federal agencies as now adopted or hereafter amended; 
F.  Other activities related to the improvement, maintenance and operation of the stormwater system. 
(Ord. #2003-22,  7) 
13-2 - STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGE CONTROL. 

13-2.1 - Title. 
    Section 13-2 may be cited as the "Stormwater Illicit Discharge Control Ordinance". 
(Ord. #2005-3,  2) 
13-2.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city has determined that the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., requires the city of Santa Fe, to implement a stormwater management plan to comply with stormwater discharge permits issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES), which includes the requirement to detect and eliminate illicit discharges of pollutants into the municipal storm drain (storm sewer) system. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  3) 
13-2.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of the Stormwater Illicit Discharge Ordinance is to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and groundwater by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the city's storm drain system. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  4) 
13-2.4 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Abate means to bring to a halt, eliminate or, where that is not possible or feasible, to suppress, reduce, or minimize. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Hazardous material means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system that contains any pollutant(s). 
    Illicit connection means either of the following: 
A.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
B.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial establishment to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
    NPDES stormwater discharge permits means general, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil, anti-freeze, and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; branches, trimmings, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing or remodeling a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, mud, plasters, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
    Premises means any lot or combination of contiguous lots held in single ownership and the buildings, structures or other appurtenances thereon. 
    Storm drain system means publicly-owned facilities and appurtenances operated by the city by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, drop inlets, piped storm drains (culverts), pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels and arroyos, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, snow melt, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rain and snow storm events. 
    Waters of the United States means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways, channels, and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rain and snow storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  5) 
13-2.5 - Responsibility for administration. 
    The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated in writing by the city to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  6) 
13-2.6 - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system that contains any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of local, state or federal water quality standards. 
B.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the U.S. when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illicit discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Clean Water Act, state law or this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources; 
(3)  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the storm drain system; 
(6)  Uncontaminated foundation drains; 
(7)  Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; 
(8)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(9)  Uncontaminated nonindustrial roof drains; 
(10)  Springs; 
(11)  Individual residential car washing; 
(12)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; or 
(13)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; street wash waters; and flows from fire fighting. 
C.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations. If requested, a copy of said NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order shall be provided to the city within ten (10) days of request. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  7) 
13-2.7 - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  8) 
13-2.8 - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
    No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any component of the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., any pollutant. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  9) 
13-2.9 - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other substances that would pollute, contaminate, obstruct, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  10) 
13-2.10 - Requirement to notify the city of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city's public works department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city's public works department within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  11) 
13-2.11 - Authority to inspect. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this section, or whenever the city has probable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of this section, the city may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater discharge compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  12) 
13-2.12 - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices and test. 
    During any inspection as provided herein, the city may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. In the event the owner or occupant denies permission to sample, establish sampling devices, and test, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such samples, sampling devices, or tests. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  13) 
13-2.13 - Requirements to eliminate illicit discharges. 
    The city may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illicit discharges. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  14) 
13-2.14 - Requirement to eliminate illicit connections. 
    The city may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this section to eliminate the connection by a specified date. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  15) 
13-2.15 - Violations; penalties, and enforcements. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Illicit Discharge Control Ordinance. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated or is violating a requirement of the section the city may: 
(1)  Issue a written notice of violation; 
(2)  File a citation in municipal court as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987; 
(3)  Commence a civil action in district court for appropriate relief, including injunctive relief; 
(4)  Determine that the violation is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is therefore declared a nuisance, and as such may be abated as set forth in elsewhere in this code. 
C.  A notice of violation shall state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation and set forth a deadline for correction of the violation pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice. The notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to correct the violation pursuant to the requirements, the city will take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and and/or restore the property and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to subsection 13-2.17 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  16) 
13-2.16 - Abatement by city. 
    If after the notice is issued, the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in said notice, the city of a contractor, designated by the city, shall request permission to enter upon the subject private property and if granted, is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and abate has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  17) 
13-2.17 - Charging cost of abatement/liens. 
    Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation by the city, the city shall notify the owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) days, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The city may assess a fee for the placement of the lien. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  18) 
13-2.18 - Exigent circumstances abatement. 
    The city, pursuant to its police powers, is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this section that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the city, the city and/or its agents are authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation for the protection of the community. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this section. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  19) 
13-2.19 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose of detecting and eliminating illicit discharges. 
(Ord. #2005-3,  20) 
EXHIBIT A
CITY OF SANTA FE 
STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE 
(Subsection 13-1.5) 
APPLICABILITY: In addition to any other charge that the city has a right to charge under any rule or regulation of the city, water utility customers, except those set forth in subsection 13-1.6, shall pay a monthly stormwater utility service charge. Stormwater utility service charge revenues shall be accounted for separately from other funds of the city. Programs to be funded shall be pursuant to subsection 13-1.7 A through F. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
RATE: Effective July 1, 2010, the monthly stormwater utility service charge shall be the following: 
Residential Charge    Meter Size Stormwater Utility Service Charge   All meters $3.00 Commercial Charge    Meter Size Stormwater Utility Service Charge   ?" $3.00   73/4" $4.50   1" $7.50   11/2" $15.00   2" $24.00   3" $46.80   4" $75.00   6" $150.00   8" $240.00  
(Ord. #2010-17) 
CITY OF SANTA FE COUNTY OF SANTA FE STATE OF NEW MEXICO 
Volume II 
____________ 
Chapter 14 
Land Development Code 
Published in 1987 by Order of the City Council 
Adopted December 28, 1988 
Republished in 2017 
____________ 

> 
CHAPTER 14 - LAND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2001-38 amended Chapter 14 in its entirety and provided for a new Comprehensive Land Development Ordinance adopted December 12, 2001.  The previous Comprehensive Land Development Ordinance (codified as Chapter XIV) for the City of Santa Fe was adopted by Ordinance No. 1988-36 on December 28, 1988 and was subsequently amended through Ordinance No. 2001-37, adopted November 28, 2001. 

Article 14-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  1) 

14-1.1 - TITLE 
This chapter shall be known as "Chapter 14 SFCC" and may be referred to internally as "Chapter 14" or "this chapter". 
14-1.2 - AUTHORITY 
(A)  Chapter 14 is adopted pursuant to the enabling authority contained in Section 3-15-1 et. seq . (Municipal Charter Act), Sections 3-17-1 through 3-17-6 (Ordinances), Section 3-18-1 (General Powers), Sections 3-19-1 through 3-19-12 (Planning and Platting), Sections 3-20-1 through 3-20-16 (Subdivisions), Sections 3-21-1 through 3-21-26 (Zoning Regulations), Sections 3-21A-1 through 3-21A-8 (Manufactured Housing and Zoning), Sections 3-22-1 through 3-22-6 (Historic Districts and Landmarks) and Sections 3-41-1 through 3-41-5 (Flood Control) New Mexico Statutes Annotated (NMSA) 1978, N.M. Const. art. X, Sections 6(D), 6(E) and any other applicable authority. 
(B)  Whenever a provision of Chapter 14 refers to or cites a section of the NMSA 1978 and that section is later amended or superseded, Chapter 14 is deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
14-1.3 - GENERAL PURPOSES 
The purposes of Chapter 14 are to: 
(A)  implement the purposes of the general plan , including guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of Santa Fe that will best promote health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development , and to ensure that the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter are in accordance with the general plan ; and 
(B)  create conditions favorable to the health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the residents of Santa Fe by coordinating streets within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets or other features of the general plan ; providing parks and trails; providing sewer, water and other infrastructure ; providing adequate open space for traffic, recreation, drainage, light and air; and providing for the appropriate distribution of population and traffic. 
14-1.4 - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; UNIFORM APPLICATION 
The provisions of Chapter 14 are minimum requirements that apply uniformly to land within the same zoning districts and structures of the same type. 
14-1.5 - GENERAL PLAN 
The general plan is the basic policy guide for the administration of Chapter 14. The general plan serves as the statement of goals, recommendations and policies guiding the development of the physical environment of Santa Fe and any other geographic areas specifically addressed by the general plan . The goals, vision, recommendations and policies of the general plan may be amended from time to time to meet the changing requirements of the city . Procedures for amending the general plan are set forth in Section 14-3.2. 
14-1.6 - JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY 
The provisions of Chapter 14 apply to all land, buildings and other structures , and their uses, located within the corporate limits of Santa Fe, including land owned by local, county , state or federal agencies to the extent allowed by law. 
14-1.7 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
(A)  Chapter 14 is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation or permit previously adopted or issued that is not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or that is adopted or issued pursuant to law and that is, likewise, not in conflict with this chapter. Chapter 14 is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul or enforce any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties, except those required by this Code. If this chapter imposes a greater restriction, than such an easement, covenant or other agreement, this chapter controls. 
(B)  In the case of a conflict within Chapter 14, or between Chapter 14 and any other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the more restrictive limitation or requirement shall prevail, unless an exception is specifically stated, and the provision shall govern that requires: 
(1)  the greater width or size of yards , courts or other open spaces ; 
(2)  the lower height of structure or lesser number of stories; 
(3)  the greater percentage of lot or land to be left unoccupied; or 
(4)  other higher standards. 
14-1.8 - TRANSITIONAL RULES 
(A)  Violations Continue   
A violation of the former Chapter 14 continues to be a violation under this Chapter 14 and is subject to penalties and enforcement under Article 14-11 unless the use, development , construction or other activity complies with the provisions of this chapter. A civil penalty assessed under the former Chapter 14 must be paid, even if the original violation is no longer considered a violation under this Chapter 14. 
(B)  Approved Projects   
As to approved projects: 
(1)  Except as provided in Subsection 14-1.8(E),approvals or permits granted under the former Chapter 14 that were valid on December 24, 2001 shall remain valid until their expiration date. Projects with valid approvals or permits may be carried out with the development standards in effect at the time of approval; 
(2)  A provision of Chapter 14 shall not require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure for which a construction permit was issued prior to December 24, 2001; and 
(3)  A re- application for an expired project approval shall meet the standards in effect at the time of re- application . 
(C)  Nonconformities Under Prior Ordinance   
A legal nonconformity under the former Chapter 14 is also a legal nonconformity under this Chapter 14. If a legal nonconformity under the former Chapter 14 becomes conforming because of the adoption of this Chapter 14, then the use, structure or lot is no longer a legal nonconformity . 
(D)  Effect of Code Amendments   
An amendment to Chapter 14 does not affect the following approvals or permits that are otherwise valid on the date of the amendment, except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  construction permits ; 
(2)  recorded plats ; 
(3)  recorded development plans; and 
(4)  permit , plan or plat applications deemed complete at the time of the effective date of the amendment. 
(E)  Specific Findings   
A code amendment may affect projects that otherwise comply with Subsection 14-1.8(B)(1) if the governing body makes a specific finding of such applicability. 
14-1.9 - GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
(A)  Meanings and Intent   
All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in Chapter 14 shall be construed according to the general purposes set out in Section 14-1.3. When, in a specific section of this chapter, a different meaning is given for a term defined for general purposes in Article 14-12, the specific section's meaning and application of the term controls. 
(B)  Headings, Illustrations and Text   
In case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of Chapter 14 and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text controls. 
(C)  Lists and Examples   
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as "for example," "including" and "such as" or similar language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(D)  Computation of Time   
The time in which an act is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city , the deadline or required date of action is the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city . References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
(E)  References to Other Ordinances, Regulations and Documents   
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of the resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or document, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(F)  Delegation of Authority   
Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, the department head, officer or employee may delegate that responsibility to others over whom the department head, officer or employee has authority. 
(G)  Technical and Nontechnical Terms   
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
(H)  Public Officials and Agencies   
All public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the city unless otherwise indicated. 
(I)  Mandatory and Discretionary Terms   
The words "shall," "will" and "must" are mandatory terms. The words "may" and "should" are discretionary terms. 
(J)  Conjunctions   
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply; and 
(2)  "or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(K)  Tenses and Number   
Words used in one tense (past, present or future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(L)  Continuing Compliance Required   
Property shall be maintained and used in continuing compliance with the provisions of Chapter 14. Development standards, use regulations, conditions of approval and other provisions that are not specifically intended as temporary requirements shall continue to apply after the completion of initial development activities, and the land use director may require that property be restored to conformance with those standards as provided in Article 14-11 (Enforcement). 
14-1.10 - INTERPRETATIONS 
The land use director is responsible for interpreting the provisions of Chapter 14, after consultation with the city attorney, as follows: 
(A)  interpretations of Chapter 14 shall be made in writing; 
(B)  interpretations may be made in response to a formal request for interpretation or as the need arises in the administration of Chapter 14; 
(C)  the land use director shall make all current interpretations available for public inspection; and 
(D)  final action of the land use director interpreting provisions of Chapter 14 may be appealed pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
14-1.11 - APPLICABILITY TO OWNERS, OCCUPANTS AND PREMISES 
(A)  Responsibility for Compliance   
The requirements of Chapter 14 and any development approved under its authority apply to the owners of real property and any tenants or occupants thereon. 
(B)  Applicability to Premises   
The requirements of Chapter 14 and any development approval made under its authority thereunder apply to each individual legal lot of record except when the land use director determines that a recorded easement, enforceable agreement or the intent of any specific regulation or development approval is such that it applies to premises that include more than one lot , whether or not owned by different persons . 
Article 14-2 - REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  2) 

14-2.1 - SUMMARY OF ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION AND REVIEW ROLES 
Table 14-2.1-1 summarizes the review and decision-making responsibilities of the entities that have specific roles in the administration of Chapter 14 and, particularly, the procedures set forth in Article 14-3 (Review and Approval Procedures). Other duties and responsibilities of these entities are set forth in the following sections of this article. 
TABLE 14-2.1-1: Review and Decision-Making Bodies and Responsibilities PROCEDURE SECTION GB PC BOA BCDDRC* HDRB ARC LUD 
DIRECTOR Amendments to General Plan 14-3.2 R/D R/REC - - - - R/REP Amendments to the Text of the Code 14-3.3 R/D R/REC - - R/REC (some) R/REC (some) R/REP Annexations 14-3.4 R/D R/REC - - - - R/REP Rezonings 14-3.5 R/D R/REC - R (if referred) R (if referred) R 
(if referred) R/REP Special Use Permits 14-3.6 A R/D (some) R/D - - - R/REP Subdivisions of Land 14-3.7 A R/D 
A (some) - - - - R/REP Development Plans 14-3.8 A R/D 
A (some) - - - - R/REP 
R D (some) Development in Flood Hazard Areas 14-3.9 - A - - - R/D Floodplain Administrator Construction permits 14-3.10 - A (some) A - - - R/D Certificates of Occupancy 14-3.11 - - - - - - R/D Archaeological Clearance Permits 14-3.13 A - - - - R/D R/REP Demolition of Historic Structure 14-3.14 A - - - R/D R (if referred) R/REP Demolition of Landmark Structure 14-3.14 R/D R/REC (some) R/REP Minor Modifications 14-3.15 R/D R/D R/D R/D R/D R/D R/D Variances 14-3.16 - R/D (some) R/D R/D (some) - - R/REP Utility Conformity Review 14-3.18 A R/D (some) 
A (some) - - - - R/REP (some) 
R/D (some) Notes: 
GB = Governing Body 
PC = Planning commission 
BOA = Board of Adjustment 
BCDDRC = BCD Design Review Committee 
HDRB = Historic Districts Review Board 
AC = Archaeological Committee 
LUD = Land Use Department Staff "A" = Appeal 
"R" = Review 
"R/D"= Review and Decision 
"R/REC"= Review and Recommendation 
"R/REP"= Review and Report 
"*"= Subject to the provisions of Section 14-2.5  
(Ord. No. 2012-11  32) 
14-2.2 - GOVERNING BODY 
(A)  Without limiting any authority granted to the governing body by state law or by other ordinances of the city , the governing body shall, with respect to Chapter 14, have the powers and duties set forth in Table 14-2.1-1, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of Chapter 14. 
(B)  In addition, the governing body shall receive duly executed copies of the minutes and any final orders or determinations of the planning commission if requested. 
(C)  If, within thirty days of any final order or determination by the planning commission, the governing body decides to review any such order or determination, notice of such proposed review shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Section 14-3.1(H) and such notice shall be a stay of execution of such final order of determination. 
(D)  In exercising the powers set forth in Chapter 14, the governing body , after reviewing the minutes of the planning commission meeting, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have, in addition to all other municipal authority, that authority of the planning commission. 
(E)  Subsections 14-2.2(C) and (D) shall not apply to appeals heard by the planning commission regarding decisions of the land use director . Such decisions of the planning commission are final. 
(F)  The governing body shall hear appeals of final actions of any land use board except as set forth in Subsection 14-2.2(G). The governing body shall hold a public hearing de novo on the appeal after notice has been given in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-3.1(H)(4). 
(G)  The governing body delegates its authority for hearing appeals of decisions of the land use director to the respective land use board as set forth in Chapter 14. Final actions of a land use board on the appeal of a decision of the land use director shall not be heard by the governing body . That appeal shall be filed in district court. 
(H)  The governing body by adoption of a resolution may approve the temporary suspension of the enforcement of those sections of Chapter 14 setting forth the expiration of development approvals due to severe economic conditions. This authority shall not be used for specific development projects or individual economic situations, but shall apply to all development projects due to broad economic downturns. 
(I)  The governing body may request a land use board review a proposed zoning map amendment or a proposed amendment to this chapter, and the land use board shall issue comments and nonbinding recommendations in response to the request. 
(J)  The governing body shall review and grant or deny requests for waivers as set forth in Section 14-6.2(G) (Underground Electric, Telecommunications and Cable Utility Lines). 
14-2.3 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
(A)  Designation There is a planning commission of the city , which shall be referred to as the "planning commission". 
(B)  Delegation of Authority The governing body hereby delegates its authority for planning within the planning jurisdiction of the city , and for approving subdivision plats within the corporate boundaries of the city , as specifically set forth in Section 3-19-1 NMSA 1978 and more generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the planning commission, except for those powers retained by the governing body in the Santa Fe City Code. The governing body delegates its authority to the planning commission to hear appeals, variances and special use permits as provided for in Chapter 14. 
(C)  Powers and Duties The planning commission has the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in Table 14-2.1-1, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of Chapter 14. In addition, the planning commission is the principal city land use administrative board and has the powers and duties specified in this section. 
(1)  Development Plans and Subdivision Plats 
Unless otherwise provided in Chapter 14, the planning commission shall review and approve or disapprove various specific development plans, requests and subdivision plats . When specifically authorized by Chapter 14, the decision of the planning commission is final, subject to any appeal right provided in this chapter. In all other instances, the planning commission shall provide advice and nonbinding recommendations. 
(2)  Amendments and Modifications of Approved Plans 
The planning commission shall review and approve or disapprove amendments, modifications or time extensions of plans, designs, plats , restrictions and other matters previously approved by the planning commission. Nothing in this section precludes the summary committee and the land use director from approving minor amendments or modifications as authorized in Chapter 14. 
(3)  Variances and Special Use Permits as Part of Subdivision or Development Plan Review 
If a request for variance or special use permit is part of a development plan or subdivision request requiring planning commission review, the planning commission shall hear and decide requests for variances pursuant to Section 14-3.16 and special use permits pursuant to Section 14-3.6. 
(4)  Appeals 
The planning commission shall hear appeals of: 
(a)  final actions of the land use director applying Chapter 14; provided that the application is made in conjunction with a development plan or subdivision request requiring the planning commission's approval; 
(b)  final actions of the land use director applying the terrain management regulations in Section 14-8.2 and the escarpment overlay district regulations in Section 14-5.6; and 
(c)  final actions of the floodplain administrator . 
(5)  Variances of Specified Regulations and Waivers to Flood and Supplementary Retail Regulations 
(a)  The planning commission shall review and grant or deny requests for variances from Section 14-5.6 (Escarpment Overlay District); Section 14-8.2 (Terrain and Stormwater Management); Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations); Section 14-8.11 (Santa Fe Homes Program); and Section 14-9 (Infrastructure Design, Improvement and Dedication Standards). When deciding variances, the planning commission shall comply with Section 14-3.16. (Ord. No. 2013-16  1) 
(b)  The planning commission shall review and grant or deny requests for waivers as set forth in Section 14-3.10 (Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas) and flood regulations set forth in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations). When deciding the waiver requests, the planning commission shall comply with notice and procedural provisions referenced in Section 14-3.16 (Variances), but shall use the approval criteria set forth in Section 14-3.10(E). 
(c)  The planning commission shall review and grant or deny requests for waivers as set forth in Section 14-8.8 (Supplementary Regulations for Retail Structures Thirty Thousand Square Feet or Larger). When deciding the waiver requests, the commission shall comply with notice and procedural provisions referenced in Section 14-3.16 (Variances), but shall use the approval criteria set forth in Section 14-8.8(B)(4). 
(d)  The planning commission shall review and grant or deny requests for waivers as set forth in Sections 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunication Facilities) and 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities). 
(6)  Long-Range Policy Recommendations 
The planning commission may: 
(a)  provide to administrative and governmental officials of the city recommendations for public improvements and the financing of such improvements. Public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission within a reasonable time such available information as it may require for its work; and 
(b)  make reports and recommendations relating to the development of the city to public officials and agencies; public utilities ; civic, educational, professional and other organizations; and citizens with regard to: 
(i)  growth management, land use, transportation, development review procedures, urban design and capital improvements ; and 
(ii)  neighborhood and community planning and other community issues as they relate to long-term planning. 
(7)  Other Recommendations to Governing Body 
The planning commission shall review and make recommendations to the governing body regarding: 
(a)  the adoption of the general plan and proposed revisions and amendments to the general plan ; 
(b)  annexations; 
(c)  rezonings; and 
(d)  proposed amendments to Chapter 14, except for proposed amendments to Sections 14-2.7 (Archaeological Review Committee), 14-3.13 (Archaeological Clearance Permits) and 14-5.3 (Archaeological Review Districts), on which the archaeological review committee shall review and issue recommendations; to Sections 14-3.14 (Demolition of Historic or Landmark Structure) and 14-5.2 (Historic Districts) on which the historic districts review board shall make recommendations; and to Section 14-8.13 (Development Water Budgets) on which the public utilities committee shall review and issue recommendations. (Ord. No. 2012-11  1) 
(8)  Other Powers and Duties 
(a)  The planning commission may request any other committee or board to review a proposed official zoning map amendment or a proposed amendment to Chapter 14, and that committee or board shall issue comments and nonbinding recommendations in response to the request. 
(b)  In the performance of its duties, the planning commission may enter on any land, make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and markers on land. 
(c)  As authorized by state law and Chapter 14, the planning commission may make decisions affecting the physical development of the city , including physical development authorized by a public agency or official not under the jurisdiction of the governing body . These decisions shall be consistent with the general plan and other adopted city policies. 
(d)  The planning commission has all powers necessary to enable it to fulfill and perform its functions and carry out the duties authorized in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(9)  Regulations; Planning and Platting; Development Review 
(a)  To carry out the planning and platting duties and development review responsibilities granted to the planning commission, including the adoption of an amendment to the general plan and approval and disapproval of plats and replats, the planning commission may adopt regulations, procedures and a schedule of fees; provided that such regulations, procedures and schedules of fees are consistent with the Santa Fe City Code and do not become effective and enforceable until approved by the governing body . 
(b)  Among other regulations, the planning commission may adopt flow charts and checklists for matters within the planning commission's jurisdiction in order to provide information and assistance to the general public in complying with the provisions of the Santa Fe City Code. 
(c)  Approved plats and development plans shall be signed by the chair and the secretary of the planning commission. 
(D)  Membership and Procedures   
(1)  Composition 
The planning commission is composed of nine members who are qualified by training, experience and ability to exercise sound and practical judgment on civic, social, economic and governmental affairs. 
(2)  Membership 
(a)  Two (2) members from each city council district shall be appointed to the planning commission; and 
(b)  One (1) at-large member shall be appointed to the planning commission. 
(3)  Appointment and Term 
The members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of a majority vote of all the members of the governing body . Members shall serve two-year overlapping terms, maintaining the original overlap of planning commission terms. Members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(E)  Summary Committee   
(1)  Designation 
The "summary committee" is created as a subcommittee of the planning commission. 
(2)  Delegation of Authority 
The planning commission hereby delegates its authority, as specifically set forth in Section 3-20-8 NMSA 1978 (Alternate Summary Procedure) and more generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the summary committee, except for those powers retained by the planning commission in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(3)  Powers and Duties 
The summary committee shall hear and decide: 
(a)  applications for the division of land into two lots ; and 
(b)  proposed amendments or modifications to plats previously approved by the summary committee. 
(4)  Membership and Procedures ..... Three members of the planning commission shall be elected by majority vote of the planning commission to serve one-year terms on the summary committee. 
(5)  Appeals 
Appeals of a decision of the summary committee shall be heard by the governing body as set forth in Section 14-3.17. 
(F)  Long-Range Planning Subcommittee   
(1)  Designation 
The "long-range planning subcommittee" is created as a subcommittee of the planning commission. 
(2)  Delegation 
The planning commission hereby delegates its authority, as set forth in this article and in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the long-range planning subcommittee, except for those powers retained by the planning commission in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(3)  Powes and Duties 
The long range planning subcommittee shall make recommendations to the planning commission regarding long-range policy recommendations as set forth in Subsection 14-2.3(C)(6). 
(4)  Membership and Procedures 
Three members of the planning commission shall be elected by majority vote of the planning commission to serve on the long-range planning subcommittee. In addition, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the governing body , shall appoint two members to the long-range planning subcommittee who are not members of the planning commission. 
(G)  Ad Hoc Subcommittees   
(1)  Delegation 
The governing body and the planning commission may delegate their authority to ad hoc subcommittees as specifically provided in this article and more generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, except for those powers retained by the governing body . 
(2)  Powers and Duties 
Ad hoc subcommittees shall gather information for, make recommendations to, and otherwise assist the planning commission in accomplishing its powers and duties, as the planning commission deems appropriate. 
(3)  Membership and Procedures 
(a)  Pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 19 NMSA 1978 (Planning and Platting) and Article 2-1 SFCC 1987, the mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the governing body , may appoint ad hoc subcommittees. 
(b)  Pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 19 NMSA 1978, the chair of the planning commission may appoint ad hoc subcommittees of the planning commission. 
(c)  Ad hoc subcommittees may be composed of volunteer citizens, land use department staff and planning commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2015-25) 
14-2.4 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
(A)  Designation There shall be a board of adjustment of the city , which shall be referred to as the "board of adjustment" or the "BOA". 
(B)  Delegation of Authority The governing body hereby delegates its authority, as set forth generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the BOA as described in this section, except those powers retained to the governing body in the Santa Fe City Code. In addition, the governing body delegates authority to the BOA to hear appeals, variances and special use permits as provided in Chapter 14. 
(C)  Powers and Duties The BOA has the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in Table 14-2.1-1 to be carried out in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14 and has the following additional responsibilities: 
(1)  to hear appeals of final actions of the land use director applying the provisions of Chapter 14, unless jurisdiction for such appeals is otherwise specifically reserved to another land use board ; 
(2)  to hear and decide applications for special use permits as provided in Section 14-3.6 and Article 14-6 (Permitted Uses and Use Regulations), unless jurisdiction for such special use permits is specifically reserved to another land use board ; and 
(3)  to authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of Chapter 14 as provided in Section 14-3.16. 
(D)  Composition The BOA consists of seven members, two of whom may be planning commission members and at least five of whom shall be members-at-large. Members of the governing body may serve as at-large members. 
(E)  Appointment and Term Members of the BOA shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the governing body . Members shall serve three-year overlapping terms, maintaining the original overlap of BOA terms. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  2) 
14-2.5 - BUSINESS-CAPITOL DISTRICT DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE 
The business-capitol district design review committee ("BCD DRC") shall automatically cease to exist when all BCD development in progress at the effective date of this amendment has received the necessary review and approval or denial from the BCD DRC. BCD development occurring after the effective date of this ordinance (Ord. No. 2011-37, effective March 1, 2012) shall be reviewed and approved or denied pursuant to Section 14-3.8 (Development Plans) and the other relevant provisions of Chapter 14. 
14-2.6 - HISTORIC DISTRICTS REVIEW BOARD 
(A)  Designation There shall be a historic districts review board of the city , which shall be referred to as the "historic districts review board" or the "HDRB". 
(B)  Delegation The governing body and the planning commission hereby delegate their authority, as set forth generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the HDRB as described in this section, except those powers retained by the governing body and the planning commission in the Santa Fe City Code. The HDRB shall carry out the city's powers and duties pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 22 NMSA 1978 (Historic Districts and Landmarks). 
(C)  Powers and Duties The HDRB, which shall meet at least once a month, unless there are no agenda items, and at such other times as the chair may determine, shall have the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in Table 14-2.1-1, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of Chapter 14. In addition, the HDRB shall: 
(1)  review and approve or deny all applications for new construction, exterior alteration and demolition of structures , except signs , in the historic districts in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth Section 14-3.14 (Demolition of Historic or Landmark Structure), 14-5.2 (Historic Districts) or 14-10 (Nonconformities). Staff shall review signs in accordance with Section 14-3.11 (Construction Permits for Signs). 
(2)  hear appeals of final actions of the land use director interpreting or applying historic district regulations pursuant to Sections 14-3.11, 14-3.14, 14-5.2 or 14-10; 
(3)  make recommendations to the governing body relating to the erection of appropriate plaques and markers designating various historical sites and points of interest in the city ; 
(4)  make recommendations to the governing body relating to the purchase or acquisition by gift, grant, bequest, devise or otherwise of real or personal property of historical background and interest; 
(5)  make recommendations to the governing body as to the exercise of the governing body 's power of eminent domain in the acquisition of real property of historical background and significance and the proposed ways and means of compensation; 
(6)  advise and assist officials, committees and commissions of the municipal government in making recommendations to the governing body ; 
(7)  compile and maintain a list of historical sites and structures ; 
(8)  perform other acts as requested by the governing body ; provided that such acts relate specifically to this section; 
(9)  conduct field trips upon request of an applicant or as determined by the chair; and 
(10)  review and make a recommendation to the governing body regarding all applications for the demolition of landmark structures in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 14-3.14. 
(D)  Membership and Procedures   
(1)  Composition 
The HDRB consists of seven members who have demonstrated interest and knowledge of the historic character of the city . One member shall be an architect, one member shall be a historian, one member shall represent some aspect of the construction industry, one member shall have a business in the historic district, one member shall be a member of the Old Santa Fe Association, and two members shall be members-at-large. Members of the governing body may serve as members at-large. 
(2)  Appointment and Term 
The mayor, with the consent of the governing body , shall appoint each member of the HDRB. Members shall serve two-year overlapping terms, maintaining the original overlap of HDRB terms. Members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(3)  Recommendations 
The following organizations are encouraged to recommend to the mayor up to three persons each for the appropriate position as designated in this section: 
(a)  Santa Fe chapter of the American Institute of Architects; 
(b)  Santa Fe Chamber of Commerce and Hispanic Chamber of Commerce; 
(c)  Museum of New Mexico; and 
(d)  Building Contractors Association and Associated General Contractors of America, Building Branch (jointly). 
(4)  Status of Recommendation 
A person being recommended is not required to be a member or staff of the organization recommending the person. This provision is in no way intended to prevent other organizations from recommending members, or to limit the appointment power of the mayor. 
14-2.7 - ARCHAEOLOGICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE 
(A)  Designation There shall be an archaeological review committee of the city , which shall be referred to as the "archaeological review committee" or the "ARC". 
(B)  Delegation The governing body and the planning commission hereby delegate their authority, as set forth generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the ARC as described in this section, except for those powers retained by the governing body and the planning commission in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(C)  Powers and Duties   
(1)  The ARC shall meet at least once a month, unless there are no agenda items, and at such other times as the chair may determine. The ARC shall have the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in Table 14-2.1-1, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of Chapter 14. In addition, the ARC shall: 
(a)  in accordance with Section 14-3.13, hold hearings to review reconnaissance reports, the recommended significance status of archaeological sites , the recommended treatment plan of cultural remains and final reports. The ARC may review and act on stages or portions of on-going archaeological studies. The ARC shall vote to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove requests for archaeological clearance permits ; 
(b)  qualify or disqualify persons for inclusion on the city 's list of approved archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians upon review of resumes and related documents as set forth in this section; 
(c)  establish a city register of recognized archaeological sites and shall establish criteria for such a register; and 
(d)  hear appeals of final actions of the land use director interpreting or applying archaeological review district regulations pursuant to Section 14-5.3. 
(2)  The ARC may: 
(a)  advise the HDRB in regard to applications to that board for new construction, exterior alteration , demolition or on other matters relating to archaeology within the historic districts; 
(b)  direct applicants to the state historic preservation division for information regarding state or federal law and regulations on the tax benefits of donating archaeological properties or easements; 
(c)  recommend to the governing body that land containing archaeological sites of major interest to the city be purchased as part of the city 's parks, recreation and open space system; and 
(d)  recommend the expenditure of money from the city archaeological fund for projects meeting the criteria for archaeological fund projects set forth in Section 14-3.13 (Archaeological Permits). Expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or less may be approved by the land use director . Expenditures over one thousand dollars ($1,000) must be approved by the governing body . 
(3)  When both a HDRB and an ARC review are required of a single project, the reviews may occur at the same time. 
(D)  Membership and Procedures   
(1)  Composition 
The ARC consists of five members. One member shall be a historian, three members shall be archaeologists or historical archaeologists and one member shall be a representative of the construction, development or real estate community. 
(2)  Appointment and Term 
The mayor, with the consent of the governing body , shall appoint each member of the ARC. Members of the ARC serve two-year overlapping terms, maintaining the original overlap of ARC terms. Members serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(E)  Qualifications for ARC Members; Qualifications for Archaeologists, Historical Archaeologists and Historians   
(1)  ARC Members 
All archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians appointed as ARC members shall meet the qualifications set forth in this section. 
(2)  Archaeologists 
All archaeologists in actual direct charge of archaeological reconnaissance or treatment required for an archaeological permit shall meet the following minimum qualifications, as provided in a resume or by other means: 
(a)  hold a master's degree in archaeology, anthropology or a closely related field with a specialization in archaeology or have equivalent training or field experience the sufficiency of which is determined by the ARC; 
(b)  have at least two years' experience in directing archaeology projects, including at least six months of field experience in the southwestern United States; and 
(c)  be listed in the state historic preservation division directory of archaeologists as a principal investigator or supervisory archaeologist. This requirement shall not apply to archaeologists who are currently on the city 's list of approved archaeologists as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2007-9 (April 23, 2007) or to archaeologists appointed as members of the ARC. 
(3)  Historical Archaeologists 
All historical archaeologists in actual direct charge of excavation of historic period sites shall: 
(a)  meet the minimum qualifications for an archaeologist set forth in Subsection 14-2.7(E)(2); 
(b)  have a minimum of one year of experience in directing historical archaeology projects or equivalent training or field experience the sufficiency of which is determined by the ARC; 
(c)  have demonstrated experience in the historic downtown archaeological review district; and 
(d)  hold a current New Mexico state burial excavation permit for any location where human remains of historic age are found. (Ord. No. 2012-11  2) 
(4)  Historians 
All historians in actual direct charge of archival research and analyses of land titles or historic maps shall meet the following minimum qualifications: 
(a)  hold a master's degree in history or have equivalent professional experience or demonstrate equivalent training, the sufficiency of which is determined by the ARC; and 
(b)  demonstrate the ability to carry out archival research . 
(5)  Waiver of Qualifications 
Qualifications for archaeologists and historical archaeologists may be waived by the ARC in its discretion for good cause shown. 
(6)  List of Qualified Individuals 
Archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians qualified by the ARC as meeting the qualifications provided in this section shall be placed on a list maintained by the land use director . Guidelines for documenting applicable experience and education for meeting the requirements of this section are available from the land use director . Archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians who wish to remain on the list shall provide a current resume and related documents upon request of the land use director . 
(7)  Standards 
(a)  Archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians are responsible for reports and performance that exhibit a high standard of professionalism and competence, including the following standards: 
(i)  any reconnaissance reports, treatment plans and final reports that are accepted by the ARC with minor typographical, formatting or content errors and upon which an archaeological clearance permit is approved shall be returned with corrections to the land use director within forty-five days of the date the permit was approved. Failure to fulfill this requirement shall result in refusal by the land use director of any new application for an archaeological clearance permit until a corrected report has been submitted; 
(ii)  reconnaissance reports, treatment plans and final reports that are not approved by the ARC and resubmitted to the land use director without the necessary corrections shall be rejected by the land use director and no new application for an archaeological clearance permit shall be accepted by the land use director until a corrected report has been accepted and an archaeological clearance permit has been approved by the ARC; 
(iii)  rejection of three or more reconnaissance reports, treatment plans or final reports in a twelve-month period may result in the ARC removing the archaeologist, historical archaeologist or historian from the list of qualified archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians for twelve months; and 
(iv)  failure to submit a final report within the one-year time limit, or any extension of time provided by the ARC as set forth in Section 14-3.13, may result in the ARC removing the archaeologist, historical archaeologist or historian from the list of qualified archaeologists, historical archaeologists and historians. 
(b)  The land use director shall notify the following, in writing, of the actions taken in Subsection 14-2.7(E)(7)(a): 
(i)  the state historic preservation officer; 
(ii)  the affected archaeologist, historical archaeologist or historian; and 
(iii)  the property owner and the applicant . 
(c)  The affected archaeologist, historical archaeologist or historian may submit a written appeal to the ARC of the final actions taken by the land use director in Subsection 14-2.7(E)(7)(a). 
(d)  Decisions of the ARC may be appealed to the governing body as set forth in Section 14-3.17. 
14-2.8 - ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES OF LAND USE BOARDS 
Except as otherwise provided by state law, city ordinance or Chapter 14, the following procedures apply to each of the land use boards and their standing subcommittees, except the governing body , the extraterritorial land use authority and the extraterritorial land use commission: 
(A)  Number of Terms, No Compensation There shall be no limitation to the number of consecutive terms a member may serve. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(B)  Residency   
(1)  a member of a land use board whose jurisdiction extends to the presumptive city limits as defined in Section 6, Paragraph E of the Santa Fe Extraterritorial Land Use Authority Ordinance No. 2009-01 shall reside within the presumptive city limits. [Editor's note: as of the date of adoption, includes the archaeological review committee, the board of adjustment and the planning commission and its subcommittees]; and 
(2)  a member of a land use board whose jurisdiction does not extend to the presumptive city limits shall reside within the city limits. 
(C)  Officers A chair, vice-chair and secretary shall be elected for one-year terms, without restriction as to re-election. In the case of an ad hoc subcommittee that will exist for less than one year, officer terms shall be equivalent to the duration of the subcommittee. The chair shall preside over the administrative body. In the absence or disability of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair. 
(D)  Meetings Regular meetings shall be held at least once a month, unless there are no agenda items, and at such other times as the chair may determine. Except as otherwise provided by the constitution of New Mexico, the New Mexico Open Meetings Act or city ordinance, all meetings shall be public meetings; all persons so desiring shall be allowed to attend and listen to the deliberations and proceedings; and public comment at the meetings shall be encouraged. 
(E)  Quorum A majority of members constitutes a quorum. 
(F)  Voting Action shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum of members. 
(G)  Communication with Members Prohibited A member of a land use board shall not communicate with any interested parties outside of the public meeting and hearing concerning the merits or substance of any quasi-judicial item coming before the board, except in writing filed with the land use director within the prescribed time period for inclusion in the public hearing record, and with copies distributed immediately to all other known parties-in-interest and all other members of the board. A member also shall not communicate with any other persons outside the land use department outside of the public meeting and hearing concerning the merits or substance of any quasi-judicial item coming before them. Further, a member shall not inspect the site of any subject property , except pursuant to a publicly noticed site visit that affords all parties the opportunity to attend. A member of a land use board who receives a communication in violation of this section shall disclose the substance of the communication on the record, and the member shall recuse himself or herself if he or she cannot be fair and impartial. 
(H)  Written Record; Findings of Fact After hearing and considering all the evidence presented, approval or disapproval of an application , request or other item shall be accompanied by a written statement of the important facts on which the decision is based, including the pertinent provisions of Chapter 14, and a full explanation of why those facts led to the decision made. 
(I)  Minutes of Proceedings; Public Record Full and complete records in the form of written minutes shall be kept of all meetings, including the date, time and place of the meeting; the names of members in attendance and those absent; the substance of the items considered; a record of any decisions and votes taken that show how each member voted, including abstention or failure to vote; and all public comment. After being approved by the relevant land use board , written explanatory findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be adopted and shall be promptly filed with and maintained by the city clerk pursuant to city ordinance and the New Mexico Open Meetings Act. Findings of fact and conclusions of law adopted by the planning commission shall be submitted to the governing body pursuant to Section 2-1.15 SFCC 1987. 
(J)  Meeting Attendance Failure of a member to attend three consecutive regular meetings or thirty-three percent or more of the regular meetings in a year shall constitute an automatic tender of resignation by the member. The mayor may accept or reject the resignation. 
(K)  Removal of Members A member of the planning commission may be removed for cause as provided in Section 3-19-2 NMSA 1978. A member of any other land use board may be removed by the appointing authority with or without cause. 
(L)  Vacancy Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made. A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(M)  Records of Membership Records of membership shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  3) 
14-2.9 - SANTA FE EXTRATERRITORIAL LAND USE AUTHORITY 
(A)  Creation; Membership The extraterritorial land use authority, also referred to as "ELUA", is created as provided in Section 3-21-3.2 NMSA 1978 and pursuant to the Santa Fe County and City Extraterritorial Land Use Joint Powers Agreement. ELUA shall consist of four county commissioners appointed by the board of county commissioners and three city councilors or two city councilors and the mayor appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The remaining member of the board of county commissioners shall be appointed as an alternate to the extraterritorial land use authority and the mayor shall appoint alternates, with the approval of the city council, from among the remaining city councilors. The alternates shall be notified prior to a meeting of ELUA if an appointed member cannot attend. When replacing a member, an alternate shall have the same duties, privileges and powers as other appointed members. The term of each member appointed by the city shall be for two years. 
(B)  Powers and Duties ELUA has the jurisdiction and powers of an extraterritorial zoning authority and shall carry out its duties related to planning and platting jurisdiction, extraterritorial zoning, subdivision approval and annexation approval or disapproval as provided in the Santa Fe City Code and as set forth in the Santa Fe County and City Extraterritorial Land Use Joint Powers Agreement. ELUA shall approve or disapprove annexation petitions brought pursuant to Section 3-7-17.1 NMSA 1978 upon review and recommendation of ELUC. (Ord. No. 2012-11  3) 
14-2.10 - SANTA FE EXTRATERRITORIAL LAND USE COMMISSION 
(A)  Creation; Membership The extraterritorial land use commission, also referred to as "ELUC", is created as provided in Section 3-21-3.2 NMSA 1978 and pursuant to the Santa Fe County and City Extraterritorial Land Use Joint Powers Agreement. ELUC shall consist of five members of the county planning commission appointed by the board of county commissioners and five members of the city planning commission appointed by the mayor with approval of the city council. Alternates to ELUC shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners from the remaining members of the county planning commission and by the mayor with approval of the city council from the remaining members of the city planning commission, who shall be notified prior to a meeting of ELUC if an appointed member cannot attend. When replacing a member, the alternate shall have the same duties, privileges and powers as other appointed members. The term of each member appointed by the city shall be for two years. 
(B)  Powers and Duties ELUC has the authority to carry out duties and make recommendations related to planning and platting jurisdiction, subdivisions, zoning and annexations as provided for in Sections 3-21-3, 3-21-3.2 and 3-21-4 NMSA 1978 and as set forth in the Santa Fe County and City Extraterritorial Land Use Joint Powers Agreement. 
14-2.11 - LAND USE DIRECTOR 
(A)  Delegation of Authority The governing body hereby delegates its authority, as set forth generally in Chapter 3, Articles 19 through 21 NMSA 1978, to the land use director as provided in this section and throughout Chapter 14, except those powers retained by the governing body or any land use board , by state law, city ordinance or the terms of this chapter. 
(B)  General Powers and Duties   
The land use director has the review and decision-making responsibilities set forth in Table 14-2.1-1, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of Chapter 14. In addition, the land use director shall: 
(1)  administer and ensure compliance with Chapter 14 by: 
(a)  organizing the land use department into divisions and delegating functions to those divisions, individual staff members and other designees under the land use director 's authority; 
(b)  publishing and enforcing existing land use department policies and setting, writing and publishing new land use department policies from time to time to inform the general public of land use department procedures and processes; and 
(c)  publishing and enforcing existing land use department submittal requirements and setting, writing and publishing new land use department submittal requirements from time to time to assist the general public in achieving application completeness; 
(2)  render advisory opinions to any land use board or other administrative body; 
(3)  interpret Chapter 14 pursuant to Section 14-1.10; 
(4)  determine the status of nonconformities pursuant to Section 14-10; 
(5)  prepare and publish preliminary agendas for land use boards as provided in Section 14-3.1; 
(6)  prepare notification materials for early neighborhood notification, land use boards and the governing body as provided in Section 14-3.1; 
(7)  provide administrative and advisory assistance to the land use boards , conduct site inspections and carry out reviews; 
(8)  take any steps necessary to enforce the provisions of Chapter 14, including filing suit for injunctive relief, criminal or civil enforcement and penalties or other remedies authorized by this code, including Section 14-11 (Enforcement); and 
(9)  take any other actions within the land use director's power to carry out the provisions of Chapter 14. 
(C)  Approval Authority   
(1)  Alternate Means of Compliance 
The land use director may allow alternate means of compliance with the requirements of Chapter 14 when: 
(a)  the proposed alternate means satisfy the intent of this chapter; 
(b)  the requirements include quantitative standards and those quantitative standards are satisfied by the alternate means of compliance; and 
(c)  site conditions, including the configuration of the lot , topography and existing vegetation make following the standards prescribed in this chapter impossible or impractical. 
(2)  Minor Modifications to Development Approvals 
The land use director may approve minor quantitative and qualitative modifications on an approved master plan, development plan, subdivision plat , special use permit or other development approval, subject to the following: 
(a)  written request by the applicant explaining the need for the modification; 
(b)  written finding by the land use director that the modifications do not substantially change the function or appearance of the development , and will not result in any negative health or safety impacts on the community or negatively impact a neighboring property ; 
(c)  the minor modification may not allow increased density or allow uses not otherwise shown on the approved plan or plat ; and 
(d)  the minor modification complies with all standards and requirements of Chapter 14, except as otherwise allowed by this section. 
(3)  Administrative Deviations 
The land use director may approve minor dimensional deviations of twelve inches or less and minor quantitative deviations from the standards in Chapter 14, including standards for the number of required off-street parking spaces, when it is impossible or impractical to fully comply with the standards. Approval of administrative deviation is subject to the following: 
(a)  written request by the applicant explaining the need for the deviation; 
(b)  written finding by the land use director that the deviation will not result in any negative health or safety impacts on the community or negatively impact a neighboring property ; and 
(c)  an administrative deviation may not allow increased density or allow uses not otherwise permitted in the district. 
14-2.12 - FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 
The land use director shall designate a floodplain administrator to administer the city's flood regulations. The person shall be a state -certified floodplain manager . The floodplain administrator may delegate any task assigned to the floodplain administrator as set forth in Chapter 14 to an appropriate staff member who is also a state -certified floodplain manager . 
Article 14-3 - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  3) 

14-3.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(A)  Relationships Among Different Applications, Permits and Approvals   
Construction permits and certificates of occupancy are the final forms of approval for most development within Santa Fe. Issuance of construction permits and certificates of occupancy may be contingent on the applicant having previously received one or more other permits or forms of approval, such as a rezoning or development plan approval. Where possible without creating an undue administrative burden on the city's decision-making bodies and staff, simultaneous processing of applications for different permits and approvals that may be required for the same development project is allowed to expedite the overall review process for the project. After this first section of general provisions, each of the subsequent sections in Article 14-3 addresses a different type of permit or approval. This section is organized in roughly chronological order, reflecting the relative timing of the different permits and approvals. 
(B)  Authority to File Applications   
(1)  Unless otherwise specified in Chapter 14, applications for review and approval under Chapter 14 may be filed by: 
(a)  the owner of the property that is the subject of the application ; 
(b)  the owner 's authorized agent with written authorization; 
(c)  a land use board; or 
(d)  the land use director. 
(2)  When a land use board files an application , it does so without prejudice to the outcome. 
(C)  Form of Application   
(1)  Applications required by Chapter 14 shall be submitted in a form and in such number as required by the land use director . 
(2)  Each application shall include plans, calculations and reports sufficient to clearly demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of Chapter 14 and applicable state and federal regulations that are administered or enforced by the city . The number and format of the required documentation shall be as required by the land use director . 
(3)  The land use director shall provide standardized checklists and format guidelines for each type of application . The land use director may waive the submittal of items on the checklist or require supplemental materials not included on the checklist where such action is necessary to clearly demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions. 
(4)  In the course of reviewing an application , the governing body and the land use boards may waive the submission of items on the checklist or may require supplemental materials not included on the checklist where such action is necessary to clearly demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions. 
(D)  Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses   
The governing body shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for construction permits , appeals, subdivisions, amendments and other applications . This schedule of fees, charges and expenses shall be posted in the land use department and may be altered or amended only by the governing body . No permit or approval required under Chapter 14 shall be issued or granted unless and until applicable charges, fees and expenses have been paid in full. 
(E)  Pre-Application Conferences   
(1)  Applicability 
(a)  Pre- application conferences are required prior to submission of applications for: 
(i)  amendment of the number, shape, boundary or area of any district, whether by a non- governing-body -initiated annexation or a rezoning; 
(ii)  subdivisions, unless the land use director waives, in writing, the requirement for good cause shown; and 
(iii)  a residential development request that is subject to the Santa Fe Homes Program set forth in Section 26-1 SFCC 1987; 
(b)  The land use director may determine that a pre- application conference is necessary for other applications to land use boards due to the scope or complexity of the proposed project; and 
(c)  The land use director may waive or modify the pre- application conference procedures based on a determination that the purposes of the conference have been achieved by other means or that the limited scope or simplicity of the project does not warrant a formal pre- application conference. 
(2)  Procedures 
(a)  At least fifteen calendar days before the application is filed, the applicant shall initiate a pre- application conference with the land use director . 
(b)  For annexations and rezonings, the purpose of the pre- application conference is to review the proposal for conformity with the general plan , availability of community facilities and utilities, proposed utilities and street improvements, required park and open space improvements and other requirements as may be dictated by city ordinance. 
(c)  For subdivisions: 
(i)  the applicant shall submit to the land use director a sketch plan and supplementary data sufficient to determine the feasibility of the proposal. The applicant should employ a competent land planner, professional engineer or professional land surveyor to assist in the development of the proposed subdivision; 
(ii)  the land use director , the public works department and other city departments as appropriate shall advise the applicant as to the appropriateness of the subdivision proposal in relation to the general plan , utility accessibility, road and street system capacity, terrain management and suitability of the proposed subdivision in relation to present city codes, regulations and ordinances; and 
(iii)  for subdivisions comprising fewer than ten lots , the land use director may waive the requirement to provide the sketch plan and supplementary data at the pre- application meeting. 
(3)  Responsibility 
The city does not assume any responsibility for a lack of understanding of these regulations by the applicant . Advice to the applicant shall not be construed to result in the city , its officers, agents or employees becoming responsible for damages to the applicant as a result of the applicant's reliance on information given by them. Advice to the applicant does not limit the discretion of any land use board or the governing body in making conditions of approval for the proposed development not anticipated at the time of the pre- application conference. 
(F)  Early Neighborhood Notification Procedures   
(1)  Intent 
Early neighborhood notification (ENN) is intended to provide for an exchange of information between the applicant and residents and property owners in affected neighborhoods before plans become too firm to respond meaningfully to community input and before changes in plans might cause major financial losses by the applicant . Notification set forth in this section is in addition to notification required elsewhere in Chapter 14, unless the other notification procedures are duplicative with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Applicability to Projects Reviewed by the board of adjustment, planning commission or the governing body . 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  4) 
(a)  ENN is required for the following types of projects , if a public hearing before the board of adjustment, planning commission or the governing body is required by other provisions of Chapter 14: 
(i)  annexations; 
(ii)  master plans; 
(iii)  rezonings; 
(iv)  development plans, except final development plans for which ENN procedures were followed at the preliminary development plan review stage; 
(v)  subdivision plats , except final subdivision plats for which ENN procedures were followed at the preliminary plat review stage; 
(vi)  vacation and dedication of rights of way ; 
(vii)  variances, except those requesting construction or modification of an individual single-family dwelling and appurtenant accessory structures or those requesting a reduction in the total parking requirements of five or fewer spaces and those requesting variances to Section 14-8.10 (Signs); 
(viii)  special use permits , except those for mobile homes ; 
(ix)  telecommunications facilities as set forth in Section 14-6.2(E); 
(x)  electric facilities as set forth in Section 14-6.2(F); 
(xi)  amendment to any of the preceding; and 
(xii)  amendments to the future land use map of the general plan . 
(b)  ENN is not required in the following specific circumstances: 
(i)  projects or amendments to project approvals that do not require public hearings before the board of adjustment, planning commission or the governing body ; 
(ii)  time extensions that do not otherwise modify a project approval. 
(3)  Applicability to City Capital Improvement Projects 
(Ord. No. 2014-36  1) 
(a)  ENN is required for certain types of city capital improvement projects requiring review by the governing body as follows: 
(i)  facility plans for municipal facilities or services, including wastewater, solid waste, potable water and airport facilities; 
(ii)  new projects or projects to expand or extend service to new service areas included in the capital improvement plan or general plan ; 
(iii)  any new road construction or reconstruction of an existing road that materially expands capacity; and 
(iv)  projects funded out of capital impact fee funds. 
(v)  any new park or reconstruction or expansion of an existing park that exceeds one acre in size or one hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) in cost; construction of a new building or structure at a park or placement of new lighting at a park that exceeds one hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) in cost. 
(b)  The following types of capital improvement projects do not require ENN: 
(i)  replacement , repair or maintenance of underground facilities where such activity does not represent a material expansion of existing facilities; 
(ii)  road maintenance, repair, surfacing or resurfacing, striping, curb and gutter or sidewalk repair or maintenance, sign maintenance, signal repair, shoulder work, bridge or culvert maintenance work; and 
(iii)  special assessment districts covered by state law or city ordinance. 
(4)  ENN Meeting Scheduling; Notice Required 
ENN meetings shall be scheduled with the land use director prior to issuing notice. Notice of meeting shall be given in accordance with Subsection 14-3.1(H). 
(5)  ENN Meeting 
The announced meeting shall take place at least ten days before the development project application is submitted. Attendees should make a good-faith effort to communicate with the applicant . The meeting shall be attended by a representative of the land use director whose role at the meeting shall be to acquaint the applicant and community with provisions of city ordinances, applicable requirements of city codes and the development review process. At the meeting, the applicant shall present schematic or preliminary plans for the proposed project and a drawing or other graphical representation suitable to reasonably indicate streets and structures within a two hundred (200) foot radius from the perimeter of the property that is the subject of the application . 
(6)  ENN Guidelines 
For any project application required to meet ENN requirements, the applicant and neighborhood shall use the guidelines set forth below to assist them in discussing the project at ENN meetings. The guidelines are based on the requirements of Chapter 14 and the general plan and other formally adopted city plans. Where applicable, the applicant shall respond in writing with a short narrative statement. Interested parties may also respond. Responses from all participants shall be provided to the land use board hearing the application . Responses for specific elements may be cross-referenced to other submittal documents. The ENN guidelines provided in this paragraph are adopted for use by applicants in meeting with interested parties. 
(a)  Effect on Character and Appearance of Surrounding Neighborhoods 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how existing requirements for architectural design review, historic districts, lighting, signs , telecommunications, open space , landscaping , trails, parks and the BCD regulations are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  the number of stories of buildings ; 
(ii)  the average setbacks ; 
(iii)  the mass and scale of the project; 
(iv)  architectural style of any construction; 
(v)  landscaping ; 
(vi)  lighting; and 
(vii)  access to public places, open spaces and trails. 
(b)  Effect on Protection of Physical Environment 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how existing code requirements and adopted plans for terrain management, escarpment, landscape , BCD, architectural design, open space and trails, and flood management regulations are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  existing tree cover; 
(ii)  existing open space ; 
(iii)  rivers, arroyos and floodplains ; 
(iv)  rock outcroppings and escarpments; 
(v)  trash generation; 
(vi)  lighting; 
(vii)  fire risk; 
(viii)  use of hazardous materials; and 
(ix)  whether the project involves easements, density transfers or other legal mechanisms that result in open space or other environmental protection. 
(c)  Impacts on Prehistoric, Historic, Archaeological or Cultural Sites or Structures, Including Acequias and Historic Downtown 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how existing Chapter 14 requirements for the historic districts and archaeological review are met. Consideration may include the project's compatibility with any historic or cultural sites located on the property where the project is proposed. 
(d)  Relationship to Existing Density and Land Use Within Surrounding Area and With Land Uses and Densities Proposed by the General Plan 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how the application meets requirements for annexation and rezoning and historic district regulations and how the application is consistent with the general plan future land use map and other policies. 
(e)  Effects on Pedestrian or Vehicular Traffic and Access to Services 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how the requirements for parking, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the general plan future land use map and other policies and traffic studies are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  increased access to public transportation and public transportation corridors; 
(ii)  effects of design or services provided on traffic in the neighborhood and citywide; 
(iii)  whether the project helps in the equitable distribution of traffic citywide, reduces overall travel distance or encourages alternate transportation modes; 
(iv)  traffic mitigation measures, including changes in flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(v)  cumulative traffic impacts; 
(vi)  enhancement of transit options; 
(vii)  pedestrian access to destinations; and 
(viii)  new or improved pedestrian trails to recreational and cultural activities and human and educational services. 
(f)  Impact on Economic Base of Santa Fe 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how the provisions for the city's economic development plan and the general plan are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  availability of jobs to Santa Fe residents; 
(ii)  whether or how the project promotes and encourages businesses consistent with the city's economic development plan and compatible with neighborhood livability; 
(iii)  market impacts on local businesses and potential displacement of local property and business owners ; and 
(iv)  how the project supports economic development efforts to improve living standards of neighborhoods and their businesses . 
(g)  Effect on Availability of Affordable Housing and Availability of Housing Choices 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how existing requirements for the Santa Fe Homes Program ( SFHP ) and the policies of the general plan are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  creation, retention or improvement of affordable housing; 
(ii)  how the project contributes to meeting the needs for various housing types serving different ages, incomes and family sizes to maintain the unique, heterogeneous character of Santa Fe; 
(iii)  whether or how the project increases or decreases the supply of housing for which there is an identified need; 
(iv)  whether the project contributes to a more even distribution of this housing throughout Santa Fe; 
(v)  the creation or retention of affordable business space; and 
(vi)  whether or how the project increases the availability of all housing types close to the city center or neighborhood centers. 
(h)  Effect On Public Services and Infrastructure Elements 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how existing requirements for telecommunications and city and utility company requirements are met. Considerations may include whether or how the project maximizes the efficient use or contributes to the improvement of existing public infrastructure and services. 
(i)  Impacts on Water Supply, Availability and Conservation Methods 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how existing requirements for landscaping , water and sewer availability statements, water conservation and policies of the city's water division are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  conservation and mitigation measures; 
(ii)  efficient use of distribution lines and resources; and 
(iii)  whether or how the construction or use of the project may affect water quality and supplies. 
(j)  Effect on Opportunities for Community Integration and Social Balance 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how the existing requirements for community integration are met. Considerations may include how the project improves opportunities for community integration and balance through mixed land uses, neighborhood centers or pedestrian-oriented design. 
(k)  Effect on Urban Form 
When applicable, the applicant shall state how the policies for urban form are met. Considerations may include: 
(i)  whether the project promotes a compact urban form through appropriate infill development and consolidation of the city's boundary to avoid leapfrog development ; and 
(ii)  the effect of the project on the need for travel between different parts of Santa Fe and between employment centers and areas. 
(G)  Application Completeness   
An application shall be considered complete if it is submitted in the required form; includes all mandatory information, including all exhibits specified by the land use director ; and is accompanied by the applicable fee. The land use director shall make a determination of application completeness. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the land use director shall provide notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected in a future re-submittal. 
(H)  Notice Requirements (Ord. No. 2013-16  5) 
The notices required by this section shall indicate the nature of the change proposed; the property affected; the time, date and place of the hearing or meeting; and the deadline for receiving written comments regarding the request, if applicable. The notice shall be approved by the land use director . Neighborhood associations that wish to receive notifications of hearings and meetings and copies of agendas, including email notifications, must register with the land use director . 
(1)  Notice of Public Hearing Before Land Use Boards and ENN Meetings. 
(a)  General Notice Requirements 
The notice requirements in Subsections 14-3.1(H)(1)(b), (c) and (d) below apply to public hearings required for all applications and ENN meetings, except that: 
(i)  Public hearings concerning development review actions initiated by the city require notification as described in Subsection 14-3.1(H)(1)(e); 
(ii)  Public hearings concerning Archaeological Clearance Permits require notification in accordance with Section 14-3.13(C)(3); 
(iii)  Public hearings concerning projects heard before the historic districts review board shall meet the agenda and posting requirements in Subsections 14-3.1(H)(1)(b) and (c) below, but mailed notification in accordance with Subsection 14- 3.1(H)(1)(d) is not required; and 
(iv)  Public hearings concerning appeals must provide notice as described in Subsection 14-3.1(H)(4). 
(b)  Agenda Requirements 
For all public hearings required before any land use board , the land use director shall place the tentative meeting agenda in a local daily newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting. In addition, the land use director shall post the tentative meeting agenda in City Hall and send a copy to neighborhood associations that are registered with the land use director , at least fifteen days prior to the scheduled meeting. 
(c)  Posting Requirements 
(i)  For all ENN meetings and public hearings required before a land use board , except appeals, the property shall be posted by the applicant with posters obtained from the land use director at the applicant's expense. At least one poster shall be prominently displayed, visible from each public and private street and road abutting the property , and securely placed on the property at least fifteen calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting. Placement of the posters shall be in such a manner as to not compromise public safety. 
(ii)  The posters shall be removed within thirty days after final action , and failure to do so may result in the city removing the poster and charging the applicant a civil fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  Mailing and Emailing Requirements 
Notice of a public hearing or ENN meeting shall be mailed via the United States postal service by the applicant at least fifteen calendar days prior the public hearing or meeting as follows: 
(i)  notices shall be mailed by first class mail to the owners of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property as shown in the records of the county treasurer, and to the physical addresses of such properties where the property's address is different than the address of the owner ; 
(ii)  notices shall also be mailed by first class mail to neighborhood associations that have registered with the land use director and that will be directly affected by the proposed action or that have a boundary within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property . Email notices to the neighborhood associations shall be provided on the same day the applicant sends postal notices; 
(iii)  for zone changes of one block or less, notices to property owners for public hearings before the governing body or the planning commission shall be by certified mail with return receipt requested as required by Section 3-21-6 NMSA 1978; 
(iv)  in the case of an application for a telecommunications facility , all property owners within the corresponding setback distances listed in Section 14-6.2(E) shall also receive notices; 
(v)  if a notice by certified mail of a zoning change is returned undelivered, the city shall attempt to discover the owner's most recent address and shall send the notice by certified mail to that address as required by Section 3-21-6 NMSA 1978; 
(vi)  copies of all required mailing lists, mailing certificates and return receipts shall be provided to the land use director prior to the public hearing or ENN meeting with an affidavit of mailing signed by the person who mailed the notices. 
(e)  Notice Requirements for City -Initiated Development Review Actions 
(i)  Agenda Requirement 
Agendas must be posted and published as provided in Subsection 14-3.1(H)(1)(b) and (c). 
(ii)  Posting Requirement 
For a project that affects one lot or other clearly-delineated premises , posting must occur as provided in Subsection 14-3.1(H)(1)(c). For a project that affects a larger project area, the city shall securely place in the public right of way one poster at each major intersection within or near the plan or project area. There shall also be at least one poster for every three hundred (300) acres. Where the city is the applicant and the plan or project area is less than one city block, one poster shall be placed within the public right of way at the nearest intersection to the subject property . All posters shall be placed at the appropriate sites at least fifteen calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing or meeting and shall indicate the nature of the change proposed; identification of the plan or project area; and the time, date and place of the public hearing or ENN meeting. 
(iii)  Mailing Requirements 
Mailed notice shall be provided as required in Subsection 14-3.1(H)(1)(d). 
(iv)  Publishing Requirements 
At least fifteen days before the public hearing, the city must publish a display advertisement in a local daily newspaper of general circulation stating the date, time and place of the public hearing, describing the nature of the change. 
(2)  Notice of Public Hearing Before Governing Body 
Notice shall be provided as required in Subsection 14-3.1(H)(1)(a) or (e), as applicable. In addition, the applicant shall publish one notice in a local daily newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Postponed or Recessed and Reconvened Public Hearings and Meetings 
If a public hearing or ENN meeting is postponed prior to the scheduled meeting, re-notification is not necessary if notice of the new date, time and location of the meeting is clearly posted at the time and place where the original public hearing or meeting was to be held. A public hearing or meeting may be recessed and reconvened without re-noticing if the date, time and place for the meeting is specified immediately prior to recessing. 
(4)  Appeal Hearing Notice Requirements 
The following shall apply to all public hearings on appeals to land use boards or to the governing body . 
(a)  Agenda Requirements 
The land use director shall place the appeal on the agenda of the body hearing the appeal and shall publish and post the agenda in accordance with the established procedures for that body. 
(b)  Notice Requirements 
The appellant shall give written notice of the appeal as follows: 
(i)  Form of Notice 
The notice shall be in a form approved by the land use director as being adequate to ensure that the average citizen reading the notice will be fairly informed of the general purpose of what is to be considered; 
(ii)  Procedure for Giving Notice 
The appellant shall give notice of the time, date and place of the public hearing by first class mail postmarked at least fifteen days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall be approved by the land use director prior to mailing, and an affidavit of mailing shall be provided by the appellant . 
(iii)  Notice Recipients 
The following shall receive notice: 1) all appellants and appellees; and 2) all persons or neighborhood associations that were required to be mailed notice for the application giving rise to the final action being appealed. 
(c)  Failure to Provide Notice 
If the appellant fails to provide proof of proper notice in a form approved by the land use director prior to the public hearing on an appeal, the appeal shall be deemed withdrawn and may not be refiled. The land use director may waive this requirement if the appellant shows good cause. The land use director's decision is not appealable. 
(I)  Public Hearing Procedures   
Public hearings shall follow the procedures adopted by resolution of the governing body . 
(J)  Conditions of Approval   
Applications may be approved with conditions of approval to ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of Chapter 14 or any section of this chapter and any applicable city land use policy. 
(K)  Post-Approval Procedures - Rezoning   
(1)  If, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14 and Sections 3-21-1 through 3-21-11 NMSA 1978, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, those changes shall be made on the official zoning map within thirty days after the ordinance adopting the change in zoning classification has been approved by the governing body . 
(2)  A rezoning ordinance shall be published one time either in its entirety or by title and a general summary of the subject matter contained in the ordinance, whichever the governing body elects to do at least five days prior to its effective date, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(L)  Required Submittals   
It is the applicant's responsibility to submit all materials necessary to prove that an application complies with the terms of Chapter 14. The land use director may require additional materials reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(M)  Time for Review of Applications   
If a land use board does not act on an application within ninety days of submission of a completed application , the applicant may request review of the application by the governing body . 
14-3.2 - AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL PLAN 
(A)  Purpose   
The general plan is a guide for the city's land use decisions. The regulations, restrictions and policies of the city affecting development of Santa Fe shall be in accordance with the general plan as provided in Section 3-21-5 NMSA 1978. When necessary, the general plan shall be amended in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Applicability   
The general plan must first be amended before any proposed changes in the city's policies on urban area boundaries, annexation, growth, economic development, special review districts or other long-range planning items not in conformance with the general plan may be approved. For example: 
(1)  annexations must conform to the general plan . The general plan must be amended before any annexations not already in conformance with the general plan may be approved; and 
(2)  the official zoning map provided for in Section 14-4.1(C) must conform to the general plan . The general plan must first be amended before: 
(a)  new zoning regulations establishing new land use classifications may be approved; or 
(b)  approval of a change in zoning district designation that is inconsistent with the land use classification shown on the general plan's future land use map. The determination of consistency shall be made based on review of the future land use map and applicable policies of the general plan , recognizing that there may not be in every case a direct correspondence between the land use classifications in the general plan and the zoning district designations in Chapter 14. 
(C)  Amendments Not Required   
Changes in the city's specific policies and code provisions that do not conflict with the general plan do not require general plan amendments. 
(D)  Procedures   
(1)  Land Use Director Review and Recommendation 
When applications are made for annexations, rezonings or other governing body or planning commission cases, the land use director shall determine in writing whether an amendment to the general plan is first required. The land use director shall review applications for amendment to the general plan for compliance with Chapter 14 and other city land use policies and make a recommendation to the planning commission. If an amendment is required, the amendment may be considered by the planning commission and the governing body concurrently with other applications . 
(2)  Planning commission Review and Recommendation 
(a)  All proposed general plan amendments shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation at a public hearing. 
(b)  The planning commission shall then transmit the application to the governing body , together with a recommendation based on the criteria set forth in Subsection 14-3.2(E) of this section as to approval, disapproval, desirable changes and special conditions and safeguards. 
(3)  Governing Body Decision 
Before taking action on a proposed general plan amendment, the governing body shall hold a public hearing. After reviewing the land use director report, the recommendation of the planning commission and any evidence obtained at the public hearing, the governing body shall take final action to approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed general plan amendment. 
(E)  Approval Criteria   
(1)  Criteria for All Amendments to the General Plan 
The planning commission and the governing body shall review all general plan amendment proposals on the basis of the following criteria, and shall make complete findings of fact sufficient to show that these criteria have been met before recommending or approving any amendment to the general plan : 
(a)  consistency with growth projections for Santa Fe, economic development goals as set forth in a comprehensive economic development plan for Santa Fe and existing land use conditions such as access and availability of infrastructure ; 
(b)  consistency with other parts of the general plan ; 
(c)  the amendment does not: 
(i)  allow uses or a change that is significantly different from or inconsistent with the prevailing use and character in the area; or 
(ii)  affect an area of less than two acres, except when adjusting boundaries between districts; or 
(iii)  benefit one or a few landowners at the expense of the surrounding landowners or the general public; 
(d)  an amendment is not required to conform with Subsection 14-3.2(E)(1)(c) if it promotes the general welfare or has other adequate public advantage or justification; 
(e)  compliance with extraterritorial zoning ordinances and extraterritorial plans; 
(f)  contribution to a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of Santa Fe that in accordance with existing and future needs best promotes health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development ; and 
(g)  consideration of conformity with other city policies, including land use policies, ordinances, regulations and plans. 
(2)  Additional Criteria for Amendments to Land Use Policies 
In addition to complying with the general criteria set forth in Subsection 14-3.2(E)(1), amendments to the land use policies section of the general plan shall be made only if evidence shows that the effect of the proposed change in land use shown on the future land use map of the general plan will not have a negative impact on the surrounding properties . The proposed change in land use must be related to the character of the surrounding area or a provision must be made to separate the proposed change in use from adjacent properties by a setback , landscaping or other means, and a finding must be made that: 
(a)  the growth and economic projections contained within the general plan are erroneous or have changed; 
(b)  no reasonable locations have been provided for certain land uses for which there is a demonstrated need; or 
(c)  conditions affecting the location or land area requirements of the proposed land use have changed, for example, the cost of land space requirements, consumer acceptance, market or building technology. 
(3)  Additional Criteria for Neighborhood Plans 
In addition to complying with the general criteria for general plan amendments set forth in Sections 14-3.2(E)(1) and (2), the adoption of neighborhood plans shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Purpose 
The purpose of the neighborhood plan is to record neighborhood-specific policies to promote the well-being of the neighborhood. 
(b)  Neighborhood 
For the purpose of neighborhood planning, a neighborhood is defined as the geographic area, people and facilities that satisfy a household's basic needs for food, shelter, recreation, social identity, security, primary education and other basic services. For the purpose of calculating the percentages required in this paragraph, each parcel is entitled to a single vote no matter how many persons might own the single parcel . 
(c)  Public Information Meetings 
The land use director shall conduct public information meetings regarding the neighborhood planning process. 
(d)  Petition 
A neighborhood may petition the land use director to develop a neighborhood plan. The petition shall contain: 
(i)  a description of the proposed boundaries of the neighborhood; 
(ii)  the signatures of forty percent of the property owners of record in the proposed boundaries; and 
(iii)  the names and contact information for a steering committee of at least five persons from the neighborhood to work with the land use director . 
(e)  Acceptance of Petition 
(i)  The land use director shall review neighborhood boundaries and recommend changes, if necessary, so that the proposed boundaries adhere to the definition of a neighborhood as set forth in Subsection 14-3.2(E)(3)(b). 
(ii)  The land use director shall verify that the petition complies with Subsection 14-3.2(E)(3)(d)(ii). 
(iii)  The land use director may prioritize the processing of neighborhood plans based upon: 1) available city resources; 2) how the neighborhood plan integrates and potentially furthers broader city planning objectives and projects; and 3) changes in the community. 
(iv)  If, after the land use director has accepted the petition for the preparation of a neighborhood plan, the city is unable to begin the process for the neighborhood plan within sixty days, a neighborhood whose petition has been delayed may proceed as set forth in Section 14-5.10(C) (Creation of Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District Alternative). 
(f)  Preparation of Neighborhood Plan 
(i)  The neighborhood steering committee is responsible for the preparation of the neighborhood plan with input from the neighborhood and the assistance of the land use director . 
(ii)  The plan shall respond to and address the general plan themes set forth in Section 1.7 of the general plan (1999). 
(iii)  The plan shall include at least these elements: 1) a description of the neighborhood, including its history, assets, existing conditions and future challenges; 2) a detailed listing of neighborhood issues and concerns; 3) a statement expressing a neighborhood vision or goals; 4) neighborhood recommendations outlining actions to be taken to implement plan elements; and 5) an implementation strategy designed to enact neighborhood priority recommendations. 
(iv)  In addition, the plan may include the following elements: 1) an improvement plan containing an assessment of the physical improvement needs of the neighborhood; and 2) the characteristics of the neighborhood that are proposed to be regulated within a proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district as set forth in Section 14-5.10. 
(g)  Public Meetings 
(i)  The neighborhood steering committee shall hold at least two public meetings at which the proposed neighborhood plan shall be discussed and developed. The meetings shall be coordinated with the land use director and held at a reasonable time and place to maximize public attendance. 
(ii)  Notice for the first public meeting shall follow the notice requirements for early neighborhood notification as set forth in Section 14-3.1(H). Notice for subsequent meetings shall be determined by the steering committee. If the proposed boundaries are enlarged, notice shall be given to those additional property owners and physical addressees as for the first scheduled meeting. 
(h)  Planning Commission Subcommittee 
(i)  A final draft of the neighborhood plan shall be submitted to a subcommittee of the planning commission, such as the long-range planning subcommittee, which shall review and make recommendations regarding the completeness of the plan and its adherence to the general plan themes. 
(i)  Neighborhood Ballot 
(i)  The steering committee shall mail a ballot by regular mail to all property owners of record within the plan boundaries. The ballot shall ask for a single affirmative or negative vote for the proposed plan. The steering committee shall include a stamped envelope addressed to the land use director for returning ballots. 
(ii)  If, within thirty days of mailing the ballot, the city receives ballots approving the plan from greater than fifty percent of the property owners of record within the neighborhood plan boundaries, the land use director shall initiate a general plan amendment to adopt the neighborhood plan as set forth in this section. 
(j)  Time to Complete Plan 
From the date of receipt of petition to initiate a neighborhood plan to the deadline for receipt of neighborhood ballots shall not exceed two years unless a specific time extension is approved by the land use director . 
14-3.3 - AMENDMENTS TO TEXT OF CHAPTER 14 
(A)  Procedure   
(1)  Proposal of Text Amendments 
(a)  A text amendment may be proposed by: 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  6) 
(i)  the governing body ; 
(ii)  the planning commission; 
(iii)  a department or agency of the city ; or 
(iv)  any other person , who must submit a request for a text amendment, in writing, directly to the governing body , or a member thereof. 
(2)  Staff Review and Recommendation 
The land use director shall review the proposed text amendment and make a recommendation as to its conformance to the review criteria. The land use director may suggest changes to the amendment to better conform to the review criteria or current policy and procedure. 
(3)  Notice 
Notice of amendments to the text of Chapter 14 shall be given as required by Sections 3-17-3 and 3-21-6 NMSA 1978 and any other applicable requirements. 
(4)  Public Hearings 
All proposed text amendments shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation at a public hearing, except for proposed amendments to Sections 14-2.6 and 14-5.2, on which the historic districts review board shall review and issue recommendations; to Sections 14-2.7, 14-3.13 and 14-5.3, on which the archaeological review committee shall review and issue recommendations; and to Section 14-8.13, on which the public utilities committee shall review and issue recommendations. The land use board's review and recommendation shall be based on the approval criteria set forth in Subsection 14-3.3(B). A land use board shall hold a public hearing on a text amendment and make a recommendation if directed to do so by the governing body . Before taking action on a proposed text amendment, the governing body shall hold a public hearing. After reviewing the land use director's and planning commission's recommendations and any comments made at the public hearings, the governing body shall take final action to approve, approve with amendments, or deny the proposed text amendment. 
(5)  Compilation 
After adoption, the land use director shall provide a copy to the city's ordinance compiler for compilation into Chapter 14. 
(B)  Review Criteria and Findings   
All text amendments shall be reviewed on the basis of the following criteria: 
(1)  compliance with law; 
(2)  consistency with the general plan ; 
(3)  consistency with other policies adopted by the governing body ; 
(4)  consistency with the purpose and intent of Chapter 14 and of the section being amended; 
(5)  consideration of how the amendment relates to other provisions of the Santa Fe City Code and the avoidance of unintended consequences; and 
(6)  consistency with any approved neighborhood conservation overlay districts. 
14-3.4 - ANNEXATIONS 
(A)  Three Methods of Annexation   
There are three methods of annexing territory: 
(1)  Arbitration Method 
The arbitration method may be used by the governing body to annex contiguous territory as authorized by Sections 3-7-5 through 3-7-10 NMSA 1978. 
(2)  Municipal Boundary Commission method 
The municipal boundary commission method may be used by the governing body or by a majority of landowners of the territory proposed to be annexed, upon petition to the municipal boundary commission as authorized by Sections 3-7-11 through 3-7-16 NMSA 1978. 
(3)  Petition Method 
The petition method may be used by a majority of landowners of the territory proposed to be annexed and the petition must be presented to the governing body for approval or rejection as authorized by Section 3-7-17 NMSA 1978. 
(B)  Zoning Designation for Newly Annexed Parcels   
All newly annexed parcels shall be considered to be in the R-1 district unless otherwise classified by rezoning. 
(C)  Procedures   
(1)  Application and Required Information 
(a)  Annexation Petitions by Landowners 
(i)  All annexation requests by petition of the landowners shall be accompanied by a letter of application , a plat of the area proposed to be annexed, a master plan or a concurrent rezoning application , or both, for the area proposed to be annexed, a proposed annexation agreement and other supporting materials required by the land use director , and shall meet all other requirements of Section 3-7-17 NMSA 1978. When the city is the petitioning landowner, a map showing the city -owned land to be annexed may be submitted in lieu of a plat . 
(ii)  In the case of an annexation request by petition of landowners brought by municipal boundary commission method, the petition must conform to the requirements listed in Item (i) above as well as those set forth in Section 3-7-13 NMSA 1978. 
(b)  Annexation Requests Initiated by the Governing Body 
When an annexation is initiated by the governing body under the arbitration or municipal boundary commission methods, the governing body shall provide the information required by Sections 3-7-5 and 3-7-13 NMSA 1978, respectively. In addition, the following shall apply: 
(i)  when annexation is initiated to consolidate city boundaries or services, a plan demonstrating how such consolidation will take place shall be provided; and 
(ii)  when annexation is proposed for purposes other than consolidation of city boundaries or services, a sector plan shall be provided. 
(2)  Planning Commission Recommendation 
(a)  All proposed petition-method annexations shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation at a public hearing based on the approval criteria set forth in Subsection 14-3.4(D). In the course of the review, the planning commission shall make complete findings of fact on all applications . The planning commission shall not rule on the economic feasibility of any development proposed in an annexation master plan. 
(b)  The planning commission shall transmit the application to the governing body , together with a recommendation based on the criteria in Subsection 14-3.4(D) as to approval, disapproval, desirable changes and special conditions and safeguards. 
(c)  If the planning commission does not act on a request for annexation application review within ninety days after submission, the applicant may request review of the proposed annexation by the governing body . 
(3)  Governing Body Decision 
(a)  Before taking action on any proposed petition-method annexation, the governing body shall hold a public hearing. After reviewing the land use director's report, if any, the recommendation of the planning commission and any evidence obtained at the public hearing, the governing body shall take final action to approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed annexation. 
(b)  When a proposed petition-method annexation has failed to receive the recommended approval of the planning commission, the annexation shall not be approved by the governing body except by a majority vote of all the members of the governing body . 
(4)  Notifications 
(a)  The city shall submit each annexation petition to the board of county commissioners as required by Section 3-7-17.1 NMSA 1978. 
(b)  The city shall notify the school board about the public hearing date for all petition-method annexations over twenty-five acres at least fifteen days in advance of the hearing. 
(c)  The city shall notify the county land use department of all annexations approved by the city . 
(5)  Resubmission of Annexation Applications 
Once an application for an annexation has been denied by the governing body after public hearing, a like or similar application for the same property shall not be filed within twelve months from the date of denial by the governing body , unless the applicant can establish before the planning commission that there has been a substantial change in conditions and circumstances surrounding the request that would warrant a reconsideration of the matter. 
(6)  Protest Petitions 
If the owners of twenty percent or more of the land included in the area, or within one hundred (100) feet, excluding public rights of way , of the area proposed to be changed by an annexation, protest in writing, the proposed petition-method annexation shall not become effective unless it is approved by a majority vote of all the members of the governing body . 
(D)  Approval Criteria   
The planning commission and the governing body shall review all petition-method annexation proposals on the basis of the following criteria. The reviewing entities must make complete findings of fact sufficient to show that the criteria provided in this section have been met before recommending or approving any annexation: 
(1)  the proposed annexation is within the urban area boundary; 
(2)  generally, the area to be annexed provides a consolidation of city boundaries and service areas; provided that allowance shall be made for those properties that are prohibited from annexation by charter or other legal instrument; and provided further that in all cases the proposed annexation must be contiguous with existing city boundaries; 
(3)  generally, a proposed development should not impose an economic burden on citizens or result in an indirect subsidy of services by the city . Specifically, evidence shall be provided by the applicant that the existing infrastructure ; public facilities, including fire stations and parks; and operating services, such as ongoing garbage collection, police and fire, can accommodate the impacts of the proposed development ; 
(4)  the amount of and proposed use for the land to be annexed is consistent with the city's policies regarding the provision of urban land sufficient to meet the amount, rate and geographic location of growth of the city . It is recognized that the city does not have an obligation to annex land if it is determined as a matter of city policy that the inventory of urban land, by land use category, is adequate to meet the projected absorption rates of the city for housing and other purposes for a specified number of years as set forth in that policy; 
(5)  any proposed development is compatible with the provisions of Extraterritorial Land Use Ordinance No. 2009-01 Establishing Subdivision, Platting, Planning and Zoning Rules Within the Presumptive City Limits, as amended; and 
(6)  all annexation requests are for areas of no fewer than twenty-five acres unless the area produces a consolidation of city boundaries or services or is in phase with the staging plan of the general plan . 
(E)  Additional Applicant Requirements   
(1)  If the accommodation of the impacts of a development cannot be demonstrated to the city's satisfaction as to the assumptions, methodology and data: 
(a)  the applicant and the city shall negotiate to offset the increased infrastructure , public facilities or operating costs to the city due to the proposed development ; or 
(b)  the city shall deny the annexation. 
(2)  When the annexed area creates a need for additional major public infrastructure expansion, the applicant may be required to contribute a proportional fair share of the cost of expansions. 
(F)  Annexation Agreements   
(1)  For all landowner petition method annexations, an annexation agreement shall be entered into between the city and the applicant . 
(2)  The annexation agreement shall be recommended by the planning commission to the governing body and adopted by the governing body as a part of the ordinance setting forth the boundaries of the annexed area. 
(3)  The agreement shall include, as appropriate: 
(a)  a list of property owners ; 
(b)  reference to the way in which the annexation is in conformance with the general plan ; 
(c)  provision for necessary off-site facilities; 
(d)  designation of land uses; 
(e)  a phasing and staging plan; 
(f)  land to be dedicated to the city ; 
(g)  impact fees; 
(h)  provision of city services, including fire and police protection, wastewater collection and sewer services, refuse disposal and street and road improvements; 
(i)  site design; 
(j)  archaeological site protection; 
(k)  provision of parks and open space and other items as agreed to by the city and the applicant ; and 
(l)  the provision of water, consistent with adopted policies of the city , shall be addressed. 
(4)  A revised annexation agreement must be approved if the master plan approved as part of the annexation application becomes invalid and a new master plan is approved. 
14-3.5 - REZONINGS 
(A)  General Provisions   
(1)  Initiation of Proposals 
A rezoning, or amendment to the official zoning map, may be proposed by: 
(a)  the governing body; 
(b)  the planning commission; 
(c)  any department or agency of the city; or 
(d)  any other person , who must submit a request in writing to the governing body , along with all submissions required by Chapter 14 and any other information requested by the land use director as reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(2)  Plan Requirements 
Plan submittal requirements for rezonings are set forth in Articles 14-4 (Zoning Districts) and 14-5 (Overlay Zoning Districts). 
(3)  Uniform Zoning Classification for Entire Lot Required 
Except where a legal lot of record is divided by a zoning district boundary, no request to change the zoning classification on a portion of a legal lot of record shall be considered unless the change will establish a uniform zoning classification for the entire lot . A new zoning district boundary shall not divide a legal lot of record , except to establish overlay district boundaries based on topography or other physical conditions. 
(B)  Procedures   
(1)  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation 
(a)  All proposed rezonings shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation at a public hearing. The planning commission's review and recommendation shall be based on the approval criteria and balancing test set forth in Subsection (C) of this section. The planning commission shall not consider or rule on the economic feasibility of any development proposed in a rezoning master plan or development plan unless the application is for a public project. 
(b)  The planning commission shall transmit the application , including any plan, to the governing body , together with a recommendation as to findings and conditions, desirable changes and recommendations for approval or disapproval. 
(2)  Governing Body Review and Decision 
(a)  Before taking action on a proposed rezoning, the governing body shall hold a public hearing. In the course of the hearing, the governing body may request other information from the applicant that is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with Chapter 14 and may suggest changes to the application as a condition of governing body approval. After reviewing the land use director report, if any, and the planning commission recommendation and any evidence obtained at the public hearing, the governing body shall take final action to approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed rezoning. The final action shall be based on the approval criteria and balancing test provided in Subsection (C) of this section. 
(b)  The governing body may approve a rezoning to a less intensive zone district than originally requested by the applicant . In such cases, no re- application or re-processing of the original application shall be required. 
(c)  When a proposed rezoning fails to receive the recommended approval of the planning commission, the rezoning shall not be approved by the governing body except by a majority vote of all the members of the governing body . 
(3)  Approved Rezonings to be Reflected on Official Zoning Map 
After the governing body has approved a rezoning application , the official zoning map shall be amended in accordance with Section 14-4.1(C) to note the new zoning designation. In the case of approval by the governing body of a rezoning to PUD, the PUD classification shall be attached to the existing zoning designation on the official zoning map, i.e., "____-PUD" with the underlying zoning district abbreviation indicated in the blank. 
(4)  Resubmission of Rezoning Applications 
Once a rezoning application has been denied by the governing body after public hearing, a similar rezoning application for the same property shall not be filed within twelve months from the date of denial by the governing body unless the applicant can establish before the planning commission that there has been a substantial change in conditions and circumstances surrounding the request that warrants a reconsideration of the matter. 
(5)  Protest Petitions 
If the owners of twenty percent or more of the land included in the area, or within one (100) hundred feet of the land proposed to be rezoned excluding public rights of way , protest in writing, the proposed rezoning shall not become effective unless it is approved by a majority vote of all the members of the governing body . 
(6)  Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District 
This section is intended to supplement the procedures and requirements of Section 14-5.10 (Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts). 
(C)  Approval Criteria   
(1)  The planning commission and the governing body shall review all rezoning proposals on the basis of the criteria provided in this section, and the reviewing entities must make complete findings of fact sufficient to show that these criteria have been met before recommending or approving any rezoning: 
(a)  one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(i)  there was a mistake in the original zoning; 
(ii)  there has been a change in the surrounding area, altering the character of the neighborhood to such an extent as to justify changing the zoning; or 
(iii)  a different use category is more advantageous to the community, as articulated in the general plan or other adopted city plans; 
(b)  all the rezoning requirements of Chapter 14 have been met; 
(c)  the rezoning is consistent with the applicable policies of the general plan , including the future land use map; 
(d)  the amount of land proposed for rezoning and the proposed use for the land is consistent with city policies regarding the provision of urban land sufficient to meet the amount, rate and geographic location of the growth of the city ; and 
(e)  the existing and proposed infrastructure , such as the streets system, sewer and water lines, and public facilities, such as fire stations and parks, will be able to accommodate the impacts of the proposed development . 
(2)  Unless the proposed change is consistent with applicable general plan policies, the planning commission and the governing body shall not recommend or approve any rezoning, the practical effect of which is to: 
(a)  allow uses or a change in character significantly different from or inconsistent with the prevailing use and character in the area; 
(b)  affect an area of less than two acres, unless adjusting boundaries between districts; or 
(c)  benefit one or a few landowners at the expense of the surrounding landowners or general public. 
(D)  Additional Applicant Requirements   
(1)  If the impacts of the proposed development or rezoning cannot be accommodated by the existing infrastructure and public facilities, the city may require the developer to participate wholly or in part in the cost of construction of off-site facilities in conformance with any applicable city ordinances, regulations or policies; 
(2)  If the proposed rezoning creates a need for additional streets , sidewalks or curbs necessitated by and attributable to the new development , the city may require the developer to contribute a proportional fair share of the cost of the expansion in addition to impact fees that may be required pursuant to Section 14-8.14. 
14-3.6 - SPECIAL USE PERMITS 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
Special use permits are intended to allow flexibility in providing for, regulating or preventing specified uses within various districts as provided in Table 14-6.1-1 so they are compatible with existing or desired land use patterns. Special use permit approval is required for certain uses so that potential detrimental effects may be reduced or avoided and conflicts in land use may be prevented. Special use permits are necessary because of the wide variety of uses that are allowed within zone districts and because of the variety of existing sites and uses found in the community. 
(B)  Approval Authority   
The planning commission and the board of adjustment have the authority to hear and decide applications for special use permits as authorized by Chapter 14; to decide questions that are involved in determining whether special use permits should be granted; and to grant special use permits with such conditions and safeguards as appropriate under Chapter 14 or to deny special use permits when not in harmony with the intent and purpose of Chapter 14. 
(C)  Procedures   
(1)  Site Plan Approval 
Special use permits shall include approval of a site plan and other site development drawings necessary to document that the type and extent of development proposed can be accomplished in conformance with applicable development standards. 
(2)  Application 
The application shall indicate the section of Chapter 14 under which the special use permit is sought and state the grounds on which it is requested; 
(3)  Approval Limited 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  7) 
A special use permit is granted for a specific use and intensity . A special use permit is required for any change of use to a new or different use category that requires a special use permit as designated in Table 14-6.1-1. A special use permit is required for any significant expansion or intensification of a special use. 
(D)  Approval Criteria and Conditions   
(1)  Necessary Findings 
To grant a special use permit , a land use board shall make the following findings: 
(a)  that the land use board has the authority under the section of Chapter 14 described in the application to grant a special use permit ; 
(b)  that granting the special use permit does not adversely affect the public interest, and 
(c)  that the use and any associated buildings are compatible with and adaptable to buildings , structures and uses of the abutting property and other properties in the vicinity of the premises under consideration. 
(2)  Conditions 
The land use board may specify conditions of approval that are necessary to accomplish the proper development of the area and to implement the policies of the general plan , including: 
(a)  special yards or open spaces ; 
(b)  fences, walls or landscape screening ; 
(c)  provision for and arrangement of parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
(d)  on-site or off-site street , sidewalk or utility improvements and maintenance agreements; 
(e)  noise generation or attenuation; 
(f)  dedication of rights of way or easements or access rights; 
(g)  arrangement of buildings and use areas on the site; 
(h)  special hazard reduction measures, such as slope planting; 
(i)  minimum site area; 
(j)  other conditions necessary to address unusual site conditions; 
(k)  limitations on the type, extent and intensity of uses and development allowed; 
(l)  maximum numbers of employees or occupants permitted; 
(m)  hours of operation; 
(n)  establishment of an expiration date, after which the use must cease at that site; 
(o)  establishment of a date for annual or other periodic review at a public hearing; 
(p)  plans for sustainable use of energy and recycling and solid waste disposal; 
(q)  any other appropriate conditions and safeguards, in conformity with Chapter 14 or provisions of other chapters of the Santa Fe City Code that regulate development and use of land; and 
(r)  conditions may not be imposed that restrict the use to a specific person or group. 
(E)  Expiration of Special Use Permits (Ord. No. 2013-16  8) 
(1)  A special use permit that has not been exercised within three years from the date of the approval expires as provided in Section 14-3.19(B)(5). Approval of the special use permit may be extended as provided in Section 14-3.19(C). 
(2)  If the use approved by the special use permit ceases for any reason for a period of more than three hundred sixty-five days, the special use permit shall expire except as provided for government uses in Section 14-10.2(C)(2). 
14-3.7 - SUBDIVISIONS OF LAND 
(A)  General Provisions   
(1)  Jurisdiction and Applicability 
(a)  These land subdivision regulations shall govern all platting or replatting of land within the jurisdiction of the city . 
(b)  No person shall subdivide land, nor shall construction of any kind commence on subdivided land, nor shall transfer of ownership be made of subdivided land prior to the approval of a subdivision of the land by the planning commission and prior to the recording of the subdivision in the office of the county clerk. Until the planning commission has approved a subdivision, the owner of the land within the subdivision or his agent shall not transfer or sell or agree to transfer or sell or negotiate to transfer or sell the land or any part of it by reference to, the exhibition of or any other use of, a plat or subdivision of the land. The description by metes and bounds in an instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(2)  Conflicts With Other Code Provisions 
(a)  No subdivision plat shall be approved that does not comply with applicable provisions of the Santa Fe City Code that regulate the development and use of land, or that increases the degree or extent of noncompliance with those provisions, unless the appropriate variance or other relief procedure is approved. 
(b)  Whenever there is a discrepancy or conflict between minimum standards or dimensions for subdivisions and those contained elsewhere in Chapter 14, Chapter 7 (Building and Housing), Chapter 12 (Fire Prevention and Protection) or other official regulations of the city , the more restrictive standard shall apply as provided in Section 14-1.7. 
(3)  Acceptance of Improvements 
The dedication of any or all of the lands for public use of any nature within the city shall be specifically accepted by the planning commission or governing body , and such acceptance may be conditioned on a finding by the land use director of compliance with all conditions of approval of the subdivision plat . Approval of a subdivision by the planning commission does not constitute acceptance by the city of the streets , alleys or other public ways or easements and parks or other public lands dedicated on the subdivision plat by the owners . 
(4)  Serial Subdivisions 
A proposed subdivision that occurs within five years after the approval of an earlier subdivision of any part of the affected land shall be subject to the same standards and shall follow the same procedures as though the cumulative number of lots created by the successive plats were created by the currently proposed subdivision. 
(5)  Common Promotional Plans 
A plan or scheme of operation undertaken by a single applicant or a group of applicants acting in concert to offer for sale or lease lots where the land is either contiguous or part of the same area of land or is known, designated or advertised as a common unit or by a common name shall constitute a single subdivision plat . 
(6)  Subdivisions by Court Order 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  9) 
(a)  Court proceedings must not be used to circumvent the provisions of Chapter 14 relating to the subdivision or resubdivision of property or to create or increase a nonconformity. 
(b)  A legal lot of record that is properly partitioned, partially condemned or otherwise divided or altered by court order as provided in Chapter 42 NMSA 1978 continues to be a legal lot of record . 
(c)  Development of property that is divided or altered by court order remains subject to the standards and requirements of Chapter 14. 
(7)  Certificate of Compliance 
(a)  Approval by the Land Use Director. 
When the land use director determines that a single lot not shown on an approved subdivision plat is a legal lot of record , the land use director may approve and cause to be recorded a certificate of compliance. The certificate of compliance describes the lot , the circumstances of its creation and the documentation and applicable regulations upon which the determination of compliance is based. 
(b)  Approval by the Planning commission. 
The planning commission may approve a certificate of compliance for a lot or contiguous lots that have been created in violation of the procedural requirements of this section if it determines that the lots comply with all other applicable standards of Chapter 14 or it imposes conditions of approval necessary to ensure such compliance. Upon meeting any conditions of approval and recordation of the certificate of compliance, the lot or lots shall be legal lots of record . 
(c)  Procedures for Approval 
Approval of a certificate of compliance by the planning commission shall follow the procedures required for a final subdivision plat , including those for any variances requested. 
(d)  No Creation of Nonconformity 
A certificate of compliance shall not be granted to divide land in a way that precludes compliance with the provisions of Chapter 14 by any other portion of the previous legal lot of record out of which the approved lots are created. 
(e)  Inclusion on Recorded Plats 
A certificate of compliance may be recorded as a separate document or in the form of a statement included on a subdivision plat approved and signed by the appropriate city officials. 
(8)  Notice of Violation 
(a)  Whenever the land use director determines that real property has been divided in violation of this section, the land use director shall record a notice of violation describing the affected property and the nature of the violation and listing any recorded documents upon which the determination of the violation is based. If the owner of record of the affected property can be determined, the name of the owner shall be included on the notice of violation, and a copy shall be mailed to the owner at the address on file with the county treasurer by certified mail with return receipt requested. 
(b)  When the violation has been corrected by means of a certificate of compliance or approved subdivision plat , the notice of violation and correction shall be referenced on the certificate or plat . When the violation is corrected by other legal means, the land use director shall record a notice of correction referencing the notice of violation and describing the means by which the violation has been corrected. 
(c)  The procedures described in Subsections (A)(6) and (7) are in addition to those provided for enforcement of Chapter 14 in Section 14-11 or elsewhere in Chapter 14. 
(B)  Procedures   
(1)  Pre-Application Conference 
Subdividers seeking a preliminary plat for subdivision lots shall comply with the pre- application conference procedures of Section 14-3.1(E). 
(2)  Early Neighborhood Notification; Notice; Public Hearing; Public Hearing Procedures 
All subdivision plat applications shall comply with the ENN requirements of Section 14-3.1(F), notice provisions of Section 14-3.1(H) and general provisions of Section 14-3.1(I) (Public Hearing Procedures). 
(3)  Preliminary Plat 
(a)  Applicability 
Preliminary plat procedures are not required for inheritance and family transfer subdivisions. 
(b)  Application 
Following the pre- application conference, if applicable, the subdivider shall prepare or cause to be prepared a preliminary plat , together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in checklists issued by the land use director and in conformance with the standards of Article 14-9 (Infrastructure Design, Improvement and Dedication Standards). The plat shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor . 
(c)  Land Use Director Review 
The land use director shall review the preliminary plat and supplementary materials submitted for conformity to this article. The land use director shall provide the planning commission with a written report of findings together with a recommendation that the preliminary plat be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved. A recommendation to conditionally approve shall contain the conditions and a recommendation for denial shall contain the reasons for that recommendation. 
(d)  Planning Commission Review and Decision 
The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat and other materials submitted for conformity to this article, consider the land use director report and recommendations and require any changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider. Following this, the planning commission shall act on the application within thirty-five days unless an extension of time is applied for in writing by the subdivider and granted by the planning commission. The planning commission shall approve or deny the application . 
(e)  Effect of Approval 
Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of the final plat ; rather, it is an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat . The final plat shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval and recorded when the provisions of this article and the conditions of preliminary plat approval are met. 
(4)  Final Plat 
(a)  Conformity with Preliminary Plat Required 
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. 
(b)  Submission 
An application for approval of a final plat shall be filed with the land use director and shall consist of maps that show the proposed development layout and the related information and drawings specified by the land use director . 
(c)  Land Use Director Review 
The land use director shall determine that all required filing and review fees have been paid in full and that public lands for park and recreation facilities have been dedicated on the final plat or the optional fee in lieu of land dedication for such facilities has been paid in full as required in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees) and 14-8.15 (Dedication and Development of Land for Parks, Open Space, Trails and Recreation Facilities). Such dedication shall not be recorded, nor take effect, unless the final plat is recorded at the same time. The land use director shall submit to the planning commission a written report of findings together with a recommendation to approve or disapprove the final plat . 
(d)  Original Drawing and Exhibits 
The original drawing of the final plat and all other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified by the land use director . 
(e)  Planning Commission Review and Decision 
(i)  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within thirty-five days of the date it first considers the complete submittal of the plat at a public hearing unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the planning commission. 
(ii)  If the final plat is approved by the planning commission, the approval shall be recorded on the face of the original drawing of the final plat . The approval shall be dated and verified on the original drawing by the signature of the chair and secretary of the planning commission in the spaces provided. If the plat is approved, the original drawing shall be used in part for recordation purposes and shall be retained in the files of the engineering division. If the final plat is disapproved, the original drawing shall be returned to the applicant . 
(f)  Recording 
Final plats shall be recorded only by the city and the land use director shall notify the subdivider of the date of the recording. The recording of a plat does not imply the acceptance by the city of maintenance obligations for any public dedication shown on the plat . 
(5)  Time Limits for Preliminary and Final Subdivision Plat Approvals 
(a)  Time limits for plat approvals are contained in Section 14-3.19 (Expiration, Extension and Amendment of Development Approvals). 
(b)  All conditions of final plat approval shall be completed within three years of recording the plat , unless a different schedule has been approved by the planning commission or an extension is applied for in writing and approved by the planning commission. 
(6)  Phasing 
Subdivision plats may be approved by the planning commission in phases at the preliminary or final plat stage, or the land use director may approve phases within an approved final plat . Each phase shall include all infrastructure and amenities necessary and appropriate to the stand-alone operation of that phase and for the orderly development of other properties in the vicinity. 
(7)  Plat Standards 
All subdivision plats must meet the minimum standards for surveying in New Mexico and must comply with plat standards adopted by the land use director . 
(C)  Approval Criteria   
(1)  In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as vegetation, water courses, historical sites and structures , and similar community assets that, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the area or to Santa Fe. 
(2)  The planning commission shall give due regard to the opinions of public agencies and shall not approve the plat if it determines that in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare the land is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuited for building, or for other reasons uninhabitable, shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for other uses that may increase danger to health, safety or welfare or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land shall be set aside within the plat for uses that will not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or produce unsatisfactory living conditions. See also Section 14-5.9 (Ecological Resource Protection Overlay District) and Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations). 
(3)  All plats shall comply with the standards of Chapter 14, Article 9 (Infrastructure Design, Improvements and Dedication Standards). 
(4)  A plat shall not be approved that creates a nonconformity or increases the extent or degree of an existing nonconformity with the provisions of Chapter 14 unless a variance is approved concurrently with the plat . 
(5)  A plat shall not be approved that creates a nonconformity or increases the extent or degree of an existing nonconformity with applicable provisions of other chapters of the Santa Fe City Code unless an exception is approved pursuant to the procedures provided in that chapter prior to approval of the plat . 
(D)  Summary Procedure   
The summary committee of the planning commission has the authority to review and approve subdivisions that result in the creation of one additional lot . Summary subdivisions are subject to the procedural requirements, approval criteria and development standards that apply to other subdivisions, except that: 
(1)  no preliminary plat or hearing is required; 
(2)  the summary committee may defer the construction of public and semi-public improvements required by Chapter 14 until such time as the lots are developed and may waive the requirements of this chapter for the posting of financial guarantees for the improvements prior to recording an approved plat . Deferral or waiver shall be made only upon finding that the improvements or guarantee is not needed to protect the interests of prospective purchasers of the lots created; to provide for the orderly development of other properties in the vicinity; or to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(E)  Resubdivisions   
The land use director has the authority to review and approve or disapprove resubdivisions where the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots does not increase the total number of lots and the resulting lots comply with the approval criteria in Subsection (C) of this section. 
(F)  Inheritance and Family Transfer Subdivisions   
(1)  Purpose 
It is the purpose of this section to support the continuation of traditional patterns of land transfer and division within families and to increase affordable housing within the family group. This section is intended to assist in the transfer of property from parents to children or grandchildren with only those restrictions that are essential to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Santa Fe. There is no intention to promote the resale of such properties outside the family or to create favorable opportunities for developers. Standards for inheritance and family transfer subdivisions have been written to reflect traditional development . 
(2)  Applicability 
(a)  A subdivision is created by inheritance if it is created by a will or order of court in probate proceedings for the purpose of transmitting property to heirs, but not for the purpose of sale or lease and not creating more than one lot per family member or violating the provisions of this section. 
(b)  A subdivision is created by family transfer if it is created by a father or mother for the purpose of transferring a lot or lots to his or her children, natural or adopted, or grandchildren, or it is created by a person who has performed the function of father, mother, grandfather or grandmother for the purpose of transferring a lot to a person for whom such person has performed that function; provided that the person proposing to create the subdivision and transfer the lot or lots files appropriate documentation of conveyance along with an affidavit with the county clerk containing the following: 
(i)  a legal description of the property being transferred; and 
(ii)  a statement that the transferor has not made any other transfers of any other lots to the person receiving it that would require the filing of an affidavit pursuant to this section. 
(3)  Restrictions and Requirements 
(a)  Inheritance and family transfer subdivisions are allowed only in residential districts. 
(b)  Any one person may receive only one lot total by family transfer. 
(c)  No sale or lease of any lot designated on a subdivision plat creating an inheritance or family transfer subdivision shall occur within three years of the date of the transfer. 
(d)  The plat shall show the name of each family member to whom a lot is being transferred. Before the final subdivision plat is filed, a copy of the instrument of transfer to the transferee or his authorized representative must be provided to the city . A construction permit shall not be issued to a person other than the transferee or his authorized representative until the required time period is completed. 
(e)  If the property is transferred to a different family member acceptable under this section within three years, the plat and affidavit must be amended to reflect the different transferee. 
(f)  If an owner of a lot that was part of an inheritance or family transfer subdivision applies for a subdivision, residential development or PUD or other rezoning, then all the provisions of Chapter 14 shall apply with no special provision for the prior family transfer subdivision. 
(4)  Procedures 
Applications for inheritance or family transfer subdivisions creating two or more additional lots shall be submitted to the planning commission. Only final plat procedures as set forth in Subsection (B) of this section are required. Applications creating one additional lot shall follow summary committee procedures as set forth in Section 14-2.3(E). In all cases, proof of a legal lot of record is required as part of the submission requirement. 
(5)  Plats and Data 
(a)  An application for approval of an inheritance or family transfer subdivision final plat shall be filed with the land use director and shall consist of maps that show the proposed development layout and the related information and drawings specified by the land use director . 
(b)  Every final plat for an inheritance or family transfer subdivision shall contain the following legend prominently portrayed: 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  10) 
"NOTICE: This subdivision has been approved pursuant to the inheritance and family transfer provisions of the Santa Fe City Code. Procedures for inheritance and family transfer subdivision improvements are significantly different than for other types of subdivisions. No sale or lease of any lot designated on this subdivision plat shall occur within three years of the date this transfer is legally made. Any person intending to purchase a lot within this subdivision should contact the city of Santa Fe land use director . Requests for construction permits on illegally sold lots shall be denied." 
(6)  Development Standards and Required Improvements 
Proof of compliance with the following standards is required for the approval of an inheritance or family transfer subdivision: 
(a)  Terrain Management Regulation 
Compliance with terrain management regulation submissions as set forth in Section 14-8.2 is required. 
(b)  Design Standards 
Subdivision design standards as set forth in Section 14-9.2 apply. 
(c)  Required Improvements 
Inheritance and family transfer subdivisions shall comply with the required improvements set forth in Section 14-9.2. 
(d)  Density and District Regulations 
Inheritance and family transfer subdivisions are required to meet the standards for use, density , building placement, height, open space , parking and other items set forth in the district regulations. 
14-3.8 - DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  1) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
(1)  It is the intent of the development plan to: 
(a)  provide the plans to be followed in construction operations, including phasing; 
(b)  enable the governing body , land use boards and land use director to ensure compliance with Chapter 14; 
(c)  document compliance with final actions to approve or conditionally approve development applications ; 
(2)  A development plan typically encompasses development of one or more parcels under common ownership or unified control that will be planned and developed as a whole. 
(B)  Applicability 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  11; Ord. No. 2016-39  2) 
(1)  Early neighborhood notification and notice and conduct of public hearings are required pursuant to the general provisions of Sections 14-3.1(F), (H) and (I). 
(2)  A development planis required in conjunction with rezoning applications in certain districts as provided in Chapter 14, Articles 4 (Zoning) and 5 (Overlay Zoning Districts). 
(3)  Approval of a development plan by the planning commission is required prior to new development that meets any of the following criteria: 
(a)  gross floor area of thirty thousand square feet or more and is located within any zoning district of the city ; 
(b)  gross floor area of ten thousand square feet or more in a residential district or in the C-1, C-2, C-4, BCD, HZ, I-1, I-2, BIP, PRRC, RS, SC or MU district and is within two hundred (200) feet, including public rights of way , of RR, R-1 through R-6, R-7, R-7-I, R-8, R-9, RC-5, RC-8, R10, R-12, R-21, R-29, RAC, AC, PRC and MH districts; 
(c)  flea market with fifteen or more vendors; or 
(d)  outdoor commercial recreational uses in any zone where the total area devoted to recreation and related pedestrian circulation and amenities, excluding parking and vehicular circulation areas, exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in any zone; provided that this provision does not apply to temporary carnivals, circuses and similar short-term entertainment uses required to obtain a permit from the city . 
(4)  The development plans described in Subsections (B)(2) and (3) shall be reviewed by the planning commission. 
(5)  This section applies where the cumulative square footage of multiple permits meets or exceeds the criteria in Subsections (B)(2) or (3) or a combination of those subsections when the permits are for coordinated development of a project comprising multiple buildings or outdoor uses, including phased projects and projects involving development of adjoining commonly owned parcels . 
(6)  This section does not apply to the construction of single-family dwellings , each of which has a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less, including accessory buildings , on lots created prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 1999-13 or on lots within a subdivision that was subject to early neighborhood notification procedures. This section does apply to construction of any single-family dwelling that has a gross floor area greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, including accessory buildings . 
(7)  No additional development plan review is required if the new or changed use or development described in Subsections (B)(2) and (3) was part of a development plan approved as part of a rezoning or other action before the governing body or the planning commission, and for which an early neighborhood notification meeting occurred as set forth in Section 14-3.1(F). 
(8)  Approval of a development plan by the land use director is required for multiple-family development comprising three or more dwelling units with a gross floor area less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(9)  This section does not apply to the construction of qualifying projects within the Midtown LINC Overlay District with the exception that 
(a)  approval of a development plan by the land use director is required prior to, or concurrent with, the issuance of a construction permit for a qualifying project consisting of new building square footage totaling more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet; and 
(b)  early neighborhood notification is required pursuant to Subsection 14-3(F) SFCC 1987 prior to the issuance of a construction permit for a qualifying project consisting of new building square footage totaling more than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. 
(C)  Procedures   
(1)  Submittal Requirements 
Applicants for developments that require development plans under this section shall submit plans and other documentation as required by the land use director that show compliance with the applicable provisions of the Santa Fe City Code as provided in Section 14-3.1(C) Form of Application, including plans that show: 
(a)  existing conditions on the site and within two hundred (200) feet of the site; 
(b)  proposed modifications to the site, including the locations of existing and new structures , grading , landscaping , lighting, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking and loading facilities; 
(c)  the types, extent and intensity of land uses that are proposed; 
(d)  proposed modifications to the infrastructure serving the site, including public and private streets , driveways and traffic control measures and utilities; 
(e)  documentation of compliance with development standards such as required yards , lot coverage, height of structures and open space ; 
(f)  the phases of development , if applicable; 
(g)  for residential development , a proposal for provision of affordable housing as required by Section 14-8.11 (Santa Fe Homes Program); (Ord. No. 2013-16  12) 
(h)  a development water budget as required by Section 14-8.13; 
(i)  for a development plan or final development plan, sufficient detail to clearly show how each applicable development standard is to be met and identify any variance or waiver required, 
(j)  for a preliminary development plan, sufficient detail to demonstrate the feasibility of meeting all applicable development standards, including an analysis of the type and extent of variances or waivers required, specific requests for which may be included. 
(2)  Coordination with Other Review Procedures 
(a)  Development plans required for rezonings by Articles 14-4 Zoning Districts and 14-5 Overlay Zoning Districts shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a public hearing with notice provided as required by Section 14-3.1(H) and then transmitted to the governing body with any recommendations, as set forth in Section 14-3.5 Rezonings. 
(b)  A special use permit or variance request associated with a development plan shall be reviewed concurrently and approved or denied by the planning commission. 
(c)  If review and approval of a development plan by the planning commission and the governing body is required in conjunction with a rezoning action, the applicant may submit a preliminary development plan for consideration at the time of rezoning. If the rezoning is approved, a separate application for a final development plan must be approved by the planning commission prior to development of the affected property . 
(d)  If review and approval of a development plan by the planning commission only is required, the applicant may first submit an application for a preliminary development plan. If the preliminary development plan is approved, a separate application for final development plan approval by the planning commission must be approved prior to the development of the property . 
(e)  If review and approval of a master plan by the planning commission and the governing body is required in conjunction with a rezoning action, and if approval of a development plan by the planning commission would be required for one or more phases, the applicant may either: 
(i)  submit a development plan for the entire affected area for review and approval in lieu of a master plan; or 
(ii)  submit a development plan for one or more portions of the affected area for review and approval concurrently with the master plan. 
(f)  Action on a development plan by the planning commission must be taken at a public hearing with notice provided as required by Section 14-3.1(H). 
(3)  Consistency with Master Plans and Preliminary Development Plans 
(a)  Development plans must be consistent with applicable provisions of approved master plans as provided in Section 14-3.9(B)(3). 
(b)  Final development plans within an area that is subject to an approved preliminary development plan must comply with the provisions of the previously approved preliminary plan unless it is amended or repealed. Final actions by the governing body , land use boards and the land use director concerning rezonings, subdivisions, special use permits , development plans and construction permits shall include a specific finding or determination that the action complies with all applicable provisions of the preliminary plan. 
(4)  Scope of Amendments to Development Plans 
(a)  The land use director has the authority provided in Section 14-2.11(C)(2) (Minor Modifications to Development Approvals). 
(b)  The planning commission has the authority provided in Section 14-3.19(D) Amendment of Development Approvals. 
(5)  Administrative Approval Procedure 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  13) 
Approval of a development plan by the land use director as provided in Subsection 14-3.8(B)(8), does not require an ENN meeting, public hearing or public notice and is not required to be filed for record with the county clerk. 
(6)  Recording of Plans; Infrastructure Construction 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  14) 
(a)  The signed original mylars of the development plan and associated engineering and improvement drawings shall be filed with the land use director and shall be the basis for issuance of construction permits . The development plan shall be filed for record with the county clerk by the land use director . 
(b)  If dedication of public rights of way or easements is required, a separate dedication plat shall be recorded concurrently with the development plan. 
(c)  Infrastructure improvements shall comply with Article 14-9 Infrastructure Design, Improvement and Dedication Standards. 
(D)  Approval Criteria and Conditions   
(1)  Necessary Findings 
To approve a development plan, the planning commission must make the following findings: 
(a)  that it is empowered to approve the plan under the section of Chapter 14 described in the application ; 
(b)  that approving the development plan will not adversely affect the public interest; and 
(c)  that the use and any associated buildings are compatible with and adaptable to buildings , structures and uses of the abutting property and other properties in the vicinity of the premises under consideration. 
(2)  Conditions 
The planning commission may specify conditions of approval that are necessary to accomplish the proper development of the area and to implement the policies of the general plan , including: 
(a)  special yards or open spaces ; 
(b)  fences, walls or landscape screenings; 
(c)  provision and arrangement of parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
(d)  on-site or off-site street , sidewalk or utility improvements and maintenance agreements; 
(e)  noise generation or attenuation; 
(f)  dedication of rights of way or easements or access rights; 
(g)  arrangement of buildings and use areas on the site; 
(h)  special hazard reduction measures, such as slope planting; 
(i)  minimum site area; 
(j)  other conditions necessary to address unusual site conditions; 
(k)  limitations on the type, extent and intensity of uses and development allowed; 
(l)  maximum numbers of employees or occupants permitted; 
(m)  hours of operation; 
(n)  phases of development , if applicable; 
(o)  establishment of an expiration date, after which the use must cease at that site; 
(p)  establishment of a date for annual or other period review at a public hearing; 
(q)  plans for sustainable use of energy, recycling and solid waste disposal; 
(r)  any other appropriate conditions and safeguards, in conformity with Chapter 14 or provisions of other chapters of the Santa Fe City Code that regulate the development and use of land; and 
(s)  conditions may not be imposed that restrict the use to a specific person or group. 
(3)  Expiration 
Development plans expire as provided in Section 14-3.19 Expiration, Extension and Amendment of Development Approvals. 
14-3.9 - MASTER PLANS 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
(1)  It is the intent of a master plan to: 
(a)  provide a comprehensive plan that must be followed during the subsequent review and approval of development plans and subdivision plats for the master-planned area. 
(b)  enable the governing body , land use boards and land use director to ensure compliance with Chapter 14; 
(c)  document compliance with final actions to approve or conditionally approve development applications ; 
(2)  A master plan provides for: 
(a)  comprehensive and coordinated planning for the development of land, often involving multiple phases occurring over a period of several years or more and may also involve multiple developers; 
(b)  plans for the funding and phased construction of major public or private infrastructure improvements required to serve the planned development . 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  A master plan is required in conjunction with rezoning applications in certain districts as provided in Article 14-4 (Zoning Districts) and may be required in conjunction with specified annexation applications as provided in Section 14-3.4. 
(2)  A development plan may be submitted in lieu of a master plan as provided in Section 14-3.8(C)(2)(c). 
(3)  All use and development of land within a master-planned area must comply with the provisions of the adopted master plan. Final actions by the governing body , land use boards and the land use director concerning rezonings, subdivisions, special use permits , development plans and construction permits shall include a specific finding or determination that the action complies with all applicable provisions of the master plan. 
(C)  Procedures   
(1)  Submission Requirements 
Applicants for developments that require master plans shall submit plans and other documentation as required by the land use director that show compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 14 as provided in Section 14-3.1(C) (Form of Application), including plans that show: 
(a)  existing conditions on the site and within the vicinity; 
(b)  proposed modifications to the site, including the locations of existing and new structures , grading , landscaping , lighting, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking and loading facilities; 
(c)  proposed changes to the zoning of land within the master plan area and the types, extent and intensity of land uses that are proposed; 
(d)  the proposed boundaries of tracts comprising the various land use areas and development phases, 
(e)  proposed modifications to the infrastructure serving the site, including locations of utilities and public and private streets and driveways and traffic control measures; 
(f)  phases of development , if applicable, 
(g)  if public or private infrastructure is proposed to be constructed in phases, a plan for the timing, financing and responsibility for infrastructure construction; 
(h)  for residential development , a proposal for provision of affordable housing as required by Section 14-8.11 (Santa Fe Homes Program); 
(i)  A development water budget as required by Section 14-8.13; and 
(j)  for master plans involving five or more acres of land, the land use director may require an analysis of the fiscal impact to the city of providing utility and other municipal services to the area. 
(2)  Special Development Standards and Design Guidelines 
(a)  Approval of the master plan may include approval of special development standards or design guidelines to be applied within the master plan area when such regulations are necessary to implement specific goals of the master plan. 
(b)  Special standards and guidelines must be approved as part of the master plan. 
(c)  Special standards and guidelines are normally more restrictive than the general standards contained in Chapter 14. All aspects of land use and development within a master planned area that are not addressed by a special guideline or standard are subject to the general standards of Chapter 14. 
(3)  PRC and PRRC Master Plans 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  2) 
(a)  The master plan must include a designation of the maximum density allowed for each tract designated for use. Unless special standards are adopted, development standards for each tract shall be those specified in Section 14-7 Building Envelope and Open Space Standards and Measurements for the corresponding density . 
(b)  The master plan must include a designation of the type of use and extent of development allowed for each tract designated for nonresidential or mixed uses . In addition to nonresidential uses allowed in residential districts, such as schools and religious assembly , the development may include: 
(i)  neighborhood shopping centers intended primarily to serve development within the PRC district and immediate vicinity as provided in Section 14-4.3(K) SC-1 Planned Shopping Center Districts and Section 14-7 Building Envelope and Open Space Standards; 
(ii)  not more than thirty-five percent of a planned residential community may be designated for development with mixed uses consistent with the standards for the MU district; and 
(iii)  within the PRRC district, neighborhood centers as provided in Item (i) above, resort accommodations and resort-related commercial services. 
(iv)  Unless special standards are adopted, the provisions of Section 14-6 Permitted Uses and Use Regulations apply within the PRC and PRRC districts. 
(4)  Notice and Action by Planning Commission 
Action by the planning commission to recommend approval of a master plan, or to approve an amendment as provided in Section 14-3.19(D)(2) Amendment of Development Approvals - Master Plans in the MU and BIP Districts, must be taken at a public hearing with notice provided as required by Section 14-3.1(H)(1). (Ord. No. 2014-31  3) 
(5)  Notice and Action by Governing Body 
Action by the governing body to approve or amend a master plan must be taken at a public hearing with notice provided as required by Section 14-3.1(H)(2). (Ord. No. 2014-31  4) 
(D)  Approval Criteria; Conditions   
(1)  Necessary Findings 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  5) 
Approval or amendment of a master plan requires the following findings: 
(a)  the master plan is consistent with the general plan ; 
(b)  the master plan is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning districts that apply to, or will apply to, the master plan area, and with the applicable use regulations and development standards of those districts; 
(c)  development of the master plan area will contribute to the coordinated and efficient development of the community; and 
(d)  the existing and proposed infrastructure , such as the streets system, sewer and water lines, and public facilities, such as fire stations and parks, will be able to accommodate the impacts of the planned development . 
(2)  Conditions 
Approval of the master plan may specify conditions of approval that are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of Chapter 14 and implement the policies of the general plan , including: 
(a)  requirements for construction and funding of private or public infrastructure , including utilities, municipal buildings , roads, parks and trails; 
(b)  provisions for the use and protection of areas of special hazards or environmental sensitivity; 
(c)  modifications to the proposed plan, including changes to the boundaries of land use tracts , patterns of land uses, infrastructure plans, phasing plans and special development standards and guidelines. 
(3)  Expiration 
Master plans expire as provided in Section 14-3.19 (Expiration, Extension and Amendment of Development Approvals). 
14-3.10 - DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
(A)  Applicability   
A plat governed by Article 14-9, or showing land all or partly within the special flood hazard area , shall meet the requirements of this section and Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations) and shall be approved and signed by the floodplain administrator . 
(B)  Administration by Floodplain Administrator 
(Ord. No. 2012-19  1) 
(1)  The floodplain administrator shall administer and enforce this section and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR Part 59 et. seq . (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(2)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include the following: 
(a)  maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this section and Section 14-8.3; 
(b)  review permit applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding and that public utilities and facilities are constructed so as to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  review and approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this section and Section 14-8.3; 
(d)  review applications for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, from which prior approval is required; 
(e)  where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the flood hazard area , for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(f)  in riverine situations, notify adjacent communities and the New Mexico office of the state engineer prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency (FEMA); 
(g)  assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained; 
(h)  when base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Subsection 14-8.3(D) (Engineering Criteria), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably use any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Subsection 14-8.3(C), (General Provisions for Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas); 
(i)  when a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator shall require that no new construction , substantial improvements or other development , including fill , be permitted within Zones A and AE on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM), unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development , when combined with all other existing and anticipated development , will not increase the base flood elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city ; 
(j)  establish a floodplain management program to meet the prerequisites for the sale of flood insurance as set forth in 44 CFR part 59.22; 
(k)  where base flood elevation data are utilized, obtain and maintain records of the lowest floor and flood proofing elevations for new and substantially improved construction; 
(l)  maintain a record of all appeals; and 
(m)  report all waivers to FEMA upon request. 
(C)  Enforcement (Ord. No. 2012-19  2) 
(1)  An application for a permit , license or certificate pertaining to the use of land or building in any special flood hazard area shall be approved by the floodplain administrator . 
(2)  The floodplain administrator may make reasonable entry upon any lands and waters within the city's jurisdiction for the purpose of making any investigation, survey, removal or repair contemplated by this section or Section 14-8.3. An investigation of any obstruction shall be made by the floodplain administrator either on the floodplain administrator 's own initiative or by the written request of any member of the public. 
(3)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this section or Section 14-8.3, the floodplain administrator may enter such buildings or premises at a reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the floodplain administrator by this section; provided that if such building or premises is occupied, the floodplain administrator shall first present proper identification and demand entry, and if such building or premises be unoccupied, the floodplain administrator shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator and his or her designee shall carry identification indicating the floodplain administrator 's authority and shall present such identification to the magistrate court or district court for the purpose of this section and to other persons when requested to do so during the performance of the floodplain administrator 's duty. 
(5)  The powers and duties of the floodplain administrator relative to obstructions in a special flood hazard area shall include the following: 
(a)  removal of the obstruction to a floodway that has been created by fallen trees, silt, debris and like matter; and 
(b)  removal or repair of an obstruction when, after investigation, an order has been issued to the property owner for its removal or repair and the order is not complied with within a reasonable time as may be prescribed by the city or the owner cannot be found or determined; provided that if the city causes the obstruction to be removed or repaired, the reasonable cost of the removal or repairs shall constitute a lien against the lot from which the obstruction was removed or on which it was repaired. The lien shall be foreclosed in the manner provided in Sections 3-36-1 through 3-36-7 NMSA 1978. 
(D)  Appeals   
An appeal of a final action of the floodplain administrator shall be pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(E)  Waivers   
The planning commission may waive the provisions of this section and Section 14-8.3. Waivers shall be approved by the planning commission as provided in this section. 
(1)  Waivers may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(2)  Waivers may be issued for development on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level , providing the relevant factors in Subsections (E)(5) and (6) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the waiver increases. (Ord. No. 2012-11  6) 
(3)  Waivers shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Waivers may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the waiver is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure . (Ord. No. 2012-11  6) 
(5)  Waivers may be approved for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  The prerequisites for granting waivers are: 
(a)  waivers shall only be issued upon a determination that the waiver is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(b)  waivers shall only be issued upon: 
(i)  showing a good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  a determination that failure to grant the waiver would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant , and 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  6) 
(iii)  a determination that the granting of a waiver will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(7)  Procedures for the consideration of a request for a waiver shall be as provided in Section 14-3.16 (Variances), including notice of the hearing in accordance with Section 14-3.1(H)(1) and requiring the prerequisites in Subsection 3.10(E)(6) instead of the findings specified in Section 14-3.16. 
(8)  An applicant to whom a waiver is granted shall be given written notice that the structure may be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation , and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
14-3.11 - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
(A)  Applicability   
(1)  A building or other structure that is regulated by Chapter 14 shall not be erected, moved, added to or altered, nor shall other development activities described in this section occur, without a construction permit issued by the land use director or building official . However, no construction permit shall be required for construction, alterations or other development activities that are specifically exempted from permit requirements by the provisions of Chapter 14 or Chapter 7 (Building and Housing), or by written policies adopted by the land use director or the building official for specified minor repairs, minor construction, minor alterations and minor development activities. 
(2)  A construction permit shall not be issued by the land use director except in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 14. When required by the provisions of Chapter 7 SFCC 1987 (Building and Housing), the building official shall approve the construction permit prior to issuance. When required by the provisions of Chapter 12 SFCC 1987 (Fire Prevention and Protection), the fire marshal or other code official shall approve the construction permit prior to issuance. 
(3)  Construction permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the land use director or building official , and other officers or agencies where additional approval is required, authorize only the use, arrangement, location and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, location or construction. Any use, arrangement, location or construction that is at variance with that authorized is a violation of Chapter 14 and is punishable as provided in Article 14-11 (Enforcement). 
(B)  General Procedures   
(1)  Applications and Approvals 
(a)  All applications for construction permits pursuant to this section shall include plans and other documentation as required by the land use director that show compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 14 as provided in Section 14-3.1(C) (Form of Application). 
(b)  A construction permit shall not be approved until it is determined that the construction or other development activity authorized by the permit complies with all applicable provisions of Chapter 14 and applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  The approval of construction permits by the land use director or other city officials shall be coordinated with the approval of permits required by other agencies. 
(d)  The land use director shall retain one approved set of plans in the city's records for not less than ten years, use one set of plans for inspections and enforcement and return one set of plans to the applicant after they are reviewed and approved. 
(2)  Amendments to Applications 
Any change from the approved site plans or floor plans shall first be approved by the land use director and shall be submitted in writing and approved prior to commencement of any construction related to the proposed amendment. 
(3)  Expiration, Extension and Renewal 
For expiration of construction permits see Section 7-1.6 SFCC 1987. The land use director may adopt procedures for the extension and renewal of construction permits consistent with the provisions of Section 7-1.6 SFCC 1987. 
(4)  Record of Construction Permits 
The land use director shall maintain a record of all construction permits , including the person to whom the permit is issued, the address, the date of issuance, the proposed use, the square footage of buildings constructed or altered and the type of construction. The record shall be retained in the city's records for not less than fifty years. Permit copies or summary records for secondary construction permits such as plumbing, mechanical and electrical permits shall be retained for not less than ten years. 
(5)  Posting of Construction Permits 
Within twenty-four hours after issuance of a construction permit , the applicant shall post the property for which the permit has been issued with posters obtained from the land use director . One or more posters shall be prominently displayed, readable from each public and private road abutting the property , and securely placed on the property . If the property does not abut a public street or road, the land use director shall require additional posters within nearby public streets or roads to provide effective notice to the public. Placement of the posters shall be in such a manner as not to compromise public safety. The posters shall remain in place until after the completion and final inspection of all work covered by the permit . 
(6)  Compliance with Permit Requirements 
No construction or other development for which a permit is required shall be done prior to obtaining the permit . All work shall comply with the provisions of the approved permit . 
(7)  Combined Permits 
The land use director may require separate construction permits for each of the categories of development identified in this section or may issue a combined construction permit for two or more of the categories. 
(Ord. # 2018-6 ,  1) 
(C)  Architectural Design Review   
(1)  Applicability 
(a)  New construction, additions, exterior remodeling, repainting and re-stuccoing of buildings in a different color shall comply with the requirements of Section 14-8.7 (Architectural Design Review) except as set forth in Subsection (C)(1)(b) of this section. 
(b)  Architectural design review is not required for the following: 
(i)  detached single-family and two-family dwellings and related accessory structures; 
(ii)  structures other than buildings, with the exception of filling station canopies, except as required in this article; 
(iii)  buildings located in the historic districts and buildings designated as landmarks , which are subject to review under Section 14-5.2 SFCC 1987 (Historic Districts); and 
(iv)  exterior building features not visible from any street , way or public place without trespassing. 
(2)  Procedures 
(a)  Application 
An applicant for a project subject to architectural design review shall submit an application , in a form and accompanied by such supporting materials as specified by the land use director to enable the land use director to review the project's compliance with the architectural design review requirements set forth in Section 14-8.7. The review shall be conducted as part of construction permit review. 
(b)  Point Review 
The land use director shall determine compliance or noncompliance with this section by means of a point system. Point allotments shall be made according to the criteria set forth in Section 14-8.7(D). 
(c)  Preliminary Review (Optional) 
(i)  A preliminary calculation of architectural design points will be performed by the land use director at the schematic design or design development stage upon request of an applicant . 
(ii)  Upon completion of the preliminary review, an itemized score sheet and one set of project plans shall be returned to the applicant . A copy of the score sheet and the other set of project plans shall be retained by the land use director . 
(iii)  Points will be recalculated at time of final review. Points allotted at time of final review may differ from those granted during preliminary review if dimensions, features, details or specifications have been altered or in any way modified. The preliminary evaluation shall not be construed to result in any responsibility of the city , the land use director or any other officers, employees or agents of the city for damages to the applicant as a result of the applicant's reliance on a preliminary evaluation. A preliminary evaluation does not limit the discretion of the plan reviewer during the final review. 
(iv)  A final calculation of architectural design points shall be performed and compliance with the point requirements of Section 14-8.7(C) shall be achieved prior to the issuance of a construction permit . 
(v)  If the number of points calculated does not meet the point requirements set forth in Section 14-8.7(C), the applicant shall modify the submittals so as to achieve the necessary number of points prior to issuance of a construction permit . All actual construction work shall comply with the approved submittals. 
(D)  Construction Permits for Signs   
(1)  Applicability 
(a)  Construction Permit Required 
Construction permits are required for all signs displayed to be readable from off the premises , unless specifically exempted in this section. All signs shall comply with the requirements of Section 14-8.10. 
(b)  Construction Permit Not Required 
A construction permit is not required for the following: 
(i)  the changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted or printed sign structure or on a marquee or similar approved sign , including the interchange of sign facings; provided that no portion of the size or color of the sign or size or color of the lettering or background are changed; or 
(ii)  the changing of the message or display of an electronic messaging sign in compliance with the provisions of Section 14-8.10(B)(5)(b); 
(iii)  painting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or sign structure unless a structural change is made. 
(2)  Permit Applications 
New construction permit applications for signs shall contain: 
(a)  the signature of the applicant; 
(b)  the name and address of the sign owner and sign erector; 
(c)  three scaled lined drawings showing the design and dimensions of the sign and standard sign structure ; and 
(d)  three scaled lined drawings of the site plan or building faade indicating the proposed location of the sign and all other existing signs maintained on the premises and regulated by Chapter 14. 
(E)  Construction Permits for Grading and Drainage   
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a construction permit for grading , all projects shall comply with applicable provisions of Section 14-8.12 (Relocation of Gunnison's Prairie Dogs) and may be subject to an archaeological review under Section 14-3.13 (Archaeological Clearance Permits). Minimum standards and submittal requirements for construction permits for grading are provided in Section 14-8.2(D). 
(2)  A construction permit for grading shall be required for grading that is not exempt under Subsection (E)(3) of this section, including: 
(a)  work within an arroyo or drainageway that in the natural course of events may lead to changes in flow characteristics, including earthwork, construction of drainage devices or erosion control devices, removal of significant trees and modifications of arroyo or drainageway banks or bottom, in addition to state or federal permits that may be required; 
(b)  grading and paving for driveways and roads; 
(c)  utility trenching for all commercial and public projects; and 
(d)  any of the following individual activities: 
(i)  removal of more than twenty-five percent of significant trees or grass coverage on a site; or 
(ii)  clearing and grading of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(3)  A construction permit is not required for the following activities if mature landscaping and natural slopes thirty percent or greater are not disturbed: 
(a)  removal, trimming or replacement of streambed vegetation that does not alter the channel shape or flow characteristics and does not require or result in mechanized earth moving; 
(b)  refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations; 
(c)  cemetery graves in approved cemeteries; 
(d)  excavation for wells; 
(e)  exploratory excavations under the direction of archaeologists, soil engineers. engineering geologists or environmental engineers; and 
(f)  grading that is exempt from the terrain and storm water management standards provided in Section 14-8.2(B)(2). 
(F)  Construction Permits for Landscaping and Utilities   
A construction permit is required for the following development : 
(1)  work for which a landscape plan is required by Section 14-8.4; and 
(2)  site improvements, including private utilities that are subject to the provisions of Chapter 14 but for which a construction permit is not otherwise specifically required, as determined by the land use director . 
(G)  Building Codes   
For applicable building codes and additional requirements for construction permits , see Chapter 7 SFCC 1987 (Building and Housing). 
14-3.12 - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
(A)  General Provisions (Ord. No. 2014-31  6) 
(1)  The land use director must issue a certificate of occupancy that certifies compliance with all provisions of Chapter 14 before any change in the use or occupancy of land or change of use or occupancy of a building or premises , or part thereof, is created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partially altered or enlarged in its use or structure , other than the change of residential occupants, or before any new building is occupied for any purpose. 
(2)  The land use director may require the renewal of certificates of occupancy on an annual or other appropriate basis. 
(3)  The approval of certificates of occupancy shall be coordinated with the approval of permits or certificates required by other agencies, including: 
(a)  when required by the provisions of Chapter 7 SFCC 1987 Building and Housing, the building official shall approve the certificate of occupancy prior to issuance; and 
(b)  when required by the provisions of Chapter 12 SFCC 1987 Fire Prevention and Protection, the fire marshal or other code official shall approve the certificate of occupancy prior to issuance. 
(4)  The land use director shall maintain for at least fifty years a record of all certificates of occupancy issued. 
(B)  Temporary Uses/Temporary Certificates of Occupancy   
(1)  Temporary uses allowed by Chapter 14 may be approved by obtaining a temporary certificate of occupancy . Such certificates shall be obtained in the same manner as general certificates of occupancy . 
(2)  The land use director may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a use that is not intended to be temporary in the following circumstances: 
(a)  the land use director determines that it is impossible to fully comply with the provisions of Chapter 14 due to weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the permittee; or 
(b)  the certificate of occupancy is part of a phased development for which multiple permits are issued or for which one permit comprises multiple buildings or structures . 
(3)  Temporary certificates of occupancy for uses that are not intended to be temporary shall comply with the following provisions: 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  15) 
(a)  the land use director shall impose conditions that ensure compliance with the provisions of Chapter 14 and other applicable regulations that protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(b)  the certificate is subject to an enforceable agreement by the permittee and landowner that: 
(i)  does not rely on the actions of a person that is not a party to the agreement; 
(ii)  provides a schedule for meeting all provisions of Chapter 14 within a reasonable time; 
(iii)  provides a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the land use director for completion of all public or quasi-public improvements required by Chapter 14; and 
(iv)  provides for revocation of the certificate by the land use director and termination of the approved occupancy by the permittee if the terms of the agreement are not complied with; and 
(c)  the temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be approved for an initial period of longer than six months. The land use director may approve extensions not to exceed an additional six months. 
14-3.13 - ARCHAEOLOGICAL CLEARANCE PERMITS 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
[RESERVED] 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  Historic Downtown Archaeological Review District 
In this district, an archaeological clearance permit shall be required: 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a building permit for projects with gross lot coverage of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more involving new construction, parking lots and/or alterations . 
(b)  Prior to issuance of a grading permit for projects with two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more in gross lot coverage. 
(c)  For all city projects over two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in gross lot coverage. 
(d)  For alterations , if the ground is dug up, graded, or otherwise disturbed. 
(e)  No archaeological clearance permit is required for a demolition permit except as follows: For demolition requests for structures which are more than seventy-five years old and which are part of a project requiring an archaeological clearance permit , staff for the Archaeological Review Committee shall issue a report to the historic districts review board as set forth in Section 14-3.14. The report shall state whether demolition will damage possible archaeological artifacts . If the Board determines that damage may occur, then it may refer the case to the Archaeological Review Committee requesting that requirements for an archaeological clearance permit be met before a demolition permit is issued. 
(2)  River and Trails Archaeological Review District 
In this district, an archaeological clearance permit shall be required prior to approval of the final development plan or plat for the following projects: 
(a)  All annexations, rezonings, subdivisions, planned unit developments , or other development requiring approval by the Planning Commission, having over two acres, or having any part lying within the area identified as the Santa Fe Trail. 
(b)  All city projects over two (2) acres in size. 
(c)  All city park projects over one (1) acre in size. 
(3)  Suburban Archaeological Review District 
In this district, an archaeological clearance permit shall be required prior to approval of the final development plan or plat for the following projects: 
(a)  All annexations, rezonings, subdivisions, planned unit developments , or other development requiring approval by the Planning Commission, having over ten (10) acres 
(b)  All city projects over two (2) acres in size. 
(c)  All city park projects over one (1) acre in size. 
(4)  Utility Mains 
An archaeological clearance permit is required for new construction of sewer mains or main lines of other utilities such as telephone lines, gas lines, and fiber optics, including the entire construction easement: 
(a)  With an extension of sixty (60) feet or more if the main is in the historic downtown archaeological review district; 
(b)  With an extension of five hundred fifty (550) or more if the main is in the river and trails or suburban archaeological review district. 
(5)  Exemptions 
(a)  Applicants who are requesting archaeological approval from federal agencies are exempted from requirements of the Archaeological Review Districts Ordinance, except that applicants must submit evidence to city staff of the application to the federal agency. In addition the applicant shall submit to city staff the reconnaissance report and other reports made to the federal agencies. 
(b)  Applicants requesting a lot split subdivision are exempted from the requirement of archaeological review districts and for archaeological clearance permits . 
(c)  In the river and trails or suburban districts, applicants with inheritance transfer subdivisions are also exempted. 
(d)  Applicants whose land is in areas where archaeological reconnaissance , excavation , or other treatment has previously been completed, are exempted from the reconnaissance , excavation , or other treatment as required, upon submitting evidence for such work to city staff. An exemption from any one requirement for a clearance permit does not exempt the applicant from other requirements of the Archaeological Review Districts Ordinance. 
(e)  In the historic downtown district, no clearance permit is required for projects for which a construction permit application was made before September 30, 1987. In the river and trails and suburban districts, no clearance permit is required for projects for which application has been made for review by the Planning Commission before September 30, 1987. (Ord. No. 2012-11  7) 
(6)  Environmental Assessments or Impact Statements 
All environmental assessment or impact statements produced by or for the city for city projects shall include an archaeological element containing as a minimum, an archaeological reconnaissance as required for the archaeological review districts in which the project is located. 
(C)  Procedures   
(1)  Pre-Application Conference 
Prior to submission of any application for an archaeological clearance permit , an applicant shall request a pre- application conference, to be conducted pursuant to Section 14-3.1(E). 
(2)  Initiation of Building Permit 
Application for an archaeological clearance permit is considered to be initiation of application for a building permit . 
(3)  Hearings; Notice 
The Archaeological Review Committee shall make all determinations at a public hearing. The applicant shall be notified and staff shall post the preliminary committee agenda at City Hall at least seven days in advance of the meeting. 
(4)  Procedures for Historic Downtown District 
The applicant shall meet the following procedures before an archaeological clearance permit is issued for projects in the historic downtown archaeological review districts: 
(a)  Reconnaissance 
Reconnaissance shall be completed by an archaeologist, hired by the applicant , meeting the professional qualifications set forth in Section 14-2.7(E). Reconnaissance requiring archaeology dealing with historic period sites shall be completed by person qualified as a historical archaeologist and as a historian. As a minimum, the reconnaissance shall consist of: 
(i)  Archival research and analysis of land titles, historic maps, the archaeological records management systems (ARMS) files of the state of New Mexico, and other existing data; 
(ii)  Visual examination of the property for evidence of archaeological features , artifacts or culturally altered landscapes at least seventy-five years old. A sample of surface artifacts shall be recovered; and 
(iii)  Test excavations encompassing a minimum of two percent of the total lot area. At least eighteen (18) square feet shall be dug by hand after which further excavations may be made by mechanical equipment. Excavations shall proceed to a depth where no archaeological features or artifacts are encountered, or until the maximum depth to which excavations can be safely made. 
(b)  Reconnaissance Report 
Upon the completion of the reconnaissance , a reconnaissance report shall be submitted by the applicant to the Archaeological Review Committee containing materials prepared to the specifications of the Committee. 
(c)  Review and Decision by Committee 
At a hearing the Committee shall review the applicant's reconnaissance report and vote to approve or disapprove the recommended significance status and if required, the recommended treatment of archaeological resources. The determination made by the Committee for treatment shall be a condition of approval for the archaeological clearance permit and the building or grading permit . 
(i)  If the project site is determined by the Committee not to be significant , then no further treatment is required and an archaeological clearance permit shall be issued. 
(ii)  If the project site is determined by the Committee to be significant and the Committee determines that the data potential of the site is exhausted because a sufficient sample has been taken and no subsurface cultural remains exist, then no further treatment is required and an archaeological clearance permit shall be issued. 
(d)  Treatment 
If the project site is determined by the committee to be significant and to contain further potential data, then the recommended treatment shall be reviewed and shall include the following procedures: 
(i)  If additional surface remains exist, then additional collections shall be made; and/or 
(ii)  If subsurface cultural remains do exist then the test pits shall be expanded, artifacts shall be collected, and an excavation shall be made of archaeological features such as hearths, living surfaces, or other non-portable cultural remains . In addition further archival research shall be conducted concerning human occupation and the land use of the project site; or 
(iii)  The site shall either be treated as a public or private open space or shall be treated in such a way that no subsurface disturbance takes place. The procedure is intended as an alternate to paragraph (ii) above. The choice of alternatives is made by the applicant . The committee may recommend but not require that one alternative rather than another be chosen. 
(iv)  Following implementation of the treatment plan, a treatment report is required containing a description of the collection, excavation , research, and other procedures, and a summary of the findings. The report shall be submitted by the applicant to and approved by the committee before an archaeological clearance permit is issued. A final report is due within one year of the date of the issuance of the clearance permit . Upon request of the archaeologist, the committee may grant a one-year's extension. 
(v)  A mapped and written record shall be kept by city staff of all surveyed areas and test excavations . 
(e)  Maximum Funding Limit 
In the historic downtown archaeological review districts, in no case shall the applicant be required to spend more than one percent of the valuation of the property shown on the building permit in providing reports and other information requested by the Archaeological Review Committee. 
(f)  Maximum Time for Excavations and for Excavation of Significant Sites 
In the historic downtown archaeological review district, in no case shall the archaeologist be required to spend more than 15 eight hour equivalent days in carrying out test excavations , or an additional 20 eight hour equivalent days in carrying out additional excavation of significant sites. 
(5)  Procedures for River and Trails Area, Suburban Area, and Utility Mains 
The following procedures shall be met before an archaeological clearance permit is issued to an applicant in the archaeological review districts for the river and trails district, the suburban district, or a utility main. 
(a)  Reconnaissance 
Reconnaissance shall be completed by an archaeologist, hired by the applicant , meeting the professional qualifications set forth in the Archaeological Review Districts Ordinance. Reconnaissance requiring archaeology dealing with historic period sites shall be completed by a person qualified as a historical archaeologist and as a historian. The reconnaissance shall consist of: 
(i)  Archival research and analysis of land titles, historic maps, ARMS files and other existing data; and 
(ii)  Visual examination of the property for evidence of archaeological features , artifacts , or culturally altered landscapes at least seventy-five years old. Linear transects at intervals not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet shall be walked. If a sample of surface artifacts is recovered during reconnaissance , then the archaeologist in charge of the reconnaissance shall inform the property owner of the desirability of permanently storing the artifacts in a statewide repository such as the museum of New Mexico. 
(b)  Reconnaissance Report 
Upon the completion of the reconnaissance , a reconnaissance report shall be submitted by the applicant to the Archaeological Review Committee containing materials prepared to the specifications of the Committee. 
(c)  Committee Review and Decision 
The Committee shall review the reconnaissance report and vote to approve or disapprove recommended significance status on an archaeological site by site basis and, if required, the recommended treatment of archaeological resources. The Committee's determination for treatment shall be a condition of approval for the archaeological clearance permits . Treatment shall be completed before approval by the Planning Commission of the final development plan or plat . For phased projects, treatment shall be completed before approval of the final development plan or plat for the phase in question. 
(d)  Treatment 
(i)  No further treatment is required if the archaeological site is determined by the Committee not to be significant , and an archaeological clearance permit shall be issued. 
(ii)  If the archaeological site is determined by the Committee to be significant and to contain potential data then the recommended treatment shall be reviewed and shall meet the following: 
A.  A sample of surface artifacts shall be collected; and 
B.  If there is reason to believe that subsurface remains do exist, then test excavations shall take place. At least eighteen (18) square feet shall be dug by hand, after which further excavations may be made using mechanical equipment. Excavations shall proceed to a depth where no archaeological features or artifacts are encountered, or until the maximum depth to which excavation can be safely extended. 
C.  In addition, further archival research shall be conducted concerning human occupation and the land use of the site; or 
D.  Surface artifacts shall be collected and documented. The site shall alternatively be treated as a public or private open space , park or greenbelt or shall be treated in such a manner that no subsurface disturbance takes place. The choice of alternatives is made by the applicant . The committee may recommend but not require that one alternative rather than another be chosen. 
(iii)  Following implementation of the treatment plan, a treatment report is required containing a description of the collection, excavation , research, and other procedures, and a summary of the findings. The report shall be submitted to and approved by the committee before an archaeological clearance permit is issued and before approval of the final development plan by the Planning Commission. A final report is due within one year of the date of the issuance of the clearance permit . Upon the request of the archaeologist, the committee may grant a one-year's extension. 
(iv)  A map and written record shall be kept by city staff of all surveyed areas and test excavations . 
(e)  River and Trails and Suburban Area: Funding Limit 
(i)  In the river and trails area, in no case shall the applicant be required to spend more than three thousand dollars ($3,000) dollars plus one hundred dollars ($100) per acre for the treatment of an archaeological site . 
(ii)  In the suburban area, in no case shall the applicant be required to spend more than four thousand dollars ($4,000) plus one hundred dollars ($100) per acre for the treatment of an archaeological site . 
(iii)  The definition of treatment of an archaeological site is as set forth in this chapter. The procedures for treatment are set forth in Subsection (5)(d) above. 
(iv)  The dollar amounts of the cost ceiling shall be reviewed on an annual basis and updated for cost-of-living increases. 
(6)  Procedures for Santa Fe Trail 
(a)  The tracks of the Santa Fe Trail are shown on the map located in the city land use department and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  For development within such an area as set forth by Subsection (a) above, the applicant is required to submit a reconnaissance report which identifies on an aerial map of at least a scale of one inch equals four hundred (400) feet the precise location of the tracks, and which recommends measures for the on-site preservation of the tracks. The committee shall approve the reconnaissance report before the issuance of an archaeological clearance permit . 
(c)  In no case shall the tracks of the Santa Fe Trail be disturbed by the development , except upon the approval of the archaeological review districts committee. Criteria for approval by the Committee for allowing disturbance of the tracks shall be as follows: 
(i)  The tracks have been mapped and photographed and such information has been provided to city staff; and 
(ii)  The portion of the tracks to be disturbed is ten percent or less of the total square footage of tracks on the applicant's site; or 
(iii)  The square footage of the tracks constitutes more than sixty percent of the total square footage of the lot and preservation of all of the tracks would constitute a "taking" of the lot . 
(7)  Appeals 
Any aggrieved person may appeal a final action of the Archaeological Review Committee to the governing body pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(D)  Other General Provisions   
(1)  Ownership of Artifacts 
All artifacts discovered as a result of a reconnaissance or further treatment, with the exception of human remains, are the property of the property owner . Property owners are encouraged to donate artifacts to the museum of New Mexico or a similar repository. 
(2)  Human Remains 
(a)  If human remains are discovered, compliance with Section 18-6-11.2 NMSA 1978 is required in addition to the requirements of this section. Persons making the discovery shall contact the city police department to ensure compliance with state law and the city land use department to ensure compliance with city law. 
(b)  If the human remains are determined to be prehistoric, or from the historical period and older than seventy-five years, then the site is considered to be significant . In this case, a treatment plan and report for the remains, meeting the requirements of this section shall be approved by the Archaeological Review Committee. 
(c)  Any treatment plan dealing with human remains shall include consideration of local Native American or other religious concerns, if applicable. 
(d)  If the remains represent an unplatted cemetery from the historical period, they may not be disturbed unless a district court order is granted authorizing their removal in conformance with Section 30-12-12 NMSA 1978 as amended. 
(3)  Unexpected Discoveries 
(a)  Any cultural remains that are discovered during construction activities shall be reported to city staff. Construction activities shall immediately cease within the area of the discovery for a maximum of twenty-four hours from time of discovery. Sunday hours may not be included in the twenty-four hour time period. No construction activity shall continue that in any way endangers the cultural remains . Every effort should be made by the city to prevent unnecessary construction delays. Designated city staff and one archaeologist from the Archaeological Review Committee shall visit the site and shall determine the archaeological significance and the data potential of the site. If the site is determined to be significant and to have data potential, then: 
(i)  Designated city staff and one archaeologist from the Archaeological Review Committee shall determine a buffer area in which construction activities shall temporarily cease; and 
(ii)  The property owner shall present a treatment plan to the committee for their approval. The treatment plan shall meet the requirements of Subsections (C)(4) or (5) above, depending on the archaeological district in which the discovery is located pursuant to Sections 18-6-11 and 18-6-11.1 NMSA 1978 as amended. 
(b)  Failure to report such finds can result in a suspension of construction permits . 
(c)  If human remains are discovered, city officials must be contacted. If remains are determined to be deposited less than seventy-five years ago, determination of jurisdiction will be made by the New Mexico Office of the Medical Investigator. If the remains are determined to be prehistoric or isolated burials of early historical age, consultation with the Archaeological Review Committee shall be undertaken to identify an appropriate treatment plan. This treatment plan shall indicate consideration of local Native American or other religious concerns, if applicable. If the remains represent an unplatted cemetery, they may not be disturbed less a district court order is granted authorizing their removal in conformance with Section 30-12-12 NMSA 1978 as amended. (Ord. No. 2013-16  16) 
(4)  Emergency Actions 
Nothing in this Section 14-3.13 shall be construed as preventing or delaying emergency actions as needed to protect human health or well being, or public or private property . However, if cultural remains are uncovered or disturbed as a consequence of such emergency actions, the disturbed remains will be treated as unexpected discoveries in accordance with Subsection (D)(3) above once a state of emergency has ceased to exist. 
(5)  Archaeological Fund and Projects 
(a)  An archaeological fund shall be established to receive revenue from construction permits , the general fund and other sources. 
(b)  The Archaeological Review Committee may recommend expenditure of money from this fund for the following projects: 
(i)  Additional analysis or other treatment of a site of citywide significance when the funding limit for treatment of a site as set forth in this section has been reached; 
(ii)  Additional analysis or other treatment of a site designated as an "unexpected discovery" by the Archaeological Review Districts Ordinance, when the funding limit for treatment of a site as set forth in this section has been reached and the site is determined to have citywide significance ; 
(iii)  Analysis of artifacts from a site of citywide significance collected prior to adoption of the Archaeological Review Districts Ordinance; or 
(iv)  Archaeological surveys or studies of a citywide scope. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, citywide significance means: 
(i)  An outstanding example of a certain category of site or of a type not adequately documented; or 
(ii)  A site associated with a person or event of special historical significance to Santa Fe. 
(E)  Approval Criteria / Archaeological Significance   
Sites identified as significant shall be those that have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in the study of prehistory or history. These shall be those: 
(1)  With cultural remains that are more than seventy-five years old; and 
(2)  With cultural remains that are directly associated with events or developments that have made an important contribution to local history or prehistory; or 
(3)  With cultural remains that are directly associated with the lives of persons significant in local history; or 
(4)  Areas where a high frequency, density , diversity or a substantial number of prehistoric cultural remains are present; or 
(5)  Areas having cultural remains known to rarely occur in the Santa Fe area; or 
(6)  Any site containing human remains over seventy-five years old. 
14-3.14 - DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC OR LANDMARK STRUCTURE 
(A)  Summary of Procedure   
(1)  Upon receiving an application for demolition of a structure within the historic districts the HDRB shall, within sixty-five calendar days from the date of application , either grant or deny the application . Ordinarily, the HDRB will act on an application for demolition at its next regular meeting, if the application is submitted in proper form at least seven days before its next regular meeting; however, the HDRB may use the entire sixty-five-day time period if the HDRB, on motion duly passed, determines such delay is necessary. 
(2)  Upon receiving an application for demolition of a landmark structure the HDRB shall, within sixty-five calendar days from the date of application , make a recommendation to the governing body to either grant or deny the application . 
(B)  Hearing Required   
(1)  In all applications involving the demolition of a structure , provision shall be made for a hearing, as set forth in the preceding section. 
(2)  The HDRB or governing body , as applicable, shall restrict its review to a consideration of whether the application will be in conformity with the standards established by this section. 
(3)  Notice of the time and place for each hearing shall be sent in writing to each applicant . 
(4)  An agenda of the HDRB shall be sent to all groups requesting notification and copies of meeting agendas, as set forth in the officially adopted neighborhood planning policies. 
(5)  On-site notice, by a sign of proposed demolition and of the time, date and place of the HDRB or governing body review shall be posted by the city on the affected property fourteen days prior to HDRB or governing body review of application for demolition. Such notice shall be prominently displayed, visible from a public street and securely placed on the property . 
(C)  Staff Review and Report   
Before granting approval or denial to a demolition request, the land use director shall provide the following information on the structure under consideration. 
(1)  A report on the historic or architectural significance of the structure ; 
(2)  A report from the city building inspector on the state of repair and structural stability of the structure ; 
(3)  If the structure is more than seventy-five years old, and the entire project of which demolition is a part requires an archaeological clearance permit , a report from the land use director on whether the demolition would damage possible archaeological artifacts ; and 
(4)  Other information as requested by the HDRB or governing body . 
(D)  Referral to Archaeological Review Committee   
Upon receiving an application for demolition of structure in a historic district or a landmark structure , the land use director shall refer the application to the Archaeological Review Committee to determine whether damage to archaeological resources may be caused by the demolition and what actions should be taken regarding excavation and the archaeological clearance permit . 
(E)  Appeals   
(1)  HDRB decisions on demolition of structures may be appealed to the governing body pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(2)  The governing body , with the advice and assistance of the HDRB, may take such steps as it determines necessary to preserve the structure concerned, in accordance with the purposes of the H District regulations under Section 14-5.2. Such steps may include, but not be limited to, consultations with civic groups, public agencies, and interested citizens; recommendations for acquisitions of property by public or private bodies or agencies; and exploration of the possibility of moving one or more structures or other features. 
(F)  Denial of Demolition Request   
A determination that the structure should not be demolished shall impose a duty on the owner or other persons having legal custody and control to immediately take the action required under Section 14-5.2(B) (Minimum Maintenance Requirements). 
(G)  Standards   
(1)  In determining whether a request for demolition in a historic district should be approved or denied, the HDRB shall consider the following: 
(a)  Whether the structure is of historical importance; 
(b)  Whether the structure for which demolition is requested is an essential part of a unique street section or block front and whether this street section or block front will be reestablished by a proposed structure ; and 
(c)  The state of repair and structural stability of the structure under consideration. 
(2)  In determining whether a request for demolition of a landmark structure should be approved or denied, the HDRB and governing body shall consider the following: 
(a)  The historical importance of the structure ; and 
(b)  The state of repair and structural stability of the structure . 
14-3.15 - MINOR MODIFICATIONS 
Land use boards have the same authority over procedures for alternate means of compliance, administrative deviations and minor plan modifications for cases before them as does the land use director pursuant to Section 14-2.11(C). 
14-3.16 - VARIANCES 
(A)  Purpose and Applicability   
Land use boards may approve variances to the provisions of Chapter 14 as provided in Section 14-2 and elsewhere in this chapter and in accordance with this section. Variances may be granted to provisions regulating the size, location and appearance of structures ; the location and extent of open space ; the extent of grading ; the width and configuration of public and private roads, driveways and trails; and to similar standards for development established by this chapter. A variance shall not be granted to provisions that restrict the type or intensity of principal or accessory uses permitted within a district, including limits on maximum residential density , and no variance shall be granted to any procedural rule. 
(B)  Procedures   
(1)  Board Review and Decision 
Following a public hearing, the land use board shall, based on the application , input received at the public hearing and the approval criteria set forth in Subsection (C) of this section, approve, approve with conditions or deny the variance application . 
(2)  Special Review for Height Variances in Airport Area 
All height variance requests for lands located within the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces as described within the approach and clear zone layout plan of the Santa Fe municipal airport dated February, 1980 prepared by PMM and company, adopted in this section by reference and on file in the city public works department shall be reviewed for compliance with federal aviation regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by an approval from the federal aviation administration accompanied by a determination as to the effect of the proposed variance on the operation of air aviation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed only upon a finding that granting the variance will not create a hazard to air navigation. Additionally, no application for variance to the height requirements within the area described in this paragraph may be considered until a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport manager does not respond to the application within fifteen days after receipt, the land use board may act on the application without the airport manager's response. Any variance granted may be conditioned to require the owner of the structure in question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner 's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. 
(C)  Approval Criteria   
Subsections 14-3.16(C)(1) through (5) and, if applicable, Subsection 14-3.15(C)(6), are required to grant a variance. 
(1)  One or more of the following special circumstances applies: 
(a)  unusual physical characteristics exist that distinguish the land or structure from others in the vicinity that are subject to the same relevant provisions of Chapter 14, characteristics that existed at the time of the adoption of the regulation from which the variance is sought, or that were created by natural forces or by government action for which no compensation was paid; 
(b)  the parcel is a legal nonconforming lot created prior to the adoption of the regulation from which the variance is sought, or that was created by government action for which no compensation was paid; 
(c)  there is an inherent conflict in applicable regulations that cannot be resolved by compliance with the more-restrictive provision as provided in Section 14-1.7; or 
(d)  the land or structure is nonconforming and has been designated as a landmark , contributing or significant property pursuant to Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts). 
(2)  The special circumstances make it infeasible, for reasons other than financial cost, to develop the property in compliance with the standards of Chapter 14. 
(3)  The intensity of development shall not exceed that which is allowed on other properties in the vicinity that are subject to the same relevant provisions of Chapter 14. 
(4)  The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land or structure . The following factors shall be considered: 
(a)  whether the property has been or could be used without variances for a different category or lesser intensity of use; 
(b)  consistency with the purpose and intent of Chapter 14, with the purpose and intent of the articles and sections from which the variance is granted and with the applicable goals and policies of the general plan . 
(5)  The variance is not contrary to the public interest. 
(6)  There may be additional requirements and supplemental or special findings required by other provisions of Chapter 14. 
(D)  Expiration of Variances (Ord. No. 2013-16  17) 
Approval of a variance expires if it is not exercised, as provided in Section 14-3.19(B)(5). 
(E)  Conditions of Approval   
Variances may be approved with conditions that will assure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified and that are reasonably related to the approval. 
(F)  Approval Limited.   
A variance applies only to the type and extent of development shown on the plans approved at the variance hearing. All other development on the property shall comply with the terms of Chapter 14 or shall require a new or amended variance. 
14-3.17 - APPEALS 
(A)  Appealable Actions   
(1)  Final Action 
(a)  Only final actions may be appealed. 
(b)  Final actions of a land use board include a decision made after a public hearing, including the final approval or denial of a preliminary plat or preliminary development plan. 
(c)  Final actions of the land use director include the written issuance or denial of a permit or other approval within the land use director's jurisdiction. 
(d)  Final action does not include: 
(i)  a recommendation; 
(ii)  a delay in rendering a decision; 
(iii)  a decision to postpone or remand; 
(iv)  a decision not to take enforcement action; 
(v)  an informational response to an inquiry; 
(vi)  any action for which an appeal is specifically prohibited; 
(vii)  any action regarding procedural matters or requirements, provision of notice, the admissibility, relevance or weight of evidence or the conduct of a public hearing; however, these actions may be raised by parties as part of an otherwise valid appeal. 
(2)  Basis for Appeal 
An appeal may only be filed for the following reasons: 
(a)  to contest noncompliance of a final action with Chapter 14 or Sections 3-21-1 through 3-21-14 NMSA 1978; 
(b)  to contest the application of Chapter 14; or 
(c)  to appeal a decision lacking substantial evidence to support it. 
(B)  Standing Required to Appeal   
Appeals of final actions may be filed by the following persons : 
(1)  the applicant when the application is denied or, if approved, the approval included conditions not accepted by the applicant; 
(2)  all persons or neighborhood associations that were required to be mailed notice for the application giving rise to the final action being appealed; 
(3)  persons or organizations duly organized at the time the decision appealed from was rendered alleging injury to their economic, environmental or aesthetic interests; 
(4)  City staff members acting in their official capacity; and 
(5)  any person who has a recognized legal interest under New Mexico law. 
(C)  Time for Appeal   
(1)  Time for Appeal 
Appellants shall file an appeal as follows: 
(a)  within thirty days for appeals of final actions by land use boards on subdivision plats , master plans and development plans; or 
(b)  within fifteen days of the date of final action for all other appeals. 
(2)  Amended Appeals 
An appellant may amend an appeal until the time for appeal has expired. 
(3)  Response 
Any party may file a response to the appeal as set forth in Subsection 14-3.17(H)(2). 
(4)  Date of Final Action 
The date of the final action shall be deemed to be the date of the final written decision and determined as follows: 
(a)  For final actions of the land use director, the date of issuance of any written order (including a decision, letter, permit or other document) granting or denying relief or in the case of building permits , the date of the posting of the permit ; or 
(b)  For final actions of a land use board or the governing body , the date that body adopts a written decision containing findings of fact and conclusions of law; provided that if such body has not adopted findings of fact and conclusions of law within thirty-one days of the date the vote deciding the matter was taken, then the date of final action shall be deemed to be such 31st day. 
(D)  Process to File an Appeal   
(1)  Filing Appeal; Form; Verification 
The appellant shall file two copies of the written appeal with the land use director . The appeal shall be filed on a form provided for that purpose and shall be verified, signed by the appellant under oath and notarized. 
(2)  Receipt; Service of Appeal 
The land use director shall initial and enter the date and time of filing on both copies of the appeal and return one copy to the appellant. Within three days of the filing date, the appellant shall hand deliver a copy of the appeal to any appellee or deliver it by first-class certified mail. 
(3)  Appeal Fee 
(a)  An appeal fee shall be paid at the time of filing an appeal. 
(b)  The governing body shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for appeals. The land use director may waive or reduce the appeal fee if the land use director determines that the appellant would qualify for the city's utility fee poverty exemption set forth in Section 15-1.3 SFCC 1987 (Utility Billing - Poverty Exemption). 
(4)  Multiple Appeals and Multiple Jurisdictions 
(a)  An appellant may not appeal any single final action more than once. 
(b)  Every appeal requires an independent basis. Final actions may not be appealed solely on the basis of alleged mistakes in prior stages of the same project, whether or not the prior final actions were appealed. 
(c)  More than one appellant may file an appeal of a final action , and appellants may combine their appeals and share the appeal fee proportionally. All appeals of any single final action shall be consolidated for hearing purposes. 
(d)  Any review by the governing body of a planning commission decision under Section 14-2.2(A)(3) shall be combined with the hearing on an appeal of that decision. 
(e)  In the case of an appeal that includes final actions that fall under the jurisdiction of more than one land use board , the land use director shall determine the appropriate land use board to hear any particular issue on appeal, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(5)  Withdrawal 
An appellant may withdraw the appeal at any time. A withdrawal does not affect any related appeal. At any time after an appeal has been filed, an appellant and appellee may agree to settle any matters raised in the appeal and the appellant may withdraw the appeal; provided that such settlement complies with applicable code requirements, including any conditions of approval of the final action being appealed. 
(6)  Conformity of Appeal 
The land use director shall promptly review all appeals for conformity with the requirements of Section 14-3.17. Upon determining that an appeal does not conform to the requirements, the land use director shall refer the matter to the city attorney for review. 
(a)  If the city attorney concurs with the land use director 's determination, the city attorney's written recommendation shall be forwarded to the governing body for discussion. The governing body may accept the city attorney's written recommendation and the decision is final and may be appealed to district court. If the governing body does not accept the city attorney's recommendation, the appeal shall be heard as set forth in Chapter 14. 
(b)  If the city attorney does not concur with the land use director 's determination, the appeal shall be heard as set forth Chapter 14. 
(7)  District Court Appeals 
An appeal of a final action of the governing body or a land use board , or of an action of the city manager, the city attorney or the land use director that is only subject to appeal to district court, shall be to the first judicial district court pursuant to Section 39-3.1.1 NMSA 1978, Rule 1-074, NMRA or Rule 1-075, NMRA, as amended, or other relevant statute or court rule. 
(E)  Stay of Action and Suspension of Permits   
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the timely filing of an appeal shall: 
(a)  suspend the issuance of a permit or the validity of a permit already issued that is the subject of the appeal; 
(b)  prohibit the recordation of a plat or the filing of a development plan pursuant to that final action ; and 
(c)  prohibit the issuance of a permit pursuant to that final action . 
(2)  The timely filing of an appeal of an enforcement action, including the revocation or suspension of a permit , shall not stop the enforcement action, except as provided in this section or when due process otherwise requires a hearing. 
(3)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 2013-16  18) 
(4)  The filing of an appeal shall not limit the ability of an applicant to file other applications . 
(5)  The filing of an appeal shall not limit the ability of any party to file an appeal of any other final action related to the same project or application provided that there is an independent basis for such appeal. 
(6)  Upon determination by the land use director that the suspension of a permit or enforcement action would cause imminent peril to life or property, a permit approving only so much of the application as is required to address the immediate danger shall be issued. When reasonably practicable, the land use director shall give all parties such notice prior to the issuance of the permit as is possible. The land use director 's action related to the issuance of the permit is not subject to appeal to any land use board or the governing body , and may be appealed only to the district court. 
(7)  The filing of an appeal of an action of the land use director revoking or suspending a permit in any matter involving a sexually oriented business shall stop or suspend the action before the appeal is heard, except upon determination by the Santa Fe police department that there is a reasonable expectation that stopping or suspending the land use director 's action would constitute a grave imminent danger to the public welfare, including life or property, in which case the city may exercise its authority to restrain, prohibit or otherwise abate the source of such danger. 
(F)  Scheduling a Public Hearing; Public Hearing Date   
The public hearing on the appeal shall be scheduled as soon as reasonably practicable. 
(1)  An appeal to a land use board or the governing body shall be heard at the next available regularly scheduled meeting after the appeal is filed that provides adequate time for notice to be provided pursuant to Section 14- 3.1(H)(4) (Appeal Hearing Notice Requirements) and for the parties to make submittals in support of their positions for inclusion in the public hearing record. A hearing before the governing body shall not be conducted until five days after the land use board has approved the minutes adopting the findings of fact and conclusions of law for the matter being appealed. 
(2)  For good cause, a land use board or the governing body hearing an appeal may postpone the hearing until the next available regularly scheduled meeting. 
(G)  Communication with Members Prohibited   
Communication regarding an appeal is limited as follows: 
(1)  Parties 
During the appeal period after a final action is taken or after an appeal is filed, a party shall not communicate with individual members of a land use board that may hear the appeal or the governing body outside an appeal hearing, concerning the merits or substance of the appeal, except in writing filed with the land use director within the prescribed time period for inclusion in the public hearing record. 
(2)  Other Persons 
Persons other than the city attorney shall not communicate outside a public hearing with a member of a land use board or the governing body concerning the merits or substance of an appeal to be heard by that body. 
(3)  Site Inspection 
Individual members of a land use board or the governing body may not inspect the site of any subject property , except pursuant to a publicly noticed site visit that affords all parties the opportunity to attend. 
(4)  Effect of Improper Communication 
A member of a land use board or the governing body receiving a communication in violation of this section shall disclose the substance of the communication on the record, and the member shall recuse himself or herself if he or she cannot be fair and impartial in hearing the appeal. 
(H)  Appeal Hearing Procedure   
(1)  Administrative Procedures 
Appeals shall be conducted in accordance with administrative procedures to be adopted by resolution of the governing body . Copies shall be available to the public in the land use department and the city clerk's office. 
(2)  Submittals by Parties 
Up to ten days prior to the public hearing, a party to an appeal may submit any documents or written evidence on which the party intends to rely for review by the body hearing the appeal. 
(3)  Land Use Board Review 
(a)  The land use board shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with adopted procedures and may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the final action appealed in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall have the powers of the land use director at the time the final action was taken. The hearing shall be de novo. 
(b)  Pursuant to Subsection 10-15-1(H)(3) NMSA 1978 (Open Meetings Act), the land use board or governing body may deliberate in executive session, provided the hearing and final action occur in open meeting. 
(c)  The land use board shall issue a written decision, including an explanatory statement of the factual and legal basis for the decision. 
(4)  Burden of Proof 
Unless otherwise provided by law, the appellant has the burden of proof under Subsection 14-3.17(A)(2). 
(I)  Due Process   
Interpretation of this section shall be made in favor of a party's opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner. Procedures shall adhere to procedural due process. 
14-3.18 - UTILITY CONFORMITY REVIEWS 
Pursuant to Section 3-19-11 NMSA 1978, the planning commission shall conduct utility conformity reviews of electrical facilities as set forth in Section 14-6.2(F)(7). 
14-3.19 - EXPIRATION, EXTENSION AND AMENDMENT OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS 
(A)  Applicability   
(1)  General Provisions 
The general provisions of this section shall apply to final actions to approve development pursuant to Chapter 14, including: 
(a)  special use permits ; 
(b)  development plans, including preliminary and final development plans; 
(c)  master plans; 
(d)  variances; 
(e)  subdivisions, including preliminary and final plats , inheritance and family transfer subdivisions, summary committee plats and resubdivisions ; and 
(f)  development within historic districts or affecting landmark properties . 
(2)  Specific Provisions Pursuant to Conditions of Approval 
A final action may incorporate conditions of approval that establish shorter time limits than those specified in Chapter 14. Final action to approve a phased development project may incorporate a phasing plan with longer time limits than those specified in Chapter 14. 
(3)  Final Actions 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  7) 
(a)  Determination of final actions shall be as provided in Sections 14-3.17(A)(1) and 14-3.17(C)(4). 
(b)  For the purpose of computing expirations and time extensions, the date of final action for a development approval that is appealed one or more times pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 14 is the date of final action by the land use board or governing body on the last appeal. The date of final action for a development approval that is appealed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-21-9 NMSA 1978 Zoning - Appeal is the date a written decision is filed pursuant to Section 39-3-1.1 NMSA 1978. 
(B)  Expiration of Development Approvals   
Unless a time extension is approved pursuant to Subsection 14-3.19(C) or specific time limits under Subsection 14-3.19(A)(2) apply, development approvals shall expire in the following circumstances. 
(1)  Master Plans 
Approval of a master plan shall expire five years after all applicable appeal periods, and any appeals of the final action approving it unless: 
(a)  approval is granted for a development plan or subdivision plat within the master plan boundaries; or 
(b)  actual development of the site or off-site improvements is begun and is continued pursuant to Subsection 14-3.19(B)(6) 
(2)  Preliminary Subdivision Plats or Preliminary Development Plans 
Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary development plan shall expire three years after final action approving it unless the final plat or development plan is approved. 
(3)  Final Subdivision Plats 
Approval of a final plat for a subdivision, including a plat approved by the summary committee and resubdivisions , shall expire three years after final action approving it unless the plat is filed for record with the county clerk. 
(4)  Final Development Plans 
Approval of a final development plan, or any development plan for which no preliminary development plan was required, shall expire three years after final action approving it unless actual development of the site or off-site improvements has begun and is continued pursuant to Subsection 14-3.19(B)(6). 
(5)  Other Development Approvals 
Approval of special use permits , approval of development by the historic districts review board, approval of variances that are not associated with other types of development approval or types of development approvals not listed in this section, shall expire three years after final action approving them unless actual development of the site or off-site improvements has begun and is continued pursuant to Subsection 14-3.19(B)(6) or unless a different expiration date is specified elsewhere in Chapter 14. Variances associated with subdivisions, development plans or similar types of development approval shall be subject to the expiration provisions of the associated development . 
(6)  Continuing Development Activity Required 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  19) 
Approvals for the uncompleted portions of development other than recorded subdivisions expire if, at any time prior to completion of all phases of the approved development , no substantive development progress occurs: 
(a)  for an approved master plan, during any interval of five years; or 
(b)  for a development plan or other development approval as specified in Subsection 14-3.19(B)(5), during any interval of three years. 
(c)  Substantive development progress means actual development of the site or related off-site infrastructure, filing for record of a development plan or subdivision plat for a phase of the approved development , or obtaining subsequent development approvals from a land use board , such as a final development plan approval subsequent to a preliminary development plan approval. 
(7)  Effect of Expiration on Partial Development 
Development and use of land that occurs prior to expiration of a development approval shall continue to be subject to applicable provisions of that approval until and unless it is amended. 
(C)  Time Extensions   
(1)  Application Filing 
Applications for extensions shall be filed prior to the expiration of the final action for which the extension is requested. The application shall state the reason for the extension request and shall document the progress made toward completion of the approved development and the proposed time schedule for final completion. 
(2)  Administrative Extensions 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  20) 
(a)  The land use director may approve two consecutive extensions to the time limits for an approved development , each not to exceed one year. Approval shall be based on review of the findings and conditions of approval of the original final action and a finding by the land use director that no substantive changes have occurred to the regulations or policies that apply to the development or to the circumstances affecting the site and its vicinity. The administrative extension shall not approve revisions to the development or amendments to the conditions of approval, and no early neighborhood notification is required. 
(b)  Administrative time extensions approved by the land use director , pursuant to this Subsection 14-3.19(C)(2), for development approvals that were granted by the planning commission or the governing body , are subject to review by the planning commission. The land use director shall identify the action taken and place it on a consent agenda for the planning commission. The land use director shall provide the planning commission with the applicant's written application and the land use director's written proposal. The planning commission may accept, reject or modify the proposal. 
(3)  Time Extensions by Land Use Boards 
Extensions of time that do not meet the requirements for administrative approval may be made by following the procedures for amending the type of action for which extension is requested. 
(D)  Amendment of Development Approvals   
(1)  Amendments Generally 
Procedures for substantive amendment or revisions to final actions to approve development shall be the same as those that apply to a new application for the type of approval proposed for amendment, unless a specific alternative procedure is provided in this section or elsewhere in Chapter 14. 
(2)  Master Plans in the MU and BIP Districts 
The planning commission may approve amendments to master plans in the MU and BIP Districts. 
(3)  Minor Amendments by the Planning commission to Plans Approved by the Governing Body 
(a)  The planning commission may approve minor amendments to master plans, preliminary or other development plans approved by the governing body , including minor modifications to master plan design standards. Such amendments must be consistent with prior action by the governing body , including any specific restrictions, limitations or requirements adopted as provisions of the master plan, preliminary or other development plan, rezoning ordinance, annexation ordinance or annexation agreement. 
(b)  Action by the planning commission to approve a minor amendment must be taken at a public hearing with notice as required by Section 14-3.2(H). 
(c)  An amendment to significantly increase the density or intensity of development previously approved by the governing body may not be approved as a minor amendment, and requires amendment of the previous approval by the governing body. 
14-3.20 - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS 
(Ord. No. 2012-21  1) 
(A)  Applicability   
The provisions of this Section 14-3.20 apply to residential condominium declarations recorded on or after May 30, 2012 that create a condominium or that amend an existing condominium declaration to change the number of condominium units or reserved development rights. 
(B)  Requirements   
A residential condominium declaration shall contain written confirmation from the land use director that the proposed or amended condominium declaration complies with the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 SFCC 1987. 
(C)  Submittals   
Prior to the recordation of a condominium declaration, the declarant shall submit information to the land use director sufficient to determine whether the proposed or amended condominium declaration is in compliance with the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 SFCC 1987. The land use director shall determine the sufficiency of the information submitted. 
(D)  Written Confirmation of Compliance with Zoning Density Requirements of Chapter 14   
If the proposed or amended condominium declaration complies with the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 SFCC 1987, the land use director shall issue a written confirmation to the condominium declarant for inclusion in the contents of the condominium declaration as required by 47-7B-5 NMSA 1978. The land use director shall maintain copies of written confirmations issued pursuant to this Section 14-3.20. 
(E)  Existing Residential Condominiums   
(1)  A condominium (including constructed condominium units and unconstructed condominium units in the form of reserved development rights) is in conformance with the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 when: 
(a)  the condominium meets the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14; or 
(b)  the condominium met the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 when the most recent condominium declarations were recorded. 
(2)  A condominium (including constructed condominium units and unconstructed condominium units in the form of reserved development rights) is subject to the provisions of Section 14-10.6 (Nonconforming Residential Condominiums) if the condominium declarations were recorded prior to May 30, 2012, and: 
(a)  the condominium does not meet the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14; and 
(b)  the condominium did not meet the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 when the most recent condominium declarations were recorded. 
State Law reference- For applicable state law see 47-7B-5 NMSA 1978 of the Condominium Act [47-7A-1 to 47-7D-20 NMSA 1978]. 
Article 14-4 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  4) 

14-4.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(A)  Purpose of Dividing City into Districts   
(1)  To achieve the purposes stated in Section 14-1, the city is divided into districts within which there are distinct regulations for the development and use of structures and land. 
(2)  The regulations are made in accordance with the general plan and are designed to lessen congestion in the streets and public ways; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of lands; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
(3)  The regulations and restrictions have been made with reasonable consideration for the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and land and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout Santa Fe. 
(B)  Compliance with District Regulations   
A structure or land shall not be used or occupied and a structure or part of a structure shall not be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformance with the regulations specified in Chapter 14 for the district in which it is located. 
(C)  Official Zoning Map   
(1)  The city is divided into zones or districts as shown on the official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter on the map and as amended from time to time, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of Chapter 14. 
(2)  The official zoning map shall be maintained in electronic form and depicted in various formats and scales as appropriate to the need. The land use director is responsible for tracking and maintaining all changes to the map and shall be the final authority of reference as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings and other structures in the city. 
(3)  Changes affecting the zoning district designation of any portion of land represented on the official zoning map, including rezonings, annexations and the creation of new zoning districts, shall be made only as the result of action by the governing body related to the zoning change and shall follow the prescribed procedures for such action as set forth in Chapter 14. 
(4)  The land use director may make the following changes to the official zoning map at any time: 
(a)  revisions of style, format or layout to enhance clarity; 
(b)  additions of explanatory text or labels; 
(c)  corrections of spelling and grammar; 
(d)  corrections based on oversight or error and to identify official actions that are not reflected or are incorrectly reflected; 
(e)  and any other changes affecting the appearance, style, color or graphic presentation of the map. 
(5)  A revised official zoning map, including the proposed nonsubstantive changes, shall be administratively approved by the land use director in writing. 
(D)  Rezoning Procedure   
Rezoning requirements set forth in this article are in addition to the requirements set forth in Section 14-3.5, which apply to all rezonings. 
(E)  Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries   
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  district boundaries indicated as approximately following center lines of streets , highways or alleys shall be construed as following those center lines; 
(2)  district boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following those lot lines; 
(3)  district boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following the city limits; 
(4)  in the event of annexation of new areas to Santa Fe, the areas shall be zoned R-1 until otherwise classified. If changes in the city limits remove territory from Santa Fe, district boundaries shall be construed as moving to conform with the city limits; (Ord. No. 2014-31  8) 
(5)  district boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be midway between the main tracks; 
(6)  district boundaries indicated as approximately following center lines of stream beds, other bodies of water or drainage ways shall be construed to follow those center lines; 
(7)  district boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Sections 14-4.2(E)(1) through (6) shall be construed as such and at such distance from the features as indicated on the official zoning map. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map; and 
(8)  where natural or man-made features that actually exist are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances not covered by this section, the governing body shall interpret the district boundaries. 
14-4.2 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
(A)  Purpose   
The purpose of this section is to distinguish between residential districts primarily on the basis of density . Unless otherwise limited by this section or other provisions of Chapter 14, a variety of dwelling types to serve a wide range of individual requirements is available throughout the residential districts, including single-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings , attached or detached dwelling units , site-built or nonsite-built dwelling units , conventional subdivision arrangements, zero lot line , cluster developments or compounds , as long as they are in keeping with the overall character of the district and all other applicable requirements are met. 
(B)  Other Structures and Uses   
Structures and uses other than residential dwelling units that serve the immediate needs of residential areas are allowed outright or are permissible as special use permits within the residential districts, subject to restrictions and requirements intended to preserve and protect the residential character of the districts. 
(C)  Rural Residential District (RR)   
The RR district is intended to respect the existing rural residential character of the area and prevent urban densities. 
(D)  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 Residential Districts   
The purpose of the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 residential districts is to be residential areas with low population densities . 
(E)  R-7, R-8 and R-9 Residential Districts   
(1)  Purpose 
These districts are designed to accomplish the following: 
(a)  to allow a greater intensity of residential land use; 
(b)  to encourage infill development on undeveloped or underdeveloped land in order to promote compact urban form and promote efficient use of public infrastructure and services; and 
(c)  to allow a density that enables affordability. 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
Rezoning to R-7, R-8 or R-9, except a city -initiated down zoning, requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and the governing body of a development plan for the property as provided in Section 14-3.8. 
(F)  R-7(I) Single-Family Residential Infill District   
(1)  Purpose 
It is the purpose of the R-7(I) district to encourage infill single- family residential development on undeveloped or underdeveloped land within or adjacent to established residential areas, consistent with the lot patterns and densities of those areas. 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
Property is eligible for rezoning to R-7(I) if the property is less than five acres in size and located within or adjacent to an established residential area that is zoned R-4, R-5 or R-6 if all other applicable requirements are satisfied. 
(G)  RC-5 and RC-8 Residential Compound Districts   
The RC-5 and RC-8 residential compound districts are intended to be medium- density residential areas allowing the development of new dwelling units in harmony with the existing character of the city's compound areas. 
(H)  R-10, R-12, R-21 and R-29 Residential Districts   
The purpose of the R-10, R-12, R-21 and R-29 districts is to make available a variety of dwelling unit types to serve a wide range of household needs at medium- and high- density levels. 
(I)  RAC Residential Arts and Crafts District   
The purpose of the RAC residential arts and crafts district is to serve and preserve the prevalent characteristics of certain limited areas of the city. Within these areas, residential uses are intermixed with small arts and crafts shops, studios and galleries where the goods traded are custom-produced in small quantities and often one of a kind; where the arts or crafts are taught to small numbers of people; or where the persons engaged in arts and crafts activities are not numerous. It is not intended that this district be applied to new areas not having these characteristics. 
(J)  MHP Mobile Home Park District   
(1)  Purpose 
The MHP district is intended to provide premises for mobile home parks in existence prior to December 10, 2012 (effective date of this Ordinance No. 2012-37) or for the development of residential subdivisions or attached multiple-family dwellings. (Ord. No. 2012-11  8; Ord. No. 2012-37  1) 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
(a)  Property is eligible for rezoning to MHP if the property is a minimum of two acres in size and if all other requirements of Chapter 14 are satisfied. 
(b)  Rezoning to MHP requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of a development plan for the property as provided in Section 14-3.8. 
14-4.3 - NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS 
(A)  C-1 Office and Related Commercial District   
The purpose of the C-1 office and related commercial district is to provide areas for government offices; professional and business offices; medical and dental offices or clinics; personal care facilities for the elderly ; and hospitals , laboratories, pharmacies and related complementary businesses that provide sales or service of office equipment, medical and dental supplies and office supplies. This district serves as a transitional buffer between more intense commercial use districts and residential districts. 
(B)  C-2 General Commercial District   
The C-2 general commercial district includes areas along streets carrying large volumes of traffic where commercial uses are appropriate. Regulations are designed to guide future additions or changes so as to discourage extension of existing and formation of future strip commercial development , to preserve the carrying capacity of the streets and to provide for off-street parking and loading. 
(C)  C-4 Limited Office, Retail and Arts and Crafts District   
(1)  Purpose 
The C-4 limited office, retail and arts and crafts district provides a specific area for limited office, retail and arts and crafts commercial uses of a nature not likely to generate heavy vehicular traffic. The C-4 district recognizes the need to protect residential property owners who are adversely affected by heavily trafficked city roads and to maintain the residential character of the area surrounding these roads. This district serves as a transitional buffer area between heavily trafficked roads and the adjoining residential districts. 
(2)  Boundaries 
(a)  Only property within a C-4 zoning eligibility area, as shown on the official zoning map, shall be eligible for rezoning to C-4. Rezoning of individual parcels shall follow the procedures in Section 14-3.5. 
(b)  Amendment to the existing eligibility area or a proposal for an additional C-4 zoning eligibility area surrounding another heavily trafficked road not already included within the existing C-4 zoning eligibility area(s) constitutes a Chapter 14 text amendment and shall comply with the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.3. 
(3)  Rezoning Requirements 
Rezoning to C-4 requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of a development plan for the property as provided in Section 14-3.8. 
(D)  HZ Hospital Zone Districts   
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  Christus St. Vincent Hospital Zone District 
The Christus St. Vincent HZ district recognizes the need for medical and dental offices, pharmacies and continuing care communities in proximity to Christus St. Vincent Hospital, while at the same time maintaining the character of the surrounding areas. 
(b)  Las Soleras Hospital Zone District 
The Las Soleras HZ district is intended to accommodate a hospital and business and professional office uses in the Las Soleras Development. 
(2)  Boundaries 
(a)  Christus St. Vincent HZ district - Only properties within the area designated on the official zoning map for Christus St. Vincent HZ rezoning eligibility shall be eligible for rezoning to HZ pursuant to the procedures in Section 14-3.5. Amendment to the eligibility area constitutes an amendment to the text of Chapter 14 and shall comply with the procedures in Section 14-3.3. 
(b)  Las Soleras HZ district - Property within the area defined in the Las Soleras HZ on the official zoning map has already received the HZ zoning designation. It is not intended that this district be expanded. 
(E)  BCD Business-Capitol District   
(1)  Purpose 
In recognition of the fact that the economic health of the city depends on the economic viability of the BCD, the purpose of the BCD is to provide for a mixture of land uses, including residential uses, designed to promote the district's economic well being while preserving the unique architecture, townscape and aesthetics that foster a strong tourist industry and sustain the quality of life, sense of community and historical identity in the district and the city. 
(2)  Boundaries 
(a)  The BCD is composed of townscape subdistricts and redevelopment subdistricts. The district and its subdistricts are defined by the official zoning map. 
(b)  Changes to boundaries of the townscape subdistricts or redevelopment subdistricts, including designations of new townscape and redevelopment subdistricts, are considered rezonings and must follow the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.5. Designations of new townscape subdistricts are also considered Chapter 14 text amendments and shall comply with the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.3. 
(3)  Townscape Subdistricts 
(a)  The existing townscape subdistricts include: Alameda Street, Barrio de Analco, Cerrillos Road, Don Gaspar, East Marcy/East Palace, Loretto, Marcy, McKenzie Street, Old Santa Fe Trail, Plaza/San Francisco, Rosario Boulevard/NW Paseo de Peralta, Sandoval/Montezuma, State Capitol and Westside. 
(b)  The townscape subdistricts are intended to: 
(i)  preserve the overall aesthetic quality of the BCD; 
(ii)  maintain diversity among the various subdistricts; and 
(iii)  protect the unique features, recognizable historic character and other common identifying characteristics of each subdistrict. 
(c)  Property is eligible for rezoning to a townscape subdistrict if the land is located within or adjacent to the BCD and meets all other requirements of Chapter 14. 
(4)  Redevelopment Subdistricts 
(a)  Purpose 
Redevelopment subdistricts are intended to provide for: 
(i)  infill and a limitation of sprawl through the efficient use of land; 
(ii)  optimum use of public infrastructure ; 
(iii)  a mix of land uses, including residential uses; 
(iv)  comprehensive site planning; 
(v)  public benefit uses ; 
(vi)  urban design innovation; 
(vii)  an enhancement of the economic vitality of the district; 
(viii)  the preservation and enhancement of the character and quality of the area in which the subdistrict is located through elimination of any potentially significant adverse impacts or potentially irreversible adverse impacts upon the community, surrounding neighborhoods or other approved project plans; and 
(ix)  redevelopment of areas with weak townscape qualities or of areas that are undergoing change. 
(b)  Redevelopment Requirements 
(i)  The property is eligible for rezoning to a redevelopment subdistrict if: 1) the land is located within or adjacent to the BCD and encompasses at least three acres, exclusive of dedicated streets and rights of way , or a complete city block, whichever is smaller; and 2) the existing infrastructure has the capability to support or to be modified to support the allowed floor area ratio set forth in Subsections (ii) and (iii) below. 
(ii)  The baseline floor-area ratio shall be two and five-tenths to one; provided, however, that such a floor-area ratio shall not be allowed if it is judged to be incompatible with an adjacent neighborhood or townscape subdistrict. 
(iii)  Rezoning to BCD-redevelopment subdistricts requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of a master plan or development plan for the property as provided in Sections 14-3.8 and 14-3.9. 
(5)  Redevelopment subdistrict property is eligible for rezoning to a townscape subdistrict provided that: 
(a)  development of the redevelopment subdistrict is substantially complete, which determination shall be made by the governing body ; 
(b)  the property is located in or adjacent to the townscape subdistrict it will become part of if the rezoning is approved, and 
(c)  all other requirements of Chapter 14 are met. 
(F)  I-1 Light Industrial District   
The I-1 district is intended primarily for light manufacturing, processing, storage, warehousing, distribution and similar commercial uses. Regulations are intended to prevent friction between uses within the district and also to protect nearby residential districts. 
(G)  I-2 General Industrial District   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  21) 
The I-2 district is intended primarily for general manufacturing and closely related uses. Also allowed in the district are commercial and other uses allowed in some commercial districts. To avoid burdensome regulations on general manufacturing but at the same time to provide adequate limitations on the development of industries incompatible with the city's general industrial characteristics, regulations for this district are intended to provide protection principally against effects harmful to other districts. These regulations do not afford the same level of protection for commercial and other allowed uses not related to general manufacturing as such uses would receive if located in districts primarily designed for them. 
(H)  BIP Business and Industrial Park District   
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  The purpose of the BIP district is to provide locations for the development of jobs in research and development activities and in offices, institutions and limited light industrial settings. The BIP district regulations intend to ensure that district locations may be adjacent to residential and commercial areas with minimum buffering. 
(b)  It is also the purpose of the BIP district to allow related uses that complement or support the primary employment-based uses to create a functional and pedestrian-friendly development . 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
(a)  Property is eligible for rezoning to BIP if the property is a minimum of four acres in size and all other applicable requirements of Chapter 14 are satisfied. 
(b)  Rezoning to BIP requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of a master plan or development plan for the property as provided in Sections 14-3.8 and 14-3.9. 
(I)  PRC Planned Residential Community District   
(1)  Purpose 
The purpose of the PRC district is to provide for the comprehensive and coordinated planning of large-scale residential developments that allows for a phasing of development that will take place over a long period of time. This district allows and encourages single- family residences in conventionally platted subdivisions and clustered residential developments based on a design concept that applies innovative site-planning techniques; a mixture of residential densities intended to achieve a balanced community for all types of families ; and neighborhood commercial uses of a type and intensity serving the residents of the PRC and the surrounding areas. 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
(a)  Only areas that contain one hundred sixty acres or more are eligible for rezoning to PRC, provided all other applicable requirements are satisfied. 
(b)  Rezoning to PRC requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of a master plan or development plan for the property as provided in Sections 14-3.8 and 14-3.9. 
(J)  PRRC Planned Resort-Residential Community District   
(1)  Purpose 
The purpose of the planned resort- residential community district is to provide for the comprehensive and coordinated planning of large-scale resort- residential developments that allows for phasing of development that will take place over a long period of time. This district allows and encourages the development of resorts in conjunction with a mixture of residential uses, densities and building types within the range of the economic market the development proposes to serve. 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
(a)  Only areas that contain one hundred sixty acres or more are eligible for rezoning to PRRC, provided all other applicable requirements are satisfied. 
(b)  Rezoning to PRRC requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of a master plan or development plan for the property as provided in Sections 14-3.8 and 14-3.9. 
(K)  SC Planned Shopping Center Districts   
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  The purpose of the SC districts is to provide new neighborhood, community and regional shopping centers. The SC-1, SC-2 and SC-3 districts are intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings , of retail establishments , stores and services that provide for the regular needs and convenience of families residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods or in the larger community. 
(b)  The purpose of the SC districts also is to allow uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the permitted principal uses and structures as stated and restricted in Subsection 14-4.3(K)(1)(a); provided that the accessory uses and structures are in keeping with the character of the district. 
(c)  The further purpose of the SC districts is that the three types of SC districts are defined and distinguished by scale of development , using trade area, market and number and variety of retail establishments to determine whether the district should be zoned SC-1, SC-2 or SC-3 as follows: 
(i)  SC-1 neighborhood shopping center district: 1) radius of trade area is approximately one to one and one-half miles; 2) minimum market is approximately one thousand families; and 3) composition of center is five to ten retail establishments , the major store is usually a supermarket or pharmacy ; other retail establishments include those offering convenience goods and personal services, not including auto repair, filling stations or residential uses; 
(ii)  SC-2 community shopping center district: 1) radius of trade area is approximately four miles or more; 2) minimum market is approximately five thousand families; and 3) composition of center is ten or more retail establishments ; the major retail establishment is usually a variety or department store, in addition to convenience goods and personal services as in SC-1. Other retail establishments may include filling stations , department stores, discount stores, furniture stores and other stores and services that provide for the regular needs of families residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods or in the larger community; and 
(iii)  SC-3 regional shopping center district: 1) radius of trade area is approximately one hour drive by automobile; 2) minimum market is approximately one hundred fifty thousand people; and 3) composition of center is one or more full-time department stores with eighty thousand to one hundred thousand square feet of gross leasable area each and retail establishments providing convenience goods and personal services. 
(d)  Development and design standards, including square footage restrictions, for the three SC districts are in Article 14-7. (Ord. No. 2012-11  9) 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
(a)  Property is eligible for rezoning to SC if: 
(i)  the property is: 1) an addition in depth to lands where frontage is already commercially zoned; 2) already commercially zoned and existing development , if any, can be brought into conformance with the SC district regulations; or 3) not already commercially zoned in whole or in part and is not now served by appropriate and convenient shopping facilities; 
(ii)  the shopping center will be convenient to and serve at least one residential area; and 
(iii)  the tract on which the shopping center will be located is of such size, shape and location as to enable well-organized development of the commercial facilities , with proper access streets , ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading space and other requirements and amenities. 
(b)  Additionally, property is eligible for rezoning to: 
(i)  SC-1 if it has a site area of five to fifteen acres; 
(ii)  SC-2 if it has a site area of ten to forty acres; and 
(iii)  SC-3 if it has a site area of thirty-five acres or more. 
(c)  Rezoning to SC requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing body of preliminary or final development plans, or both, for the property as provided in Section 14-3.8. 
(L)  MU Mixed-Use District   
(1)  Purpose 
It is the purpose of the MU mixed-use district to provide for the creative infill and development of underused and vacant land and buildings in Santa Fe. This zoning category allows office, commercial and residential uses in the same building or on the same property . MU zoning should accomplish the following goals: 
(a)  control sprawl by creating a more efficient use of land and more opportunities for infill ; 
(b)  promote affordable housing and economic development by emphasizing a variety of land uses 
(c)  promote creative and flexible land uses within Santa Fe; 
(d)  foster alternative means of transportation, including transit, bicycles and walking; 
(e)  promote infill development and pedestrian-oriented streetscapes in currently underused parking areas and along existing roadway corridors; and 
(f)  promote shared parking areas in the design and development of mixed-use projects. 
(2)  Rezoning Requirements 
(a)  Application for rezoning to MU is not allowed for residentially zoned properties located in historic districts, as shown on the official zoning map. 
(b)  Rezoning to MU requires consideration and approval by the planning commission and governing-body of preliminary or final development plans for the property as provided in Section 14-3.8. 
Article 14-5 - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

14-5.1 - GENERAL PURPOSE; RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL USE ZONING DISTRICTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  5) 
(A)  The overlay zoning districts of this article are intended to apply in combination with the underlying zoning districts of Article 14-4 to impose regulations and standards in addition to those required by the underlying districts. When the requirements of an overlay district are in conflict with those of the underlying district or those of another overlay district, the more restrictive limitation or requirement controls as provided for in Section 14-1.7. The following overlay districts are created: 
(1)  historic (H) districts; 
(2)  archaeological review districts; 
(3)  arts and crafts district; 
(4)  highway corridor protection (HCP) districts; 
(5)  escarpment overlay districts; 
(6)  PUD planned unit development district; 
(7)  residential suite hotel/motel (RS) district; 
(8)  ecological resource protection (ERP) district; and 
(9)  neighborhood conservation overlay (NCO) districts. 
(B)  Any rezoning requirements set forth in this article are in addition to the requirements set forth in Section 14-3.5, which apply to all rezonings. 
14-5.2 - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
(A)  General Provisions   
(1)  General Purpose 
In order to promote the economic, cultural, and general welfare of the people of the city and to ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of the city , it is deemed essential by the governing body that the qualities relating to the history of Santa Fe, and a harmonious outward appearance, which preserve property values and attract tourists and residents alike, be preserved, some of these qualities being: 
(a)  The continued existence and preservation of historical areas and buildings ; 
(b)  The continued construction of buildings in the historic styles; and 
(c)  A general harmony as to style, form, color, height, proportion, texture and material between buildings of historic design and those of more modern design. 
(2)  Application to State of New Mexico and any of Its agencies, political subdivisions or instrumentalities (Ord. No. 2009-46  1; Ord. No. 2010-24  1) 
Pursuant to Sections 3-22-1 through 3-22-6 NMSA 1978, it is the intent of the City of Santa Fe that the provisions of this section shall apply to the State of New Mexico and any of its agencies, political subdivisions or instrumentalities, as well as to any other entity or activity in the historic districts or to landmarks located outside historic districts. The provisions of Section 3-22-6 NMSA 1978 shall apply to state capital outlay projects in historic districts or to landmarks located outside the historic districts as provided in Subsection 14-5.2(M) concerning the design, construction, alteration, including additions to or demolition of the exterior features of state buildings . The provisions of Subsection 14-5.2(N) shall apply to county and Santa Fe public schools capital outlay projects concerning the design, construction, alteration, including additions to or demolition of the exterior features of county and Santa Fe public schools buildings in historic districts or to landmarks located outside the historic districts. 
(3)  Boundaries 
The boundaries for the historic district are as shown on the map attached hereto and incorporated herein to the historic district ordinance, and as shown on the official map, located in the city land use department. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
Editor's Note: Historic district map adopted by Ordinance No. 1982-62, as amended, is shown on the official zoning map. 
(4)  Design of Buildings 
Full responsibility for the design and development of structures is left to the applicant ; however, the file of previously approved applications shall be made available to the applicant . 
(5)  Zoning District Regulations 
The property in an historic district shall be subject to the requirements, uses, and other regulations of the zoning district of which the property is a part, except for height as regulated in Subsection 14-5.2(D). 
(6)  Nonconforming Structures 
Any building in the historic district not meeting the standards for architectural style set forth in this section, unless given special approval by the board for architectural or historic interest or unless individually entered in the state register of cultural properties or in the national register of historic places or designated as significant on either register, shall be considered nonconforming. Except for repairs and maintenance required by law, no nonconforming building may be added to or altered in any way unless the proposed addition or alteration will bring the whole to a degree of conformity acceptable to the board. Structures other than buildings , including signs, not conforming to the architectural style or sign standards set forth in this section shall be considered nonconforming. No alteration or repair may be made of any such structure other than its removal. No nonconforming structure in the historic district, which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of more than fifty percent of its value, exclusive of basement or cellar, shall be restored except in conformity with the requirements of this section. 
(7)  Electric Facilities (Ord. No. 2008-54 4) 
The review of electric facilities in the historic districts shall be limited as set forth in Section 14-6.2(F)(10). 
(B)  Minimum Maintenance Requirements   
(Ord. No. 2009-13  4) 
All buildings and structures in the historic district over which the board has jurisdiction to determine whether a demolition permit should be approved or denied and all landmark structures over which the governing body has such jurisdiction shall be preserved against decay and deterioration and free from certain structural defects in the following manner, by the owner thereof or such other person or persons who may have the legal custody and control thereof. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such building or structure if it is found to have any of the following defects: 
(1)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property ; 
(2)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation; 
(3)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports or flooring for floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(4)  Members of walls , partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(5)  Members of walls , partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(10)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster; 
(11)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls , roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
(12)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall covering, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering; or 
(13)  Any fault or default in the building or structure that renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(C)  Regulation of Significant and Contributing Structures in the Historic Districts   
(Ord. No. 2004-26) 
(1)  Purpose and Intent 
It is intended that: 
(a)  Each structure to be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development , such as the addition of conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings , shall not be undertaken; 
(b)  Changes to structures that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved, recognizing that most structures change over time; 
(c)  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a structure be preserved; and 
(d)  New additions and related or adjacent new construction be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the original form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(2)  Designation of Significant, Contributing, or Noncontributing Status within Historic Districts 
(a)  Status Designation 
Structures within historic districts may be designated a status of "significant," "contributing," or "noncontributing" based upon the definitions of these terms in Article 14-12. Staff shall maintain a record as to the current status of structures located in the Historic Districts. 
(b)  Board Authority to Review Status Designation 
(i)  The Board is authorized to change the status of a structure or to designate a status for a structure with no status designated. 
(ii)  A change in status or the designation of a status shall be based upon an evaluation of data provided through survey or other relevant sources of information and the definitions of "significant," "contributing," or "noncontributing." 
(c)  Initiation of Review of Status Designation 
The Board may review the status designation in response to the following: 
(i)  An application for construction or demolition as set forth in Section 14-5.2 as follows: 
A.  Prior to the application being placed on a board agenda or prior to issuance of a building permit , if Board approval is not required, staff shall determine whether or not the board should review the status of the structure . Staff's determination shall be made within thirty days of submittal of the application . If staff's determination is not completed within the thirty days, the application shall be forwarded to the board. Review by the board as to the structure's status shall be made at the earliest practicable date. The board or staff (as applicable) may consider the application immediately following the determination of status. The application shall be reviewed based upon the status of the structure following the determination of status. 
B.  Prior to action by the board on the application , the board itself may decide to review the status of the structure . The board's determination as to the status shall be made within forty-five days of the decision of the board to review the status. The board or staff (as applicable) may consider the application immediately following the determination of the status. The application shall be reviewed based upon the status of the structure following the determination of status. 
(ii)  A request from the property owner ; or 
(iii)  A request initiated by the city . Staff shall notify the property owner prior to initiating the request. 
(d)  Notice of Board's Review of Status 
(i)  Staff shall mail notice, certified mail return receipt requested, to the property owner of the subject property no less than fifteen days prior to the board's review of a change in or designation of status. 
(ii)  In addition, staff shall mail notice, certified mail return receipt requested, to all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property no less than fifteen days prior to the board's review of a change in or designation of status if the review may result in the lowering of the structure's status. 
(iii)  With the consent of the property owner , the city shall have posted on the property a poster obtained from the land use department. Otherwise, the city shall post the poster on the nearest place available to the city . Such poster shall be securely posted, prominently displayed, visible from a public street , at least fourteen days prior to the scheduled board hearing. The posting shall indicate the nature of the application , identification of the property affected and the time, date and place of the hearing. The poster shall be removed within thirty days of final action. Failure to do so may result in the city removing the sign at the applicant's expense. A civil fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged. (Ord. No. 2005-31  4; Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(e)  Appeals (Ord. No. 2009-42  16) 
Decisions made by the historic districts review board may be appealed to the governing body as set forth in Section 14-3.17. 
(f)  Restoration of Status 
If a property owner makes changes to a structure without the proper city approvals which result in the lowering of the structure's status, staff or the board may require the property owner to restore the structure such that its former status is restored. 
(g)  Report to the governing body 
Staff shall report annually, beginning in August 2005, all decisions made by the board regarding a structure's status. 
(3)  Review by Historic Board Required 
(a)  Except where this chapter provides for review by staff, the historic districts review board shall review all applications for new construction, alteration, or demolition in the historic districts, and of landmark structures throughout the city , based on the standards set forth in this Section 14-5.2. (Ord. No. 2002-37  23) 
(b)  The historic board may approve an application for alteration or for new construction on the condition that changes relating to exterior appearance recommended by it be made in the proposed work. In such case, no permit shall be issued until new exhibits, satisfactory to the board have been submitted. 
(c)  No permits shall be issued until the time for appeal to the governing body has expired. (Ord. No. 2009-42  17) 
(4)  Compliance with General and Specific Design Standards Required 
All development located within the historic districts and subject to this Section 14-5.2 shall comply with all applicable general development standards set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(D), as well as any applicable specific development standards set forth in Subsections 14-5.2(E) through (I). 
(5)  Exceptions 
Staff shall determine whether an exception to this section is required. The historic board may grant an exception to the regulations set forth in this section provided that such exception does not exceed the underlying zoning. 
(a)  Height 
If the applicant requests approval of a height in the historic district that exceeds the underlying zoning district requirement, the applicant shall first receive an exception to this Section 14-5.2. If approved by the historic board, the applicant shall proceed to the board of adjustment or other applicable city body for consideration of the proposed variance. 
(b)  Design Standards and Signage 
The board may recommend exceptions to Subsections 14-5.2(D)(1-8, 10-11) and 14-5.2(E) through (I) for construction or alterations within the historic district. The recommendation for exceptions shall be made to the governing body . Procedures for public notice and hearing before the governing body shall be as set forth in Section 14-3.6(B)(3). Exceptions are project specific and do not apply to the subject property in perpetuity. If approved by the governing body , the inspections and enforcement office shall accept and review an application for, and issue, as appropriate, a building permit . The applicant for such exceptions shall conclusively demonstrate and the board shall make a positive finding of fact that such exceptions comply with all the criteria listed as follows: 
(i)  Do not damage the character of the district; 
(ii)  Are required to prevent a hardship to the applicant or an injury to the public welfare; and 
(iii)  Strengthen the unique heterogeneous character of the City by providing a full range of design options to ensure that residents can continue to reside within the historic districts. 
(c)  Height, Pitch, Scale, Massing, and Floor Stepbacks 
The board is the city administrative board reviewing and granting or denying requests for exceptions from regulations set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(D)(9). When requesting exceptions the applicant shall use the procedures for public notice and hearing set forth in Section 14-3.6(B)(3), unless the applicant also requests a variance to the underlying zoning. In such a case the applicant for the H ordinance exception shall not be required to publish a legal ad in the local newspaper. Exceptions are project specific and do not apply to the subject property in perpetuity. The board may grant exceptions and impose conditions thereon to Subsection 14-5.2(D)(9) for height of structures within the historic districts as specified in Subsection 14-5.2(D)(9)(a). The applicant for such exceptions shall conclusively demonstrate and the board shall make a positive finding of fact that such exceptions comply with all the criteria listed as follows: 
(i)  Do not damage the character of the streetscape ; 
(ii)  Prevent a hardship to the applicant or an injury to the public welfare; 
(iii)  Strengthen the unique heterogeneous character of the city by providing a full range of design options to ensure that residents can continue to reside within the historic districts; 
(iv)  Are due to special conditions and circumstances which are peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the related streetscape ; 
(v)  Are due to special conditions and circumstances which are not a result of the actions of the applicant ; and 
(vi)  Provide the least negative impact with respect to the purpose of this section as set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(A)(1). 
(D)  General Design Standards for All H Districts   
In any review of proposed additions or alterations to structures that have been declared significant or contributing in any historic district or a landmark in any part of the city , the following standards shall be met: 
(1)  General 
(a)  The status of a significant, contributing, or landmark structure shall be retained and preserved. If a proposed alteration will cause a structure to lose its significant, contributing, or landmark status, the application shall be denied. The removal of historic materials or alteration of architectural features and spaces that embody the status shall be prohibited. 
(b)  If a proposed alteration or new construction will cause an adjacent structure to lose its significant, contributing, or landmark status, the application may be denied. 
(2)  Additions 
(a)  Additions shall have similar materials, architectural treatments and styles, features, and details as the existing structure , but shall not duplicate those of the existing structure in a manner that will make the addition indistinguishable from the existing structure . 
(b)  Additions to buildings that meet the standards of Subsection 14-5.2(E) shall continue to meet those standards set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(E) in addition to the standards set forth in this section. 
(c)  Additions are not permitted to primary faades . 
(d)  Additions are not permitted to the side of the existing footprint unless the addition is set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the primary facade. The addition shall not exceed fifty percent of the square footage of the existing footprint, and shall not exceed fifty percent of the existing dimension of the primary facade. To the extent architecturally practicable, new additions shall be attached to any existing noncontributing portion of structures instead of attaching them to the significant or contributing portion. 
(e)  The height of additions: 
(i)  For significant and landmark structures shall be a minimum of six (6) inches less than the parapet or equivalent roof-feature of the existing adjacent connecting facade. 
(ii)  For contributing structures shall be no more than one additional story higher than the existing structure . To the extent architecturally practicable, two story additions shall be set to the rear or the side rear of the structure . When an additional story is to be placed upon an existing contributing structure , that footprint may be no greater than fifty percent of the footprint of the existing structure , subject to the provisions of Subsection A(1) above. For the purposes of this paragraph, an additional story shall not exceed twelve (12) feet from the existing rooftop to the highest point of that story . 
(3)  Remodeling to Increase Height; Rooftop Appurtenances 
(a)  For remodeling of existing significant and landmark structures , no increase in height of the structures is permitted. (For standards relating to additions to existing structures , see paragraph (2) above.) 
(b)  For significant and landmark structures , publicly visible roof top appurtenances, including but not limited to solar collectors, clerestories, decks, or mechanical equipment, shall not be added nor shall the parapet be raised to conceal the rooftop appurtenances . For contributing buildings solar collectors, clerestories, decks, or mechanical equipment if publicly visible shall not be added. 
(4)  Porches and Portals 
Existing porches or portals shall not be enclosed. 
(5)  Windows, Doors, and Other Architectural Features 
(a)  For all facades of significant and landmark structures and for the primary facades of contributing structures : 
(i)  Historic windows shall be repaired or restored wherever possible. Historic windows that cannot be repaired or restored shall be duplicated in the size, style, and material of the original. Thermal double pane glass may be used. No opening shall be widened or narrowed. 
(ii)  No new opening shall be made where one presently does not exist unless historic documentation supports its prior existence. 
(iii)  No existing opening shall be closed. 
(b)  For all faades of significant, contributing and landmark structures , architectural features, finishes, and details other than doors and windows, shall be repaired rather than replaced. In the event replacement is necessary, the use of new material may be approved. The new material shall match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Replacement or duplication of missing features shall be substantiated by documentation, physical or pictorial evidence. 
(6)  Roofs 
The existing roof styles and materials shall be maintained or replaced in kind if necessary. The addition of dormers or other roof features should only be considered when they are an existing or historical feature of the structure . 
(7)  Surface Cleaning 
The surface cleaning of structures , when undertaken, shall employ the gentlest means possible. Chemical or physical treatment , such as sandblasting, that causes damage to historic materials, is not permitted. 
(8)  Archaeological Resources 
Discovery of archaeological resources made during the historic districts review process shall be referred to the archaeological review committee. 
(9)  Height, Pitch, Scale, Massing and Floor Stepbacks 
The height, pitch, scale , and massing of any structure in an historic district, as defined in this section, shall be limited as provided for in this section, unless further restricted within this chapter. 
(a)  Applicability 
The following sections identify specific areas and specific projects subject to this section. Land use department staff shall determine whether or not properties are included within this section. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(i)  Specific Areas 
A.  The authority to limit the height of any structure , as provided in this section, shall apply within the downtown and eastside, Don Gaspar, historic transition, and westside-guadalupe historic districts. 
B.  It shall also apply in the historic review district as specified herein. This authority shall apply to the northern and eastern portion of the historic review district as illustrated on the referenced map attached hereto,* and located in the city's land use department. Inclusive under this authority are all properties accessed from Canyon Road, Camino Militar, Apodaca Hill, Camino Ribera, Camino Cabra, Camino Santander, Camino San Acacio, Camino del Monte Sol, Camino Rancheros, Camino Ranchitos, Garcia Street, Old Santa Fe Trail (to the Arroyo de los Chamisos crossing), and Old Pecos Trail (to the southern boundary of the historic review district) as they continue out of the downtown and eastside historic district and terminate in the historic review district. This authority shall also apply to all properties accessed from public rights-of-way that are located east of the western boundary of the historic review district and north of the southern boundary of the historic review district to the intersection of Camino Corrales and Fort Union Drive. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
Editor's Note: The map referenced herein adopted by Ordinance No. 1983-69, as amended, is shown on the official zoning map. 
C.  This authority shall also apply to properties accessed from Camino Lejo, Mt. Carmel Road, and east to the intersection of Camino de Cruz Blanca and Camino de Cruz Blanca Norte, inclusive of Camino de Cruz Blanca and Camino de Cruz Blanca Norte, and exclusive of properties east of the intersection of Camino de Cruz Blanca and Camino de Cruz Blanca Norte. 
D.  This limitation of applicability shall not affect the authority of the Board with respect to significant or contributing structures as provided in Subsections 14-5.2(F), (G), and (H). 
(ii)  Project Types 
Land use department staff shall determine the applicability of this section to individual projects and the applicable streetscape as follows: (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
A.  If the project location is sited on a street which extends linearly with no interruptions or truncations, the streetscape shall include buildings , yard walls , and fences on both sides of the street on which the proposed building , yard wall , or fence is to be located, for a distance of six hundred (600) feet measured from the midpoint of the street facing faade(s) of the proposed building , yard wall , or fence in both directions parallel to the street centerline. See Illustration 14-5.2-1, "Linear Street - No Interruptions or Truncations." 

B.  If the streetscape is truncated by an intersecting block or a visual intrusion (such as a curve or turn in the streetscape) before the six hundred (600) feet is measured, the streetscape shall include all buildings , yard walls , or fences up to and including those which front the intersection or intrusion. See Illustration 14-5.2-2, "Truncation by an Intersecting Block or Visual Intrusion." 

C.  If the proposed building , yard wall , or fence fronts more than one street , the streetscape on each street frontage as determined in Subsection (ii)A above shall be considered. See Illustration 14-5.2-3, "Frontage on More than One Street." (Ord. No. 2002-37  24) 

D.  When the proposed building, yard wall or fence is located on a lot with no frontage on rights-of-way, the streetscape is defined by measuring a distance of three (300) feet in all directions beginning from the mid-point of the facade which contains the principal entrance of the building . The height of a proposed yard wall or fence shall not exceed the height of the tallest yard wall or fence within this streetscape . See Illustration 14-5.2-4, "Interior Lot with No Street Frontage." 

E.  When the proposed building , yard wall or fence faces a T- or a Y-intersection, the streetscape shall include buildings , yard walls , and fences as defined in Subsection (ii)(A) above and buildings , yard walls , and fences on both sides of the street creating the leg of the "T" or the arm of the "Y" for a distance of three hundred (300) feet parallel to the street centerline. See Illustrations 14-5.2-5, "Location at a "Y" Intersection," and 14-5.2-6, "Location at a "T" Intersection." (Ord. No. 2002-37  25) 
F.  When the proposed building , yard wall , or fence is located in a streetscape that includes no buildings , yard walls , or fences, the height of the proposed building shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet. Yard walls and fences in this streetscape shall not exceed five (5) feet in height. 


(b)  Streetscape Standards 
(i)  Streetscapes shall not extend beyond the outer boundaries of the historic districts. 
(ii)  When determining streetscape , the following structure types shall be excluded: institutional, buildings originally constructed to house a hotel , residential multiple unit , buildings with non-historic multiple stories, non-historic pitched roof, auxiliary outbuildings such as sheds, existing structures approved by way of a variance or exception, and yard walls and fences whose height is inconsistent with the predominant height of yard walls and fences on an applicable streetscape . 
(iii)  When determining an applicable streetscape , vacant lots or parcels shall not be included in the calculation for allowable height. 
(iv)  In certain cases, the board may consider the standard deviation of heights in addition to the average heights within an applicable streetscape . 
(v)  If a portion of a structure falls within the measurement of an applicable streetscape , such structure shall be considered as part of the applicable streetscape . 
(vi)  If the determined allowable height of a proposed residential building or addition does not meet the minimum construction standards related to height set forth in the uniform building code, then the uniform building code shall prevail. 
(c)  Height 
(i)  Official map of building heights in the historic districts - procedures. 
A.  The historic districts review board shall recommend the adoption of an official map reflecting building heights in the historic districts to the governing body . This map shall be used for the purpose of regulating building height in the historic districts. The map shall be adopted at a public hearing of the governing body , which hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. All affected property owners and owners of lots or of land within one hundred (100) feet, excluding public right-of-way, of the property affected shall be notified of the public hearing by first class mail, mailed at least fifteen days prior to the public hearing. The official map shall be adopted by the governing body by ordinance. 
B.  The official map of building heights in the historic districts may be amended from time to time. This historic districts review board shall make recommendations to the governing body for the amendment of the official map, at a public hearing. Such hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. 
C.  The governing body shall hold a public hearing on any amendments to the official map. The official map, inclusive of amendments, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if set out herein. Such public hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. All affected property owners and owners of lots or of land within one hundred (100) feet, excluding public right-of-way, of the property affected shall be notified of the public hearing by first class mail, mailed at fifteen days prior to the public hearing. 
D.  The official map is available in the city planning office and is accessible at all reasonable times for inspection. 
(ii)  In exercising its authority under this section, the board shall limit the height of structures as set forth in this section. Heights of existing structures shall be as set forth on the official map of building heights in the historic districts. 
A.  If a proposed building has a parapet, the faade shall not be in excess of two (2) feet of the average of the height of the faades in the streetscape . 
B.  If the proposed building has a pitched roof, the ridge height of the proposed building shall not be in excess of two (2) feet of the average of the ridge height of the pitched roofs in the streetscape . 
C.  Yard walls and fences shall be limited to a height that does not exceed the average of the height of other yard walls and fences in the streetscape . 
D.  Pursuant to Section 14-7.4(C), the height of any other structure shall be limited to the allowable building height within the applicable streetscape , as defined in this section. (Ord. No. 2002-37  26) 
E.  The height and dimension of signage are as set forth in Section 14-8.10(H). 
F.  The board may increase the allowable height for proposed buildings and additions located on a sloping site where the difference in the natural grade along the structure's foundation exceeds two (2) feet. In no case shall the height of a faade exceed four (4) feet above the allowable height of the applicable streetscape measured from natural or finished grade , whichever is more restrictive. This increase in height shall be constructed only in the form of building stepbacks from the street . 
(iii)  In historic districts, height shall be the vertical distance measured between the highest part of a structure and the existing grade or finished grade , whichever is more restrictive, at the midpoint of the street facing facade, excluding rooftop appurtenances , the increased height of walls or fences over pedestrian and vehicular openings, and gates (either in opened or closed position). For structures which do not have street frontage, height shall be determined by the facade which contains the tallest vertical distance measured between the highest part of a structure and the existing grade or finished grade , whichever is more restrictive. The height of walls and fences is measured from the street -facing side of the wall or fence. (Ord. No. 2002-37  27) 
(d)  Pitch 
If the determined streetscape includes over fifty percent buildings with pitched roofs, the proposed building may have a pitched roof. A pitched roof is defined as a gable, shed, or hipped roof . The pitch of the roof shall match the predominant pitch extant in the streetscape . 
(e)  Scale 
The height of a proposed building or addition, its faade length, and its roof form and pitch shall appear to be in proportion to the height, faade length, and roof form and pitch of buildings in the applicable streetscape , or the building on which the addition is proposed. 
(f)  Massing and Floor Stepbacks 
The Board may require that upper floor levels be stepped back, to carry out the intent of this section; provided that the board in making such determinations shall take into account whether the height of the proposed building , yard wall , fence, or proposed stepback of upper floor levels is in harmony with the massing of the applicable streetscape and preservation of the historic and characteristic visual qualities of the streetscape . The Board shall also require that the publicly visible faades of the structure be in conformance with Subsections 14-5.2(E) through (H), and in meeting those requirements, may require that different floor levels be stepped back. 
(10)  Signs; Murals 
Sign applications and required submittals shall be reviewed by the Land Use Department. Approval or disapproval shall be indicated by the division on the application for the building permit and on each of the required submittals, all of which shall be signed by the division staff assigned to the review. The division shall report approvals and disapprovals to the board at its next regular meeting as an informational item. Murals may be referred to the city arts board for an advisory recommendation. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(11)  Walk Areas 
The Board shall recommend to the governing body appropriate streets or portions of streets within the historic district to be set aside for walk areas. The governing body may set aside the areas recommended; provided, that three-fourths of the property owners adjoining the street or portion of street affected have given consent thereto. Such walk areas shall be closed to vehicular traffic, and any improvements made by the city in the public right-of-way within the walk area shall be for pedestrian purposes. No walk area shall be set aside unless there is adequate space available conveniently related to the area for parking of cars of those who will make use of the area. The board's recommendation to the governing body shall include a statement of the available parking space. 
(E)  Downtown and Eastside Design Standards   
The governing body recognizes that a style of architecture has evolved within the city from the year 1600 to the present characterized by construction with adobe , hereafter called "old Santa Fe style", and that another style has evolved, hereafter called "recent Santa Fe style", which is a development from, and an elaboration of the old Santa Fe style, with different materials and frequently with added decorations. 
(1)  Old Santa Fe Style 
Old Santa Fe style, characterized by construction with adobe , is defined as including the so-called "pueblo" or "pueblo-Spanish" or "Spanish-Indian" and "territorial" styles and is more specifically described as follows: 
(a)  With rare exception, buildings are of one story , few have three stories, and the characteristic effect is that the buildings are long and low. Roofs are flat with a slight slope and surrounded on at least three sides by a firewall of the same color and material as the walls or of brick. Roofs are never carried out beyond the line of the walls except to cover an enclosed portal or porch formed by setting back a portion of the wall or to form an exterior portal , the outer edge of the roof being supported by wooden columns. Two- story construction is more common in the territorial than in other sub-styles, and is preferably accompanied by a balcony at the level of the floor of the second story . Faades are flat, varied by inset portales , exterior portales , projecting vigas or roof beams, canales or water-spouts, flanking buttresses and wooden lintels, architraves and cornices, which, as well as doors, are frequently carved and the carving may be picked out with bright colors. Arches are almost never used except for nonfunctional arches, often slightly ogive, over gateways in freestanding walls ; 
(b)  All exterior walls of a building are painted alike. The colors range from a light earth color to a dark earth color. The exception to this rule is the protected space under portales , or in church-derived designs, inset panels in a wall under the roof, in which case the roof overhangs the panel. These spaces may be painted white or a contrasting color, or have mural decorations; 
(c)  Solid wall space is always greater in any faade than window and door space combined. Single panes of glass larger than thirty (30) inches in any dimension are not permissible except as otherwise provided in this section; 
(d)  The rule as to flat roofs shall not be construed to prevent the construction of skylights or installation of air conditioning devices, or any other necessary roof structures , but such structures other than chimneys, flues, vents and aerials, shall be so placed as to be concealed by the firewall from the view of anyone standing in the street on which the building fronts; 
(e)  True old Santa Fe style buildings are made of adobe with mud plaster finish. Construction with masonry blocks, bricks, or other materials with which the adobe effect can be simulated is permissible; provided, that the exterior walls are not less than eight (8) inches thick and that geometrically straight faade lines are avoided. Mud plaster or hard plaster simulating adobe , laid on smoothly, is required; and 
(f)  It is characteristic of old Santa Fe style commercial buildings to place a portal so that it covers the entire sidewalk, the columns being set at the curb line. 
(2)  Recent Santa Fe Style 
Recent Santa Fe style intends to achieve harmony with historic buildings by retention of a similarity of materials, color, proportion, and general detail. The dominating effect is to be that of adobe construction, prescribed as follows: 
(a)  No building shall be over two stories in height in any faade unless the faade shall include projecting or recessed portales , setbacks or other design elements; 
(b)  The combined door and window area in any publicly visible faade shall not exceed forty percent of the total area of the faade except for doors or windows located under a portal . No door or window in a publicly visible faade shall be located nearer than three (3) feet from the corner of the faade; 
(c)  No cantilevers shall be permitted except over projecting vigas, beams, or wood corbels, or as part of the roof treatment described below; 
(d)  No less than eighty percent of the surface area of any publicly visible faade shall be adobe finish, or stucco simulating adobe finish. The balance of the publicly visible faade, except as above, may be of natural stone, wood, brick, tile, terra cotta, or other material, subject to approval as hereinafter provided for building permits ; 
(e)  The publicly visible faade of any building and of any adjoining walls shall, except as otherwise provided, be of one color, which color shall simulate a light earth or dark earth color, matte or dull finish and of relatively smooth texture. Faade surfaces under portales may be of contrasting or complimentary colors. Windows, doors and portals on publicly visible portions of the building and walls shall be of one of the old Santa Fe styles; except that buildings with portals may have larger plate glass areas for windows under portals only. Deep window recesses are characteristic; and 
(f)  Flat roofs shall have not more than thirty (30) inches overhang. 
(F)  Historic Review District   
(1)  Applicability 
(a)  The division shall review and approve or deny all applications for new construction, exterior alteration, and demolition of structures in the historic review district in accordance with the standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  The historic districts review board shall review and approve or deny new construction of commercial, residential multi-unit, public structures , and those structures requiring the Board's review as specified in Subsection 14-5.2(D)(9)(a). Approval, disapproval, or referral shall be indicated by the division on the application for the building permit and on each of the required submittals, all of which shall be signed by the division staff assigned to the review. 
(2)  District Standards 
(a)  The following structural standards shall be complied with whenever exterior features of buildings and other structures subject to public view from any public street , way, or other public place are erected, altered, or demolished: 
(i)  Slump block, stucco, or stone shall be used as exterior wall materials. Wood and other materials may be used for details. Aluminum siding, metal panels, mirrored glass, and unstuccoed masonry units or unstuccoed cement shall not be used as exterior wall materials; and 
(ii)  The color of stuccoed buildings shall predominantly be brown, tan, or local earth tones. This does not include chocolate brown colors or white except dull or matte off-white (yeso). Surfaces of stone shall be in the natural color. Entries and portals may be emphasized by the use of white or other colors or materials. Painting of buildings with bold repetitive patterns, or using buildings as signs is prohibited. 
(b)  It is intended that buildings be designed to be " wall dominated". "Wall dominated" means that the building's geometry is more defined by walls than by roofs. Buildings with flat, gabled, shed, and hipped roofs can be designed as "wall dominated" solutions and are allowed. However, gabled, shed and hipped roofs are only allowed if sufficient evidence is provided by the applicant showing that there are pitched roofs extant before December 12, 1983 (date of enactment) within the related streetscape , as viewed when standing in the public street in front of the site. The height of the roof above the wall shall be no greater than the height of the walls . Folded plate, hyperbolic, mansard, or red tile roofs are not allowed. Roofs in local earth tones are preferred. 
(c)  The use of solar and other energy collecting and conserving strategies is encouraged. The use of large glazed areas on south-facing walls for trombe walls or other solar collectors, direct gain, or other collecting purposes is allowed. When in view from any public street , way, or other public place, solar equipment shall be screened as follows: 
(i)  Raising the parapet; 
(ii)  Setting back from the edge of the roof; 
(iii)  Framing the collector with wood; 
(iv)  In pitched roofs, by integrating the collector into the pitch; 
(v)  In ground solar collectors by a wall or vegetation; 
(vi)  In wall collectors or greenhouses , by enclosing by end or other walls ; 
(vii)  Other means that screen the collector or integrate it into the overall structure . Non-glare materials shall be used in solar collectors. 
(d)  Roof-mounted mechanical, electrical and telephone equipment and other obtrusive structures shall be architecturally screened with opaque materials by raising the parapet, boxing in the equipment or other appropriate means. The equipment shall be of a low profile to minimize the screening problem. 
(e)  No cantilever or long apparently unsupported openings are allowed except over the projecting vigas, beams, or wood corbels or as part of the roof. The use of arches is discouraged except in freestanding walls . 
(f)  In order to emulate traditional Santa Fe architecture and construction traditions, it is intended that structures be designed to appear essentially as structures with massive walls which are defined as being built or appearing to be built of adobe construction, wall thickness appearing massive in relation to wall height, and where applicable, the depths of windows, doors and entry opening showing the massiveness of the structure . Solid wall space shall be greater in any faade than window or door space combined. Exceptions are allowed for south facing walls for solar equipment as provided in Subsection (F)(2)(c) of this section and under portales . The mass elements that make up the building composition shall appear as single blocks. Buildings with ground coverage of over twenty thousand 20,000 square feet and over one story shall be designed to appear more as an aggregation of smaller " building blocks" rather than a single large box or block. (Ord. No. 2002-37  28) 
(g)  Walls and fences visible from the street shall be built of brick, adobe , rock, masonry, wood, coyote fencing, wrought iron, slump block, or similar materials. Walls of unstuccoed concrete block or unstuccoed concrete, chain link, metal wire, or similar materials are prohibited, except where the wall or fence is not visible from the street . 
(h)  When parking spaces are required for commercial or multi-family residential buildings , they shall be placed to the rear or side of the building . When parking areas are visible from the street , they shall be screened from view by walls , fences, vegetation, planters, earth berms, or other means. 
(G)  Historic Transition District   
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  In order to promote the economic, cultural and general welfare of the people of the city and to ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city , it is deemed essential by the governing body that the qualities relating to the history of Santa Fe, and a harmonious outward appearance, which preserves property values and attracts tourists and residents alike, be preserved, some of the qualities being: 
(i)  The continued existence and preservation of historic areas and buildings ; 
(ii)  The continued construction of buildings in the historic styles; and 
(iii)  A general harmony as to style, form, color, proportion, texture, and material between buildings of historic design and those of more modern design. 
(b)  The governing body hereby establishes a process for review of style, form, color, proportion, texture, and materials as part of the building permit process in the historic transition district. 
(2)  Applicability 
Submittals of required elevations and plans and approval of these submittals by the land use department are required before a building permit is given for construction, renovation, or exterior remodeling of any exterior feature of a building or structure subject to public view from any public street , way, or other public place. Demolition shall not require prior approval by the land use department. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(3)  District Standards 
Compliance with the following structural standards shall occur whenever those exterior features of buildings and other structures subject to public view from any public street , way, or other public place are erected or altered: 
(a)  Architectural Style 
(i)  Materials 
It is intended that exterior wall materials express a monolithic and massive appearance. Stucco, brick, slump block, and stone are allowed. Materials such as aluminum siding, metal panels, mirrored glass, and unstuccoed masonry units or cement are not allowed. Wood siding is not allowed for an entire wall ; 
(ii)  Color 
The color of stuccoed buildings shall predominantly be in brown, tans, or local earth tones. This does not include chocolate brown colors or white except dull or matte off-white (yeso). Surfaces of stone or brick shall be in the natural color. Entries and portals may be emphasized by the use of white or other colors or materials. Painting of buildings with bold repetitive patterns, or using buildings as signs is prohibited; 
(iii)  Roof Form, Slope and Shape 
It is intended that buildings be designed to be "wall dominated". "Wall dominated" means that the building's geometry is more defined by walls than by roofs. Buildings with flat, gabled, shed, and hipped roofs can be designed as "wall dominated" solutions and are allowed. The height of the roof above the wall shall be no greater than the height of the walls . Folded plate roofs, hyperbolic, mansard, or red tile roofs are not allowed. Roofs in local earth tone colors are preferred. See Illustration 14-5.2-7, "Examples of Roof Types"; 
(iv)  Solar Equipment 
A.  It is intended that the use of solar and other energy collecting and conserving strategies be encouraged. The use of large glazed areas on south facing walls for collectors, trombe walls , greenhouses , garden rooms, direct gain, or other collecting purposes is allowed. Solar equipment shall be screened as follows: 
1.  raising the parapet; 
2.  setting back from the edge of the roof; 
3.  framing the collector with wood; 
4.  in the case of pitched roofs, by integrating the collector into the pitch; 
5.  in case of ground solar collectors by a wall or vegetation; 
6.  in the case of wall collectors or greenhouses , by enclosing by end or other walls ; 
7.  other means that screen the collector or integrate it into the overall structure . Non-glare materials shall be used in solar collectors. 
B.  Roof-mounted equipment: roof-mounted mechanical, electrical and telephone equipment and other obtrusive structures shall be architecturally screened with opaque materials, for example, by raising the parapet, and shall be of a low profile to minimize the screening problem; 
C.  Cantilevers, arches: no cantilever or long apparently unsupported openings are allowed except over the projecting vigas, beams, or wood corbels or as part of the roof. The use of arches is discouraged except in free standing walls ; 
(b)  Size, Mass and Shape 
(i)  In order to emulate traditional Santa Fe architecture and construction traditions, it is intended that structures be designed to appear essentially as structures with massive walls . Structures with massive walls are defined as being built or appearing to be built of adobe construction, wall thickness appearing massive in relation to wall height, and where applicable, the depths of windows, doors and entry openings showing, the massiveness of the structures . Solid wall space shall be greater in any faade than window or door space combined. Exceptions are allowed for south facing walls for solar equipment as provided in Subsection (G)(3)(a)(iv) of this section, and under portales ; (Ord. No. 2002-37  29) 
(ii)  The mass elements which make up the building composition shall appear as single blocks; 
(iii)  Buildings with ground coverage of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and over one story shall be designed to appear more as an aggregation of smaller " building blocks" rather than a single large box or block. A human scale shall be achieved near ground level on large commercial, multi-family residential and public buildings and along street faades and entryways through the use of such scale elements as windows, doors, columns, and beams. Human scale means the entrances, windows, doors, columns, and beams on large buildings are in proportion to the people using the building . For example, a ten-foot high entrance cover is in proportion to a person using it. A thirty (30) foot high colonnade is not; 
(c)  Walls and Fences 
Walls and fences visible from the street shall be built of brick, adobe , rock, masonry, wood, coyote fencing, wrought iron, slump block, or similar materials. Walls of unstuccoed concrete block or unstuccoed concrete, chain link, metal wire, or similar materials are prohibited, except where the wall or fence is not visible from the street ; 
(d)  Remodeling and Alteration 
Persons requesting approval for building permits for remodeling or alteration of nonconforming structures shall not be required to bring the total structure into conformance with the standards for the historic transition area. However, the portion of the building that is remodeled or altered shall conform to those standards. Remodeling of structures of architectural and historic interest or individually entered on the state register of cultural properties or national register of historic places or designated as significant on either register shall be related to and compatible with the structure . "Related to and compatible with" means existing together with unity and coherence. 
(4)  Final Review 
(a)  All applicants for final review shall submit: 
(i)  Three copies of four building elevations drawn to scale . Elevations shall be drawn with sufficient detail to show the architectural design of the structures , including proposed exterior finish materials, textures and colors; 
(ii)  Three copies of a dimensioned plan drawn to scale which shows building location and configuration in relation to other site improvements, including but not limited to parking lots and utilities. 
(b)  The Land Use Department shall make a determination of whether the plans and elevations are in compliance with the requirements of this section within five working days from the date of the application to the city . If the submitted information is inadequate, the division may postpone action until a date agreed upon by the division and the applicant . (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(c)  Final approval, disapproval, or conditional approval shall be noted on the face of the application and signed by a representative of the land use department. If conditional approval is given, the list of conditions shall be attached to the application . If the application is disapproved, the sections of the historic transition district with which the application did not comply shall be noted on the application . (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(d)  No approval by the land use department shall be required for repairs that do not in any way alter any exterior feature in view from any public street , way, or public place, or for repainting it the same color. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(5)  Property Use and Zoning District 
The property in the historic transition district may be used for any use permitted in the zoning district of which the property in question is a part. The property in the historic transition district shall be subject to the requirements, uses, height, and other regulations of the zoning district of which the property is a part. 
(H)  Don Gaspar Area Historic District   
(1)  District Standards 
Compliance with the following structural standards shall occur wherever those exterior features of buildings and other structures subject to public view from any public street , way, or other public place are erected, altered, or demolished: 
(a)  Slump block, stucco, brick, stone, or wood shall be used as exterior wall materials. Aluminum siding, metal panels, mirrored glass and unstuccoed concrete block or unstuccoed concrete shall not be used as exterior wall materials. The painting of buildings with a color that causes arresting or spectacular effects or with bold repetitive patterns, or using building as signs is prohibited. Murals, however, are permitted and may be referred to the city arts board for an advisory recommendation. 
(b)  Roof forms including but not limited to flat, gabled, shed, and hipped roofs are allowed. Folded plate or hyperbolic roofs are not allowed. 
(c)  The use of solar and other energy collecting and conserving strategies is encouraged. The use of large glazed areas on south facing walls for trombe walls or other solar collectors, greenhouses , garden rooms, direct gain, or other energy collecting purposes is allowed. When in view from any public street , way, or other public place, solar equipment shall be screened by the following methods: 
(i)  raising the parapet; 
(ii)  setting back from the edge of the roof; 
(iii)  framing the collector with wood; 
(iv)  in the case of pitched roofs, by integrating the collector into the pitch; 
(v)  in case of ground solar collectors by a wall or vegetation; 
(vi)  in the case of wall collectors by enclosing by end or other walls ; 
(vii)  other means that screen the collector or integrate it into the overall structure . Non-glare materials shall be used in solar collectors. 
(d)  Mechanical, electrical, telephone equipment, microwave satellite receiving dishes, and other obtrusive equipment shall be architecturally screened by opaque materials by raising the parapet, framing in the equipment, or other appropriate means. The equipment shall be of a low profile to minimize the screening problems. 
(e)  Walls and fences shall be of brick, adobe , masonry, rock, wood, coyote fencing, or similar materials. Wrought iron fences and slump block walls are allowed. Walls of unstuccoed concrete, chain-link, metal wire, or similar materials are prohibited, except where the wall or fence is not in view from any public street , way, or other public place. 
(f)  Greenhouses . Attached greenhouses that front on the street shall give the appearance of being integrated into the structure of the building or of being a substantive addition rather than having a lean-to-effect. The use of corrugated fiberglass or rolled plastic for the external surface of attached or freestanding greenhouses that front on the street is prohibited. Greenhouses with slanting sides shall be bracketed at the ends and the greenhouses made from enclosed porches or portales shall maintain the shape of the porch or portal . 
(g)  For residential uses, paving with asphalt or parking is not allowed in the front yard except in the sidewalk or driveway. 
(h)  For commercial uses zoned C-1 front yards are required to be landscaped, and no required front yard shall be used for off-street parking . 
(i)  As a condition of any rezoning all applicants shall provide evidence of sufficient off street parking and an intent to maintain the architectural integrity of the existing building or to conform to the architectural style of the district if constructing a building on a vacant lot . 
(2)  Walls; Fences; Solar Collectors; Administration 
Applications for erection, alteration, or destruction of walls , fences, and solar collectors and required submittals shall be reviewed by the land use department. Approval, disapproval, or referral shall be indicated by the division on the application for the building permit and on each of the required submittals, all of which shall be signed by the division staff assigned to the review. The division shall report approvals, disapprovals, or referrals to the board at its next regular meeting as an informational item. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(I)  Westside-Guadalupe Historic District   
(1)  District Standards 
Compliance with the following structural standards shall occur whenever those exterior features of buildings and other structures subject to public view from any public street , way, or other public place are erected, altered, or demolished: 
(a)  Slump block, stucco, brick, or stone, shall be used as exterior wall materials. Wood and other materials may be used for details. Aluminum siding, metal panels, mirrored glass, and unstuccoed concrete block or unstuccoed concrete shall not be used as exterior wall materials; 
(b)  The color of stuccoed buildings shall predominantly be in browns, tans, local earth tones and soft pastels. Surfaces of stone or brick shall be in the natural color. Entryways, and portales or porches may be emphasized by the use of white or other colors. Painting of buildings with a color that causes arresting or spectacular effects or with bold repetitive patterns or using buildings as signs is prohibited. Murals, however, are permitted and may be referred to the city arts board for an advisory recommendation; 
(c)  Roof form, slope , and shape. It is intended that buildings be designed to be "wall dominated". "Wall dominated" means that the building's geometry is more defined by walls than by roofs. Buildings with flat, gabled, shed, or hipped roofs can be designed as "wall dominated" solutions and are allowed. The height of the roof above the wall shall be no greater than the height of the wall . Folded plate, hyperbolic or mansard roofs are not allowed; 
(d)  The use of solar and other energy collecting and conserving strategies is encouraged. The use of large glazed areas on south facing walls for trombe walls or other solar collectors, direct gain, or other energy collecting purposes is allowed. When in view from any public street , way, or other public place, solar equipment shall be screened as follows: 
(i)  raising the parapet; 
(ii)  setting back from the edge of the roof; 
(iii)  framing the collector with wood; 
(iv)  in the case of pitched roofs, by integrating the collector into the pitch; 
(v)  in the case of ground solar collectors by a wall or vegetation; 
(vi)  in the case of wall collectors, by enclosing by end or other walls ; 
(vii)  other means that screen the collector or integrate it into the overall structure . Non-glare materials shall be used in solar collectors. 
(e)  Mechanical, electrical, telephone equipment, microwave satellite receiving dishes, and other obtrusive equipment shall be architecturally screened with opaque materials by raising the parapet, boxing in the equipment, or other appropriate means. The equipment shall be of a low profile to minimize the screening problems; 
(f)  Walls and fences shall be of brick, adobe , masonry, rock, wood, coyote fencing, or similar materials. Wrought iron fences and slump block walls are allowed. Walls of unstuccoed concrete block, unstuccoed concrete, chain-link, metal wire, or similar materials are prohibited, except where the wall or fence is not in the street frontage; 
(g)  Greenhouses 
(h)  Attached greenhouses that front on the street shall give the appearance of being integrated into the structure of the building or of being a substantive addition rather than having a lean-to effect. The use of corrugated fiberglass or rolled plastic for the external surface of attached or freestanding greenhouses that front on the street is prohibited. Greenhouses with slanting sides shall be bracketed at the ends and that greenhouses made from enclosed porches or portales maintain the shape of the porch or portal ; 
(i)  Porches and portales are encouraged; 
(j)  When parking spaces are required for commercial or multi-family residential buildings , they shall be placed to the rear or side of the building. 
(2)  Walls; Fences; Solar Collectors; Administration 
Applications for erection, alteration, or demolition of walls , fences, and solar collectors and required submittals shall be reviewed by the land use department. Approval, disapproval or referral shall be indicated by the division on the application for the building permit and on each of the required submittals, all of which shall be signed by the division staff assigned to the review. The division shall report approvals, disapprovals, and referrals to the board at its next regular meeting as an informational item. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(J)  Creation of Historic Districts   
The governing body may, of its own motion, on recommendation of the historic districts review board, or in response to petition, designate an area as an historic district. Historic districts shall be areas of historical, architectural, cultural, or special aesthetic interest. Historic districts so classified will be designated for zoning purposes by the existing zone designations at the time of the adoption of this section, plus the suffix "H." The procedure for establishment of an historic district shall be that prescribed for other rezonings, but also shall comply with this section. 
(1)  Application 
Any  petition for designation of a historic district shall be accompanied by an application and supporting materials as specified in the user's guide, and also any other information as requested by the historic board. 
(2)  Preliminary Review and Hearing 
(a)  In any matter subject to its review, the historic board, upon request of the applicant , shall provide a preliminary review. Application for preliminary review shall be accompanied by two copies of the design development drawings or photographs. The Board shall provide an informal determination of whether the drawings and photographs are in compliance with the applicable standards. 
(b)  Preliminary approval or disapproval shall be indicated on each copy of the design development drawings or photographs and signed by the chair of the board. If disapproved, the board shall give the reasons for disapproval on each copy of the required submittals. One marked copy shall be retained by the board. The other copy, similarly marked, shall be returned to the applicant . Preliminary approval is not a substitute for final review approval. Any subsequent changes to the design development drawings prior to final review shall be consistent with the preliminary approval. 
(c)  The historic board shall act at its next regular meeting upon those preliminary applicants that have been filed seven or more days in advance of that meeting. Notice of the time and place of the preliminary review shall be given to the applicant in writing by the land use department. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(3)  Final Review and Hearings 
(a)  No exterior feature or part of an exterior feature of a structure which is subject to view from any public street may be erected, demolished, or have its appearance changed until the application and required submittals have been approved by the historic board, as part of the building permit process in accordance with standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  The historic districts review board shall act upon the final application at its next regular meeting, unless the application is made less than seven days before a regular meeting, in which case the question may be held over until the next meeting. If the exhibits are inadequate, the historic districts review board may postpone action until a date agreed upon by the historic districts review board and the applicant . Recommended final approval, disapproval, or conditional approval shall be noted on the face of the application and signed by the chair of the historic districts review board, or, in the chair's absence, by the acting chair. If conditional approval is given, the list of conditions shall be attached to the application . If the application is disapproved, the chair of the historic districts review board shall state on the application the sections of H district regulations with which the application did not comply. If the application is disapproved for failure to provide required information, the chair shall state on building permit for work within an historic district may be issued without approval of the historic districts review board endorsed thereon, except after appeal, as provided in 14-3.17. (Ord. No. 2002-37  30; Ord. No. 2009-42  18) 
(c)  All applications for review by the board shall be accompanied by three copies of plans and exterior building elevations drawn to scale , with sufficient detail to show the architectural design of structures , including proposed exterior finish materials, textures, colors, and the plot plan or site layout, including a general location of the existing adjacent improvements. The plans and elevations shall also show all improvements affecting appearance such as walls , fences, signs, lights, fixtures, steps and other appurtenant elements. Applications for new construction or demolition shall be accompanied by clear photographs showing contiguous property . 
(d)  Applications and exhibits shall be kept available for public inspection. For new construction, a clear photograph of the structure , as completed, shall be taken by the city to be included in the land use department's historic area new construction archives. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(e)  No approval by the historic board shall be required for repairs that do not in any way alter the exterior appearance of a structure , or for repainting it in the same color, unless the board has previously notified the owner in writing that the existing color of the structure is objectionable, in which case approval by the board shall be obtained for any repainting. 
(f)  The historic board shall judge any proposed alteration or new structure for harmony with adjacent buildings, preservation of historical and characteristic qualities, and conformity to the standards for architectural style set forth in this section. 
(K)  Historic Compounds   
(Ord. No. 2003-18  1) 
(1)  Purpose and Intent 
It is intended that: 
(a)  Historic compounds shall be recognized as historic places and that the identifiable historic, physical, and spatial elements comprising them shall be preserved. 
(b)  Character defining architectural, landscaping , spatial features and contexts in an historic compound shall be preserved. 
(c)  The buildings, structures , landscaping , and open spaces comprising a compound change over time. Changes to a compound may have acquired historic significance and, if so, shall be retained and preserved. 
(d)  Additions to existing buildings and new construction and landscaping in an historic compound shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the historic form and integrity of the historic compound would be unimpaired. 
(2)  Identification of Historic Compounds 
(a)  In reviewing applications for compliance with Section 14-5.2, staff shall evaluate whether the subject property is located in an historic compound . If a compound is listed on the historic compound register, this shall constitute identification as an historic compound . In other circumstances, identification of an historic compound shall be accompanied by a written analysis and justification as to why the compound is historic. Historic compounds shall be comprised of a group of at least three buildings that are historically, physically, and/or spatially related. In order for a compound to be considered historic, at least fifty percent of the buildings in the compound shall be designated contributing, significant or landmark . Designation of all buildings, structures , and objects in a compound shall be reviewed upon application . Four general types of historic compounds are found in Santa Fe, the family, the rental, the placita and the commercial. 
(3)  Board Review of Existing Conditions Assessments and Historic Compound Plans 
(a)  For any proposed substantive change to an historic compound , the property owner or representative shall submit an existing conditions assessment for review and approval by the board. 
(b)  For compounds that have one owner , the board may also require a proposed historic compound plan for review and approval. If an historic compound plan is required, a permit for substantive change in the historic compound shall not be issued until final review and approval of the document by the board. 
(c)  An existing conditions assessment and/or historic compound plan shall not be reviewed until all exhibits, as specified by city policy, have been submitted. 
(d)  Review of the existing conditions assessment and historic compound plan by the board shall include the historic, physical, and spatial character including scale and development pattern of the historic compound . 
(4)  Standards for the Rehabilitation, Demolition, Additions and New Construction in Historic Compounds 
(a)  General 
(i)  If proposed changes will significantly alter the historic, physical, or spatial character of the historic compound as a whole, the application shall be denied. 
(ii)  If the proposed changes will result in a resource located in the historic compound to lose its contributing, significant or landmark status, the application shall be denied. 
(b)  Rehabilitations of Contributing, Significant, and Landmark Resources 
In rehabilitating contributing, significant, and landmark resources, the standards as set out in Subsection 14-5.2(D) shall be met. 
(c)  Additions 
Additions to contributing, significant, or landmark buildings or structures shall meet the standards as set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(D)(2). 
(d)  Height 
(i)  Additions to contributing, significant, or landmark buildings shall be a minimum of six inches lower than the parapet or ridge of the historic building. Additions to contributing, significant or landmark structures other than buildings shall be a minimum of six (6) inches lower than the highest point of the historic structure. This requirement shall supersede Subsection 14-5.2(D)(2)(e). 
(ii)  In addition to the height requirements set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(K)(4)(d)(i), new buildings shall be at least six (6) inches lower than the calculated average height of all contributing, significant or landmark buildings in the historic compound. 
(iii)  New walls, fences, or gates shall not exceed the average height of existing walls , fences, or gates in the historic compound . No wall or fence that significantly changes the spatial character of the historic compound shall be constructed. 
(e)  New Free-Standing Construction and Landscaping 
(i)  New buildings shall not exceed in size the average historic footprint of all contributing, significant or landmark buildings in the historic compound . 
(ii)  The total footprint of new free-standing building construction approved under this ordinance shall not exceed fifty percent of the combined historic footprint of contributing, significant or landmark buildings. 
(iii)  New construction shall use similar materials, building forms and stylistic elements as found in the historic compound . 
(iv)  New construction shall be visually distinct from, but compatible with, contributing, significant, or landmark architecture in the historic compound . 
(v)  New construction shall not damage, block, or obscure historic, physical, or spatial character defining features of the historic compound including but not limited to courtyards, roads, paths, walls , fountains, curbing, and vegetation. 
(vi)  The location of new construction shall be considered so that its physical relationship to other buildings is similar to the spatial relationships of existing contributing, significant, or landmark buildings in the historic compound . 
(vii)  Addition of a new object shall not be considered new construction. 
(f)  Demolitions 
(i)  Any demolition in an historic compound shall be reviewed as per Section 14-3.14. 
(ii)  The effect(s) of the demolition on the character of the historic compound as a whole shall be taken into consideration when reviewing the application . 
(5)  Survey, Recommendation, Approval of Historic Compound Register and Effective Date 
(a)  A survey of the historic districts shall be completed to determine a list of eligible historic compounds . 
(b)  The historic districts review board shall make a recommendation to the governing body as to which properties shall be registered as historic compounds . 
(c)  The governing body shall approve the historic compound register after conducting a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given to the owner of record of each property considered for the historic compound register by certified mail, return receipt requested, no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  Subsection 14-5.2(K) shall become effective thirty days after the approval of the historic compound register by the governing body . 
(L)  Landmarks   
(Added Ord. No. 2004-26 2) 
(1)  Official Map of Landmark Structures -Procedures 
The historic districts review board shall recommend to the governing body an official map designating the status of structures for the purpose of regulation of landmark structures . 
(a)  The map shall be adopted at a public hearing of the governing body , which hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. All affected property owners and owners of lots or of land within one hundred (100) feet, excluding public right-of-way, of the property affected shall be notified of the public hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed at least fifteen days prior to the public hearing. 
(b)  The historic districts review board shall make recommendations to the governing body for the amendment of the official map, at a public hearing. Such hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper no less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. All affected property owners shall be notified of the public hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, mailed at least fifteen days prior to the public hearing. With the consent of the property owner , the city shall have posted on the property a poster obtained from the planning and land use department. Otherwise, the city shall post the poster on the nearest place available to the city . Such poster shall be securely posted, prominently displayed, visible from a public street , at least fourteen days prior to the scheduled Board hearing. The posting shall indicate the nature of the application , identification of the property affected and the time, date and place of the hearing. The poster shall be removed within thirty days of final action. Failure to do so may result in the city removing the sign at the applicant's expense. A civil fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged. (Ord. No. 2005-31  5) 
(c)  The governing body shall hold a public hearing on a recommendation by the historic districts review board for an official map. Any official map shall be adopted by the governing body by ordinance. 
(d)  The official map of landmark structures , with referenced property addresses, is amended from time to time. The same is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if set out herein. The original referenced map is available in the city planning office and is accessible at all reasonable times for inspection. (Ord. No. 2001-38  2) 
(M)  State Capital Outlay Projects   
(Ord. No. 2009-46  2) 
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  Recognizing the fragility of the city's historic heritage, the purpose of Subsection 14-5.2(M) is to activate the procedure established in Section 3-22-6 NMSA 1978 under which the city and the state will collaborate in good faith and work jointly to preserve and protect the historic districts of Santa Fe as well as contributing, significant and landmark structures . 
(b)  State capital outlay projects in historic districts shall be carried out pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 3-22-6 NMSA 1978 and Subsection (2) below and in a manner that is harmonious and generally compatible with the design standards set forth in Subsection (3) below. These procedures and standards apply to new structures and additions to and alterations and demolition of existing buildings. 
(2)  Procedures 
(a)  Before commencing with the design phase of a capital outlay project , the state and the historic districts review board shall consult as to the appropriate design standards and how those design standards would impact costs and the operation or manner in which the project will ultimately be expected to function. The historic districts review board shall work collaboratively with the state to arrive at compatibility of the project with the design standards, considering reasonable costs and preserving essential functionality. The state shall also make every reasonable effort to obtain input from members of identifiable community groups involved in historic preservation in Santa Fe before commencing the design phase. 
(b)  After the design phase and before soliciting a bid or proposal for design-build or lease-purchase for a capital overlay project , the state shall submit the plans to the historic districts review board for review and comment. The historic districts review board in conjunction with the state shall conduct a public meeting to receive public input. Notice of the public meeting shall be given to any identifiable community groups involved in historic preservation in Santa Fe. 
(c)  Within sixty days after the public meeting the historic districts review board, any identifiable historic preservation community group or any other interested party shall communicate recommendations and comments in writing to the state . The state shall consult with the historic districts review board or other entity to resolve any issues raised. If at the end of the sixty-day period unresolved issues remain, the city may within five days after the end of the period, notify the state that the issues remain unresolved and these issues shall be finally determined as set forth in Section 3-22-6(G) NMSA 1978, provided that if notice is not timely given, the state may, after incorporating those provisions to which the state and the city have agreed, proceed with the project . 
(d)  The state shall not take any irrevocable action on the capital project in reliance on the plans until the procedures set forth in Section 3-22-6 NMSA 1978 have been followed. 
(3)  Design Standards 
(a)  General Standards 
A state capital outlay project shall be designed appropriate to the seat of government and with the intent of achieving harmony with existing buildings by the use of similar materials, color, proportion, and general details to the existing buildings in the applicable streetscape . The applicable streetscape shall be determined as set forth in Subsections 14-5.2(D)(9)(a)(ii) A., B., C., D., and E. A new structure or proposed alteration or addition shall not cause an adjacent contributing, significant or landmark structure to lose its status. Alterations and additions shall be in character with the style, detail and massing of the existing building. The dominating effect is to be that of adobe construction as follows: 
(i)  Roofs 
Roofs, generally, shall be flat with a slight slope and surrounded by a parapet of the same color and material as the walls or of brick. Roofs shall generally not be carried out beyond the line of the walls except to cover an enclosed portal or porch formed by setting back a portion of the wall or to form an exterior portal , the outer edge of the roof being supported by columns, posts or other vertical supports. No cantilevers shall be permitted except over projecting vigas, beams, or wood corbels, or as part of the roof treatment not to exceed an overhang of thirty (30) inches. The restriction as to flat roofs shall not be construed to prevent the construction of skylights or installation of air-conditioning devices, or any other necessary roof structures , but such structures other than chimneys, flues, vents and aerials, shall be so placed as to be concealed by the parapet from any public way. 
(ii)  Walls and Windows 
The combined door and window area in any publicly visible facade generally shall not exceed forty percent of the total area of the facade except for doors or windows located under a portal . No door or window in a publicly visible faade shall be located nearer than three (3) feet from the corner of the facade except in circumstances where the unique purpose of the space may warrant special design considerations. Windows, doors and portales on publicly visible portions of the building and walls shall be of one of the old Santa Fe styles. Glass and window trim shall be nonreflective. Windows shall be similar in proportion to the fenestration pattern in the streetscape . Deep window recesses are characteristic. 
(iii)  Finishes 
Construction shall be with materials with which the adobe effect can be simulated provided that the exterior walls are not less than eight (8) inches thick. Mud plaster, hard plaster or other materials simulating adobe , laid on smoothly, is required. No less than eighty percent of the non-fenestration surface area of any publicly visible faade shall be adobe finish, stucco or other material simulating adobe finish. The balance of the publicly visible facade may be of natural stone, wood, brick, tile, terra cotta, or other material. Materials shall convey a sense of substance and permanence. 
(iv)  Colors 
The publicly visible facade of any building and of any adjoining walls generally shall be of one color but no more than three colors and simulate a light earth or dark earth color , matte or dull finish and of relatively smooth texture. However, facade surfaces under portals or inset panels in a wall under a roof overhangs, in church-derived designs, may be painted white or be of contrasting or complimentary colors or have mural decorations. 
(v)  Other Features 
Facades shall be flat, varied by inset portals , exterior portales , projecting vigas or roof beams, canales or water-spouts, flanking buttresses and wooden lintels, architraves and cornices. Depending upon the existing streetscape and if permitted otherwise in this chapter, a portal may cover the entire sidewalk with the columns set at the curbline. 
(vi)  Height 
The height shall be limited to the average height of institutional buildings as measured within the applicable streetscape . When determining an applicable streetscape , vacant lots or parcels shall not be included in the calculation for allowable height. If no institutional buildings are included in the streetscape , the maximum height shall not exceed the average height of existing buildings in the streetscape . The land use department staff shall determine the applicable streetscape as set forth in Subsections 14-5.2(D)(9)(a)(ii) A., B., C., D., and E. Height shall be measured as set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(D)(9)(c)(iii). Heights of existing structures shall be as set forth on the official map of building heights. If the height of an existing building is not given, the state shall submit a statement from a NM licensed surveyor of the actual height. No building facade shall be over two stories in height unless the faade includes projecting or recessed portales , balconies, setbacks or other design elements. 
(b)  Contributing, Significant and Landmark Buildings 
State capital outlay projects that involve contributing, significant or landmark structures shall be undertaken in such a manner as to preserve the status of the structure and in accordance with the standards for alterations or additions to contributing, significant or landmark buildings as set forth in Section 14-5.2. Historic materials and architectural features and spaces that embody the status shall be preserved. A proposed alteration or addition shall not cause the structure to lose its status. 
(4)  Demolition of Historic and Landmark Structures; Minimum Maintenance Requirements 
(a)  A request for demolition of an historic or landmark structure shall include the report required in Section 14-3.14(C) and follow the standards set forth in Section 14-3.14(G). If there is a disagreement as to demolition, the procedures set forth in Section 3-22-6(G) NMSA 1978 shall be followed. 
(b)  The minimum maintenance requirements for historic or landmark structures set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(B) shall be met. 
(N)  County and Santa Fe Public Schools Capital Outlay Projects   
(Ord. No. 2010-24 2) 
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  Recognizing the fragility of the city's historic heritage, the purpose of Subsection 14-5.2(N) is to establish a procedure under which the city , the county and Santa Fe Public Schools will collaborate in good faith and work jointly to preserve and protect the historic districts of Santa Fe as well as contributing, significant and landmark structures . 
Preserving and protecting the historic districts as well as contributing, significant and land mark structures promotes economic welfare, preserves property values and attracts businesses and tourists thus benefiting the entire Santa Fe community including the city , the county and Santa Fe public schools. By establishing up front procedures to ensure cooperation between the city and the county and the public schools, unnecessary costs and delays for capital outlay projects will be avoided. Specific design requirements that acknowledge necessary building functions and budgets will result in harmonious yet responsive public projects . 
(b)  County and Santa Fe public schools capital outlay projects in historic districts or involving landmarks located outside historic districts shall be carried out pursuant to the procedures set forth Subsection (2) below and in a manner that is harmonious and generally compatible with the design standards set forth in Subsection (3) below. These procedures and standards apply to new structures and additions to and alterations and demolition of existing buildings. 
(2)  Procedures 
(a)  Before commencing with the design phase of a capital outlay project , the county or the Santa Fe public schools shall consult with the historic districts review board as to the appropriate design standards and how those design standards would impact costs and the operation or manner in which the project will ultimately be expected to function. The historic districts review board shall work collaboratively with the county or the Santa Fe public schools to arrive at compatibility of the project with the design standards, considering reasonable costs and preserving essential functionality. The county or the Santa Fe public schools shall also make every reasonable effort to obtain input from members of identifiable community groups involved in historic preservation in Santa Fe before commencing the design phase. 
(b)  After the design phase and before soliciting a bid or proposal for design-build or lease-purchase for a capital outlay project , the county or the Santa Fe public schools shall submit the plans to the historic districts review board for review. The historic districts review board shall conduct a public meeting to receive public input. Notice of the public meeting shall be given to any identifiable community groups involved in historic preservation in Santa Fe. 
(c)  Within sixty days after the public meeting the historic districts review board, any identifiable historic preservation community group or any other interested party shall communicate recommendations and comments in writing to the county or the Santa Fe public schools. The county or the Santa Fe public schools shall resolve any issues raised and submit the project to the historic districts review board for final approval. 
(3)  Design Standards 
(a)  General Standards 
A county or Santa Fe public schools capital outlay project shall be designed appropriate for the public use and with the intent of achieving harmony with existing buildings by the use of similar materials, color, proportion, and general details to the existing buildings in the applicable streetscape . The applicable streetscape shall be determined as set forth in Subsections 14-5.2(D)(9)(a)(ii) A., B., C., D., and E. A new structure or proposed alteration or addition shall not cause an adjacent contributing, significant or landmark structure to lose its status. Alterations and additions shall be in character with the style, detail and massing of the existing building. The dominating effect is to be that of adobe construction as follows: 
(i)  Roofs 
Roofs, generally, shall be flat with a slight slope and surrounded by a parapet of the same color and material as the walls or of brick. Roofs shall generally not be carried out beyond the line of the walls except to cover an enclosed portal or porch formed by setting back a portion of the wall or to form an exterior portal , the outer edge of the roof being supported by columns, posts or other vertical supports. No cantilevers shall be permitted except over projecting vigas, beams, or wood corbels, or as part of the roof treatment not to exceed an overhang of thirty (30) inches. The restriction as to flat roofs shall not be construed to prevent the construction of skylights or installation of air conditioning devices, or any other necessary roof structures , but such structures other than chimneys, flues, vents and aerials, shall be so placed as to be concealed by the parapet from any public way. 
(ii)  Walls and Windows 
The combined door and window area in any publicly visible faade generally shall not exceed forty percent of the total area of the faade except for doors or windows located under a portal . No door or window in a publicly visible faade shall be located nearer than three (3) feet from the corner of the faade except in circumstances where the unique purpose of the space may warrant special design considerations. Windows, doors and portales on publicly visible portions of the building and walls shall be of one of the old Santa Fe styles. Glass and window trim shall be nonreflective. Windows shall be similar in proportion to the fenestration pattern in the streetscape . Deep window recesses are characteristic. 
(iii)  Finishes 
Construction shall be with materials with which the adobe effect can be simulated provided that the exterior walls are not less than eight (8) inches thick. Mud plaster, hard plaster or other materials simulating adobe , laid on smoothly, is required. No less than eighty percent of the non-fenestration surface area of any publicly visible faade shall be adobe finish, stucco or other material simulating adobe finish. The balance of the publicly visible faade may be of natural stone, wood, brick, tile, terra cotta, or other material. Materials shall convey a sense of substance and permanence. 
(iv)  Colors 
The publicly visible faade of any building and of any adjoining walls generally shall be of one color but no more than three colors and simulate a light earth or dark earth color, matte or dull finish and of relatively smooth texture. However, faade surfaces under portales or inset panels in a wall under a roof overhangs, in church-derived designs, may be painted white or be of contrasting or complimentary colors or have mural decorations. 
(v)  Other Features 
Facades shall be flat, varied by inset portals , exterior portales , projecting vigas or roof beams, canales or water-spouts, flanking buttresses and wooden lintels, architraves and cornices. Depending upon the existing streetscape and if permitted otherwise in this chapter, a portal may cover the entire sidewalk with the columns set at the curb line. 
(vi)  Height 
The height shall be limited to the average height of institutional buildings as measured within the applicable streetscape . When determining an applicable streetscape , vacant lots or parcels shall not be included in the calculation for allowable height. If no institutional buildings are included in the streetscape , the maximum height shall not exceed the average height of existing buildings in the streetscape . The land use department staff shall determine the applicable streetscape as set forth in Subsections 14-5.2(D)(9)(a)(ii) A., B., C., D., and E. Height shall be measured as set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(D)(9)(c)(iii). Heights of existing structures shall be as set forth on the official map of building heights. If the height of an existing building is not given, the county or Santa Fe public schools shall submit a statement from a New Mexico licensed surveyor of the actual height. No building faade shall be over two stories in height unless the faade includes projecting or recessed portales , balconies, setbacks or other design elements. 
(b)  Contributing, Significant and Landmark Buildings 
County or Santa Fe public schools capital outlay projects that involve contributing, significant or landmark structures shall be undertaken in such a manner as to preserve the status of the structure and in accordance with the standards for alterations or additions to contributing, significant or landmark buildings as set forth in Section 14-5.2. Historic materials and architectural features and spaces that embody the status shall be preserved. A proposed alteration or addition shall not cause the structure to lose its status. 
(4)  Demolition of Historic and Landmark Structures ; Minimum Maintenance Requirements 
(a)  A request for demolition of an historic or landmark structure shall comply with the provisions of Section 14-3.14. 
(b)  The minimum maintenance requirements for historic or landmark structures set forth in Subsection 14-5.2(B) shall be met. 
14-5.3 - ARCHAEOLOGICAL REVIEW DISTRICTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  6) 
(A)  Purpose   
To promote the economic, cultural and general welfare of the people of Santa Fe, the governing body deems it essential that the qualities relating to the unique cultural traditions, prehistory and history of Santa Fe, which attract tourists and residents alike, be preserved by establishing three archaeological review districts. The purpose of these districts is to: 
(1)  recognize the value of archaeological resources from all periods of history and prehistory, including prehistoric Native American settlements, Spanish colonization and settlement and settlement and developments under Mexican and American governments; 
(2)  provide the means for identifying archaeological sites by requiring surveys and test excavations , depending on the district, through the development review and construction permit process; 
(3)  provide the means by which archaeological sites may be evaluated for their potential contribution to cultural, educational, historic, economic and scientific concerns; 
(4)  establish a procedure for treatment of archaeological resources on private and public land, thereby mitigating the information loss from the sometimes unavoidable destruction of archaeological resources and providing for the treatment of those resources that can be preserved; and 
(5)  provide methods for the emergency treatment of archaeological resources found through unexpected discovery. 
(B)  Application to State and Its Agencies, Political Subdivisions or Instrumentalities   
Pursuant to Sections 3-22-1 through 3-22-6 NMSA 1978 (Historic Districts and Landmarks), the provisions of this section apply to the state and its agencies, political subdivisions and instrumentalities, as well as to any other entity or activity in the archaeological review districts. 
(C)  Establishment of Districts; Boundaries   
(1)  Districts Established 
Three archaeological review districts are established, to be known as the historic downtown, the river and trails and the suburban archaeological review districts. 
(2)  Boundaries 
The boundaries of the historic downtown, the river and trail and the suburban archaeological review districts are as shown on the official zoning map. The boundaries are determined by the following criteria: 
(a)  Historic Downtown Archaeological Review District 
The center of Santa Fe since 1610 and occupied by Native Americans prior to that time, land within the historic downtown archaeological review district has a high potential of containing significant cultural remains and is part of the historic core of Santa Fe; 
(b)  River and Trails Archaeological Review District 
An area of prehistoric Native American occupation, settled by early Spanish colonists, and being primary transportation routes important to the settlement of Santa Fe, the river and trails archaeological review district has a high potential of containing significant cultural remains and is part of the Santa Fe river floodplain , escarpment, or ridges above the escarpment, and land adjacent to those areas, and contains historic trails such as Santa Fe Trail, Galisteo Road and Agua Fria; 
(c)  Suburban Archaeological Review District 
Land within the suburban archaeological review district has a moderate potential of containing significant cultural remains and is not a part of the historic downtown or river and trails archaeological review districts. 
(3)  Map Revisions 
The archaeological review districts may be revised upon a recommendation of the archaeological review committee as approved by the governing body . In revising the district boundaries the committee shall follow the criteria set forth in Subsection 14-5.3(C)(2). 
(D)  Archaeological Clearance Permit Required   
An archaeological clearance permit is required for certain types of development activity within the archaeological review districts, as described in Section 14-3.13. (Ord. No. 2014-31  9) 
14-5.4 - ARTS AND CRAFTS DISTRICT 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  6) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
It is the intent of the arts and crafts (AC) district to allow arts and crafts and other related commercial uses in eligible underlying districts. Within this overlay district, residential and limited office and retail commercial uses are intermixed with small arts and crafts shops, studios and galleries where the goods traded are custom-produced in small quantities and are often one of a kind; where the arts or crafts are taught to small numbers of people; or where small numbers of persons are engaged in arts and crafts activities. 
(B)  Land Eligible   
An AC district may overlay any residential district or any portion of a residential district. 
(C)  Uses   
The allowed principal uses, accessory uses, and special exceptions of the AC district are the same as the underlying zoning district with the addition of those uses specified in the corresponding column in Table 14-6.1-1 (Permitted Uses). 
(D)  Standards   
The development and design standards within the AC district are the same as the underlying zoning district; however no more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of the gross floor area of any building may be used for nonresidential purposes. 
14-5.5 - HIGHWAY CORRIDOR PROTECTION DISTRICTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  6) 
(A)  SCHC South Central Highway Corridor Protection District   
(1)  Purpose and Intent 
Because openness, quiet and continuity adjoining the highway corridors in the south central section of the city is considered a special asset that should be retained as the area develops, it is the intent of the SCHC district to: 
(a)  establish a clear sense of visual openness and continuity of development , as seen from major highway entrances to Santa Fe; 
(b)  protect the openness and continuity of the existing landscape by retaining and planting native and other drought-tolerant, low maintenance trees, shrubs and groundcovers; 
(c)  ensure that landscaping provides an appropriate and attractive visual buffer, compatible with neighborhood landscaping character; conserves water by use of storm water collection and drip irrigation systems; and screens transformers and loading areas or outdoor storage; 
(d)  encourage the use of architectural style and scale that is representative of Santa Fe; and 
(e)  preserve clean air and a sense of quiet and reduce the potential negative impacts of noise, air pollution, lights, movement of cars, activities on site or other nuisances on adjoining properties . 
(2)  Boundaries 
(a)  The SCHC district encompasses the land within six hundred feet of the edge of the right-of-way on both sides of the following streets designated as special review districts in the general plan and shown on the official zoning map in the south central section of Santa Fe: St. Michael's Drive; Old Pecos Trail; St. Francis Drive; Rodeo Road; and Interstate 25 and its frontage roads. 
(b)  persons with property divided by the SCHC district boundary are required to comply with the SCHC district standards only for that segment of the property within the boundary. In cases where the rear lot line depth exceeds the six hundred (600) foot boundary, property owners have the right to petition the governing body in the form of a rezoning application at any time for inclusion of the remainder of their property in the SCHC district. 
(3)  Uses 
The uses allowed in this district are the same as those allowed in the underlying district. 
(4)  Standards 
The standards applicable to development within the SCHC district are the same as the underlying zoning district and, in addition, any new development in the SCHC district shall comply with this paragraph. 
(a)  Development and Design Standards 
(i)  Density - 
The density for residential development shall be the same as in the underlying district, but in no case shall it exceed a maximum density of twenty-one units per acre; 
(ii)  Height 
The maximum height of structures shall be twenty-five (25) feet, not including a parapet; 
(iii)  Setback or yard 
The minimum building setback or yard from the edge of the right-of-way shall be fifty (50) feet except that the minimum building setback from Old Pecos Trail between I-25 and St. Michael's Drive shall be seventy-five (75) feet; and 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  10) 
(iv)  Floor area ratio 
The maximum floor area ratio for office uses allowed in the district is: 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  11) 
TABLE 14-5.5-1: Maximum Floor Area Ratio Use Building Size Maximum Ratio Professional and 
Other Office One story 0.25 Two story 0.35 Medical 
Office One story 0.20 Two story 0.30  
(b)  Landscaping Standards 
(i)  existing landscaping - to the greatest extent possible, existing natural landscaping shall not be disturbed within twenty-five feet of the property line that adjoins the street right-of-way . This area shall be labeled as open space setback . No structures or parking are allowed in this setback ; 
(ii)  plant material - plant material shall be provided in the open space setback where that area has been disturbed and shall be provided for surrounding buildings and parking areas at a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
(iii)  parking and loading area screening - If parking is provided in the required front yard , it shall be effectively screened by earth berms or landscaping that shall be at least four (4) feet above parking lot grade . Loading areas shall be screened and located on side or rear yards ; 
(iv)  arroyos/ floodplains - In order to preserve natural landscaping on the banks of the arroyos, an undisturbed setback of ten feet shall be retained next to the major arroyos where one percent chance flood events have been recorded; 
(v)  open space - for any nonresidential permitted use, a minimum of thirty-five percent of the lot and for any residential permitted use, a minimum of fifty percent of the lot shall be open space ; and 
(vi)  outdoor storage - outdoor storage shall not be allowed. 
(c)  Additional standards 
When nonresidential uses abut R-1 through R-7 residential densities : 
(i)  all of the structures for the nonresidential uses shall be set back fifty (50) feet from the residential property line and a twenty-five (25) foot landscape buffer meeting the standards set forth in Subsection 14-5.5(A)(4)(b) shall be located between the residential and nonresidential uses; or 
(ii)  all of the structures for the nonresidential uses shall have a twenty-five (25) foot landscape buffer meeting the standards set forth in Subsection 14-5.5(A)(4)(b) and a masonry wall or a fence as approved by the land use director located between the residential and nonresidential uses. 
(B)  CRHC Cerrillos Road Highway Corridor Protection District   
(1)  Purpose and Intent 
Cerrillos Road is one of Santa Fe's busiest thoroughfares, one of Santa Fe's primary entranceways, and one of the community's major commercial strips. For these reasons, it is the purpose and intent of the CRHC district to assure that Cerrillos Road: 
(a)  accommodates, in a safe and efficient manner, both through and local traffic; 
(b)  provides for a visually attractive and aesthetically appropriate introduction to Santa Fe; 
(c)  allows for clear identification of, and easy access to, all commercial and institutional establishments; 
(d)  provides for a gradual transition between the rural character of the county and the urban character of the city ; and 
(e)  accentuates, to the greatest extent possible, architecture and landscaping rather than parking lots and commercial signage. 
(2)  Boundaries 
The CRHC district begins at the intersection of Cerrillos Road and St. Francis Drive and extends southwest along Cerrillos road to the southern city limits. The provisions of this section apply to all legal lots of record that directly abut Cerrillos Road right-of-way . The CRHC district is further subdivided into the following four zones: 
(a)  CRHC Zone One, St. Francis Drive to St. Michael's Drive; 
(b)  CRHC Zone Two, St. Michael's Drive to Calle del Cielo; 
(c)  CRHC Zone Three, Calle del Cielo to Airport Road; and 
(d)  CRHC Zone Four, Airport Road to the southern city limits. 
(3)  Uses 
The uses permitted in the CRHC district are the same as those permitted in the underlying district. 
(4)  Standards 
The standards in the CRHC district are the same as those in the underlying district with the addition of the following standards that apply to all new development and not, unless otherwise indicated, to existing buildings and structures : 
(a)  Development and Design Standards 
(i)  Lot Depth 
No new legal lots of record may be created abutting Cerrillos Road right-of-way having depth of less than seventy-five (75) feet in CRHC zone one, one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in CRHC zone two, one hundred seventy-five (175) feet in CRHC zone three and two hundred twenty-five (225) feet in CRHC zone four; 
(ii)  Height 
The maximum height of structures in the CRHC district shall be that allowed in the underlying district, but in no case shall the height of any portion of a building exceed forty-five (45) feet or exceed the distance which that portion of the building is set back from the property line abutting Cerrillos Road right-of-way ; 
(iii)  Setbacks and Yards 
The minimum building setback or yard , as measured from any property line abutting Cerrillos Road right-of-way , shall be fifteen (15) feet in CRHC zone one, twenty-five (25) feet in CRHC zone two, thirty-five (35) feet in CRHC zone three and forty-five (45) feet in CRHC zone four or twenty percent of a lot's depth, whichever is less. Setback requirements for other front yards shall be one-half the depth required for front yards in the underlying zoning district; and 
(iv)  Lot Coverage 
The maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures in the CRHC district shall be that allowed by the underlying zoning district, but in no case greater than sixty percent. The areas of all buildings and structures , both existing and new, shall be included in the calculation of maximum lot coverage. 
(b)  Landscaping Standards 
(i)  Frontage Landscaping 
There shall be a frontage landscaping strip within the front property line abutting and parallel to Cerrillos Road right-of-way with a minimum depth of ten (10) feet in CRHC zone one, fifteen (15) feet in CRHC zone two, twenty (20) feet in CRHC zone three and twenty-five (25) feet in CRHC zone four. Where an adjacent lot in the same CRHC zone has a frontage landscaping strip of greater depth, the required frontage landscaping strip depth of the property at issue shall match the adjacent lot's frontage landscaping strip depth. In no case, however, shall the required frontage landscaping strip depth exceed fifteen (15) feet in CRHC zone one, twenty-five (25) feet in CRHC zone two, thirty-five (35) feet in CRHC zone three and forty-five (45) feet in CRHC zone four, nor shall it exceed twenty percent of a lot's depth; and 
(ii)  Screening 
Any new loading docks, storage facilities or trash disposal areas located in the CRHC district shall either be located at the rear of the property or be entirely screened from public view by an opaque wall or fence of no less than six (6) feet in height. 
(C)  Airport Road Overlay District   
(Ord. No. 2013-1  2) 
(1)  Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of the Airport Road Overlay District is to: 
(a)  Establish an attractive, street-oriented character on this multi-use corridor to encourage development and redevelopment on Airport Road; 
(b)  Create a unique sense of place and identity for this major arterial that serves the southwest part of the city; 
(c)  Promote a healthy and safe environment through the development of walkable neighborhoods, less dependence on the automobile, street-oriented building design; and the reduction of crime, nuisances, and public health harms associated with alcohol sales and advertising; 
(d)  Incentivize certain uses that are absent or deficient on Airport Road. 
(Ord. # 2017-24 ,  1) 
(2)  Boundaries 
The Airport Road Overlay District begins at the intersection of Airport Road and NM 599 and extends east along Airport Road to the intersection of Airport Road and Cerrillos Road. The provisions of this Section apply to all legal lots of record that directly abut the Airport Road right-of-way . 
(3)  Applicability 
(a)  The provisions of this subsection do not apply to single family dwellings and detached multiple-family dwellings except as provided in Subsections 14-5.5(C)(5)(k) and 14-5.5(C)(7)(e). 
(b)  Additions to or remodeling of existing buildings shall comply with the provisions of this subsection to the extent practical or feasible as determined by the land use director. 
(Ord. # 2018-21 ,  1) 
(4)  Standards 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified, permitted uses and development standards within the Airport Road Overlay District shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning district of a property. 
(b)  The land use director may permit alternate means of compliance with the provisions of this subsection as provided in Section 14-2.11(C). 
(c)  In the event of conflicts between the requirements of this subsection and platted building setbacks or existing easements, the requirements of this subsection shall apply. 
(5)  Site Design, Circulation and Parking 
(a)  New buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be oriented so that their primary faades face Airport Road or to integral courtyards that shall face Airport Road. 
(b)  No more than one single-loaded row of parking is permitted adjacent to Airport Road. 
(c)  Perimeter screening of parking lots shall be in accordance with Section 14-8.4(I)(2) except that screening walls , hedges or berms shall not exceed four (4) feet at maturity and shall be provided with openings adjacent to the Airport Road right-of-way to allow multiple points of pedestrian access to Airport Road. 
(d)  Sidewalks adjacent to Airport Road shall be provided in accordance with Section 14-9.2. 
(e)  Direct vehicular access to Airport Road shall be prohibited where feasible as determined by the land use director in consultation with the public works director. 
(f)  New buildings shall have accessible pedestrian connections to Airport Road. 
(g)  Loading docks shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and shall be fully screened so that the loading dock is not visible from Airport Road. The screening shall be integrated with the building architecture, materials and construction. 
(h)  Vehicular access between and among adjacent lots shall be provided where feasible as determined by the land use director . 
(i)  Electrical transformers and water system backflow preventer cabinets shall be screened from view of public roadways and sidewalks by walled enclosures or landscape screening . Water system backflow preventer cabinets and wall -mounted utility boxes shall be painted the same color as the closest building on site. 
(j)  New development of the following categories of use, as defined in Table 14-6.1-1, shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the Airport Road right-of-way and shall be separated from the Airport Road right-of-way by development not containing these uses: 
(i)  Electrical substations or switching substations 
(ii)  Sexually Oriented Businesses 
(iii)  Storage 
(iv)  Telecommunications towers , but not tower alternatives 
(v)  Vehicles and Equipment 
(vi)  Industrial 
(vii)  Outdoor Storage 
(viii)  Warehouse and Freight Movement 
(k)  The following provisions shall apply to new development of single family dwellings and detached multiple-family dwellings on lots adjacent to the Airport Road right-of-way : 
(i)  Buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the Airport Road right-of-way . 
(ii)  A six (6) foot high, color-coated, masonry wall shall be constructed along the entire length of the common property line at the Airport Road right-of-way . 
(Ord. # 2017-24 ,  2; Ord. # 2018-21 ,  2) 
(6)  Architecture 
In addition to requirements found in Section 14-8.7 SFCC 1987, Architectural Design Review, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  The primary entrance to any new building shall be visible from Airport Road. 
(b)  The finished floor elevation of the primary entrance to any new building shall not be three (3) feet higher or lower than the elevation of the adjacent sidewalk within the Airport Road right-of-way . 
(c)  Lot configuration permitting, the longest faade of all new buildings shall be aligned with Airport Road. 
(d)  No garage doors shall face Airport Road. 
(e)  The square footage of retail building faades that face Airport Road or any abutting street shall be comprised of between thirty percent and sixty percent double pane windows. Storefront glazing systems may be used to meet this requirement and shall not exceed fifty percent of the faade . 
(f)  A faade exceeding one hundred (100) feet, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses of at least twenty-four (24) inches in depth encompassing at least fifty percent of the faade length. 
(g)  A faade exceeding one hundred (100) feet, measured horizontally, shall be of at least two different colors or materials with each color or material applied to an entire projection or recess. 
(h)  Except when covered by a portal or other permanent shade structure , windows shall be recessed a minimum of eight (8) inches. 
(i)  With the exception of buildings constructed for industrial uses in I-1 and 1-2 zoning districts, no portion of any building wall facing Airport Road or any street shall extend more than twenty (20) feet, measured horizontally, without openings. Doors, windows or display windows shall be considered openings. 
(j)  Rooftop equipment shall be fully screened so that the equipment is not visible from the public right-of-way . The screening shall be integrated with the building architecture, materials and construction. Rooftop solar equipment shall be screened to the extent that the screening does not impair the performance of the solar equipment. 
(k)  Drive-through and drive-in facilities shall be located to the rear of buildings . 
(l)  Enclosures required for trash receptacles and compactors shall be: (Ord. No. 2013-17  1) 
(i)  located to the rear of buildings ; and 
(ii)  sized to include commercial recycling space sufficient to accommodate the commercial recycling generated by a development . 
(7)  Landscaping Standards 
In addition to requirements found in Section 14-8.4 SFCC 1987, Landscape and Site Design, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  On-site storm water detention or retention facilities: 
(i)  shall be integrated with the required landscaping on the site; 
(ii)  when located adjacent to the Airport Road right-of-way , shall not be wider than ten (10) feet measured perpendicular to the Airport Road right-of-way ; and 
(iii)  shall not create a physical barrier to pedestrian access from the Airport Road right-of-way to the site. 
(b)  Street trees shall be planted at a minimum of twenty (20) feet on-center adjacent to the Airport Road property line. Street trees shall be two and one half (21/2) inches minimum caliper at time of planting and a minimum mature height of thirty (30) feet. The location and minimum mature height of street trees may be adjusted where conflicts with overhead utility lines exist. 
(c)  A minimum of thirty percent of required plant material shall be evergreen. 
(d)  The area between the Airport Road curb and the Airport Road sidewalk adjacent to the development site shall be landscaped as part of the required landscaping of the development site. 
(e)  The following provisions shall apply to new development of single-family dwellings and detached multiple-family dwellings on lots adjacent to the Airport Road right-of-way : 
(i)  The twenty (20) foot setback area between buildings and the Airport Road right-of-way shall be planted with trees in accordance with Subsection 14-5.5(C)(7)(b). Trees shall be maintained and replaced when necessary by the property owner . 
(Ord. # 2018-21 ,  3) 
(8)  Signage 
In addition to the requirements found in Section 14-8.10 SFCC 1987, Signs, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Pole-mounted signs are prohibited. 
(b)  Monument signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(c)  Signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way . 
(d)  Wall or building-mounted signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet. 
(e)  Roof-mounted signs are prohibited. 
(9)  Site Furnishings 
(a)  A minimum of one bench per five thousand (5000) gross square feet of building is required on the site and shall be located adjacent to the Airport Road sidewalk, or to the primary building entrance, or to a public or private amenity provided by the development. 
(b)  At least one bench per development shall be shaded by a tree or a shade structure. 
(c)  Where multiple benches are required, a trash receptacle shall be provided adjacent to one of the benches. 
(d)  All site furnishings on a development site, including bicycle racks, benches, trash receptacles and light fixtures shall be of a coordinated design style and color. 
(10)  Outdoor Lighting 
In addition to compliance with Section 14-8.9 SFCC 1987, Outdoor Lighting, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Pole-mounted lights shall not exceed twenty feet in height. 
(b)  Lamps of building -mounted light fixtures shall not be placed more than twelve (12) feet above the exterior grade at the perimeter of the building . 
(11)  Incentives 
(a)  Fee Incentives 
Development of the following uses are exempt from the payment of construction permit fees, plan review fees, and development review fees as set by Resolution of the governing body, as may be amended from time to time, and are exempt from the payment of impact fees in accordance with Subsection 14-8.14(D): 
(i)  Grocery stores; 
(ii)  Farmer's markets; 
(iii)  Medical practitioners including physicians, dentists, chiropractors, alternative medicine providers and clinics; 
(iv)  Schools, day-care centers for youth or adults, youth centers; and 
(v)  Recreational facilities including martial arts studios, dance studios, gymnasiums, fitness centers, aquatic centers, sports centers and miniature golf courses; and 
(vi)  Restaurants without drive-through or drive-up service, including bakeries, coffee shops, and other shops selling food for on-site or take-away consumption, provided that food and beverage services constitute the primary use of the establishment. 
(b)  Public Art; Active Play Opportunities 
Applicants for a permit for new construction, redevelopment or additions who provide public art or active play opportunities accessible to the public shall have their total construction permit fees reduced in an amount equal to the cost of the public art or active play amenity provided. 
(c)  Community Gardens and Orchards 
Applicants for a permit for new construction, redevelopment or additions to a multi-family housing development who provide a community garden or orchard space for use of the residents of the development shall have their total construction permit fees reduced in an amount equal to the cost of the community garden provided. 
(d)  Review 
This subsection 14-5.5(C)(11) shall be reviewed by the governing body five (5) years after the date of its adoption. 
(Ord. # 2017-24 ,  3) 
(12)  Alcoholic Beverage Sales Activities 
In addition to the provisions of Chapter IV SFCC 1987, Alcoholic Beverages, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  New alcoholic beverage sales activities established after January 26, 2013 are prohibited in the following locations: 
(i)  Within five hundred (500) feet of an existing alcoholic beverage sales activity ; and 
(ii)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any of the following: 
A.  An accredited public or private elementary, middle, or high school; 
B.  A public park, playground or recreational area; 
C.  A nonprofit youth facility; 
D.  A place of religious assembly ; 
E.  A hospital ; 
F.  An alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment facility; or 
G.  A county social service office. 
For the purposes of this subsection, all measurements taken in order to determine the location of new alcoholic beverage sales activity shall be the shortest straight-line distance from the property line of the alcoholic beverage sales activity to the property line of any of the above locations or other alcoholic beverage sales activities . 
(iii)  A location where the new alcoholic beverage sales activity would lead to the grouping of more than four alcoholic beverage sales activities within a five hundred (500) foot radius from the new alcoholic beverage sales activity . 
(b)  New alcoholic beverage sales activities established after January 26, 2013, where alcoholic beverages are sold in unbroken packages for offsite consumption and not for resale off the licensed premises and where alcoholic beverage sales comprise less than sixty percent of total sales of a business shall comply with the following regulations: 
(i)  All alcoholic beverages shall be consolidated in an alcoholic beverage display area located within a clearly designated and marked area of the licensed premises. No alcoholic beverages may be displayed or stored outside the designated alcoholic beverage display area ; and 
A.  Signs saying: "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES AREA - NO ONE UNDER 21 UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY PARENT, LEGAL GUARDIAN OR ADULT SPOUSE" shall be conspicuously posted around the boundaries of the alcoholic beverage display area ; 
B.  An employee of the alcoholic beverage licensee who is at least twenty-one years of age and has a valid State of New Mexico alcohol server permit shall be responsible for the overall supervision of both the receiving and sale of alcoholic beverages , including supervision of the alcoholic beverage display area . For purposes of this subsection, "supervision" means the ability to observe who enters and leaves the alcoholic beverage display area and means actively checking identification of those who may be under the age of twenty-one years who attempt to enter the alcoholic beverage display area . The alcoholic beverage licensee shall designate employees within the licensed premises to serve in this capacity as part of their job description and shall ensure that such a designated employee is on duty on the licensed premises during alcoholic beverage sales hours; and 
C.  Small displays of chips, snacks, or similar items may be displayed for sale in the alcoholic beverage display area so long as those items are also available in other parts of the licensed premises outside the alcoholic beverage display area . Except for such small displays, displays of food or other merchandise that would require customers to enter the alcoholic beverage display area for food or other merchandise are not permitted; or 
(ii)  Alternatively, alcoholic beverages shall be stored and displayed in such a manner that only the alcoholic beverage licensee's employees have access to the alcoholic beverages , and the alcoholic beverage licensee's employees shall deliver the alcoholic beverages to customers only at the point of sale; and 
(iii)  The floor plan of the licensed premises shall be submitted to the land use director for review and approval. The land use director has the authority to require changes to the floor plan. 
A.  The floor plan shall show the area where the alcoholic beverages are displayed within the licensed premises or show that only the alcoholic beverage licensee's employees have access to the alcoholic beverages . 
B.  The alcoholic beverage licensee shall notify the land use director at least seven business days prior to making any changes to the alcoholic beverage display area of the floor plan. 
(c)  Except for paragraph (iv), below, all alcoholic beverage sales activities shall comply with the following provisions after January 26, 2013: (Ord. No. 2013-17  2) 
(i)  No more than thirty-three percent of the square footage of the windows and clear doors of an alcoholic beverage retail outlet may bear advertising or signs of any sort, and all advertising and signage shall be placed and maintained in a manner that ensures that law enforcement personnel have a clear and unobstructed view of the interior of the premises, including the area in which the cash registers are maintained, from the exterior public sidewalk or entrance to the premises. This requirement does not apply to premises where there are no windows, or where existing windows are located at a height that precludes a view of the interior of the premises by a person standing outside the premises. 
(ii)  Outdoor advertising of alcoholic beverages , including permanent or temporary signs visible from outside a building , is prohibited within five hundred (500) feet of any of the following: 
A.  A public or private elementary, middle, or high school; 
B.  A public park, playground or recreational area; 
C.  A nonprofit youth facility; 
D.  A place of religious assembly ; 
E.  A hospital ; 
F.  An alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment facility; or 
G.  A county social service office. 
The provisions of this Subsection 14-5.5(C)(12)(c)(ii) do not apply to building-mounted signs legally permitted prior to January 26, 2013. 
(iii)  A restaurant with a beer and wine license may post outside its building but only on the property occupied by the restaurant, a copy of its menu, including beer and wine offered and their prices, in type no larger than any menu posted or provided to patrons inside the restaurant. 
(iv)  Unless contained in packages of four or more, as delivered by the distributor, single serving containers of alcoholic beverages , in sizes of eight ounces or less, shall not be sold or offered for sale. The provisions of this Subsection 14 5.5(C)(12)(c)(iv) shall be effective May 26, 2013. 
(D)  Midtown Local Innovation Corridor (Midtown LINC) Overlay District   
(Ord. No. 2016-39  1) 
(1)  Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of the Midtown Local Innovation Corridor (LINC) Overlay District is to: 
(a)  Strengthen and animate the built environment and the business and population links within the demographic and geographic center of the city between the existing employment centers of the Santa Fe University of Art and Design and surrounding uses to the west and the Christus St. Vincent Regional Medical Center and related medical uses to the east; 
(b)  Incentivize multi-family residential development, complementary non-residential uses, and an enlivened, street-oriented pedestrian environment by freeing development capacity of existing under-developed land and buildings for these targeted uses, while allowing existing uses to continue as redevelopment occurs; 
(c)  Allow for innovative development and redevelopment of the district while providing buffering between the district and existing residential development outside of the district by the application of amended land development regulations and fees and by establishing conditions precedent for future infrastructure enhancements and the application of other redevelopment and financing tools; 
(d)  Promote a more healthy, safe, and enjoyable environment within the city's midtown area through the enhancement of pedestrian and bicycle accessibility and safety, landscaping and other street-related amenities and the eventual reduction of traffic speeds and provision of on-street parking, bicycle lanes, and improved crosswalks; and 
(e)  Provide flexibility in sign design and location so as to maintain effective communication, business identification and wayfinding for existing buildings whose visibility may be reduced by new development. 
(2)  Boundaries 
The Midtown LINC Overlay District includes land in the vicinity of the St. Michael's Drive right-of-way from the eastern edge of the Cerrillos Road right-of-way to the western edge of the St. Francis Drive right-of-way , and additional land in the vicinity of the campus of the Santa Fe University of Art and Design as shown on the Midtown LINC Overlay District Map. 
Editor's Note: The Midtown LINC Overlay District Map can be found as Exhibit E, in the Appendix of Chapter 14, Land Development. 
(3)  Applicability 
(a)  The provisions of this Subsection 14-5.5(D) apply to all land within the boundaries of the Midtown LINC Overlay District. 
(b)  New development shall comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
(c)  Alterations to existing structures shall comply with the provisions of this subsection to the extent practical or feasible as determined by the land use director . 
(4)  Permitted Uses; Qualifying Projects 
(a)  Permitted and Prohibited Uses 
Permitted uses and structures within the Midtown LINC Overlay District are the same as those permitted in underlying zoning districts except as provided in Table 14-5.5-2 and as permitted for qualifying projects as defined in this subsection. 
Table 14-5.5-2: Midtown LINC Overlay District - Additional Permitted & Prohibited Uses 
Table 14-5.5-2: Midtown LINC Overlay District - Additional Permitted & Prohibited Uses 
(See Note 1) ADDITIONAL USES PROHIBITED USES CATEGORY Specific Use CATEGORY Specific Use RESIDENTIAL Dwellings, Multiple-family RESIDENTIAL Mobile homes; Mobile home parks COMMERCIAL Sexually Oriented Businesses Vehicles and Equipment (2) Outdoor Storage Storage (3) Industrial (4) Warehouse & Freight Movement NOTES: 1. Uses listed are additions to, or deletions from, the list of otherwise permitted uses within underlying zoning districts. See Table 14-6.1-1 for a complete listing of use categories and permitted uses per underlying zoning district. See Table 14-5.5-4 for additional uses permitted if associated with a qualifying project . 2. Parking lots and garages are permitted as accessory uses when associated with a qualifying project . 3. Individual storage areas enclosed within a building and that are part of a qualifying residential project are permitted. 4. Research, experimental and testing laboratories are permitted.  
(b)  Qualifying Projects 
As used in this Subsection 14-5.5(D): 
(i)  Qualifying project means a new development within the Midtown LINC Overlay District that complies with the requirements of this Subsection 14-5.5(D) and that is either a qualifying residential project or a qualifying non-residential project as defined in this subsection. 
(ii)  Qualifying residential project means a new development that: (a) is composed solely of new multiple-family dwellings , or (b) results in a development that is a mix of primarily new multiple-family dwellings and any lesser amount and combination of the eligible non-residential uses listed in Table 14-5.5-3 as measured by gross floor area . 
(iii)  Qualifying non-residential project means a new development that is composed of a new building or buildings , or of alterations to an existing building or buildings , for the eligible uses identified in Table 14-5.5-3. 
(iv)  Development projects not meeting the definitions of this Subsection 14-5.5(D)(4)(b) are permitted as provided in Subsection 14-5.5(D) but are not qualifying projects . 
(v)  The land use director may adopt submittal requirements and review policies in accordance with Subsection 14-2.11(B) as necessary to verify that qualifying projects meet the requirements of this Subsection 14-5.5(D). 
Table 14-5.5-3: Midtown LINC Overlay District - Non-Residential Uses Eligible for Qualifying Projects 
Table 14-5.5-3: Midtown LINC Overlay District - Non-Residential Uses Eligible forQualifying Projects USE CATEGORIES (See Note 1) For Inclusion in Qualifying Residential Projects As Qualifying Non-Residential Projects Pre-Schools, Daycare for Infants & Children (All) X X Educational (All; including Libraries) X X Community Centers & Institutions (All) X X Parks and Open Space (All) (2) X X Arts Activities (All) X X Assembly X Food and Beverage (All) (3) X X Medical (All) X X Public Transportation X Recreation and Entertainment (All) X X Retail Sales and Services (All) X X (8) Service Establishments (All) X X Storage (4) X Vehicles and Equipment (5) X Industrial (6) X X Manufacturing and Production (7) X X NOTES: 1. Eligible uses listed in this table are permitted uses when part of a qualifying project . See Table 14-6.1-1 for a complete listing of use categories and permitted uses in underlying zoning districts. 2. Except cemeteries, mausoleums & columbariums. 3. Except restaurants with drive-through/drive-up service. 4. Only individual storage areas completely enclosed within a building and that are intended to serve the associated qualifying residential project . 5. Only parking lots and garages that are intended to serve the associated qualifying project . 6. Research, experimental and testing laboratories only. 7. Light assembly and manufacturing (including "maker" spaces) only. 8. Neighborhood grocery stores and laundromats only.  
(5)  General Standards 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in this Subsection 14-5.5(D), permitted uses and development standards within the Midtown LINC shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning district of a property. 
(b)  The land use director may permit alternate means of compliance with the provisions of this subsection as provided in Subsection 14-2.11(C). 
(c)  In the event of conflicts between the requirements of this Subsection 14-5.5(D) and the requirements of underlying zoning districts, platted building setbacks or existing easements, the requirements of this subsection shall apply. 
(6)  Building Envelope Standards and Measurements 
Table 14-5.5-4: Midtown LINC Overlay District - Table of Dimensional Standards 
Table 14-5.5-4: Table of Dimensional Standards for the Midtown LINC Overlay District DEVELOPMENT TYPE Max. Gross Density (Dwelling units/Acre) Min. Lot Size Max. Height of Structures (Feet) (1) Yard Requirements (Feet) Max. Lot Coverage (%) Min. Required Open Space Qualifying
Residential
Projects 
(As defined in Subsection 14-5.5(D)) N/A Same as C-2 District 52 (2) Minimum 
Street: 0 (3) 
Side: 5 
Rear: 10 (4) 
Maximum 
Street: 5 (5) None Same as C-2 District 
(See 14-7.5(D)) All Other Development Same as 
C-2 
District Same as 
C-2 
District Per Underlying District Standards; Santa Fe University of Art and Design Campus (SFUAD): 62 Per Underlying District Standards except as noted below 
Maximum Street: 
5 (3, 5) Per Underlying District Standards Per Underlying District Standards NOTES: 1. Elevator "over-runs" and renewable energy generating equipment less than ten (10) feet high (such as solar photovoltaic panels and wind turbines) mounted on buildings shall not be included in the calculated height of a building. 2. Maximum height of structures fifty-two (52) feet, except where any portion of a structure associated with a qualifying residential project will be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of an existing residential development located outside of the Midtown LINC Overlay District, in which case the maximum height of a structure associated with a qualifying residential project within the above limits shall be thirty-eight (38) feet, or, where a structure is also located within the South Central Highway Corridor Protection District (SCHC), in which case the maximum height of a structure shall conform to the requirements of the SCHC district, Subsection 14-5.5(A). 3. Except that 4th stories along street-frontage faades shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the story below. 4. Rear yard ten (10) feet, except at the rear of a lot abutting an existing residential development, in which case there shall be a required rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 5. Maximum Street yard five (5) feet, except that: (a) up to thirty (30) percent of a street-frontage faade may be set back greater than 5 feet for entryways and integral courtyards, or to accommodate other aspects of a building's design, and (b) street-frontage faades may be set back greater than five (5) feet in locations where existing utility easements prevent compliance with this requirement.  
(7)  Site Design, Circulation and Parking 
(a)  New buildings or additions to existing buildings shall be oriented so that their primary faades face St. Michael's Drive, Cerrillos Road, or other street frontages as applicable. 
(b)  Perimeter screening of parking areas shall be in accordance with Subsection 14-8.4(I)(2) except that screening walls, hedges or berms shall not exceed four feet at maturity and shall be provided with multiple openings adjacent to street frontages to maximize of pedestrian permeability between street sidewalks and parking areas. 
(c)  Sidewalks along the street frontages of St. Michael's Drive and Cerrillos Road shall be provided in accordance with Section 14-9.2(E), Sidewalks, and shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide. Where existing sidewalks are widened to meet this requirement, the widening shall occur on the building side of the existing sidewalk. 
(d)  Vehicular access shall be from the side or rear of the lot to the extent possible. 
(e)  Vehicular access between and among adjacent lots shall be provided where possible. 
(f)  New buildings shall have accessible pedestrian connections to St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road as applicable. Building entrances shall have the same general elevation as the street frontage sidewalks adjacent to the entrance. Site grading shall not result in the need for steps or ramps from the street frontage sidewalk to the building . Visual and physical barriers to building entrances shall be minimized. 
(g)  Sidewalks and other pedestrian pathways connecting buildings to the street and to parking areas shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide and shall be clearly defined. 
(h)  Loading docks shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and shall be fully screened so that the loading dock is not visible from St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road as applicable. The screening shall be integrated with the building architecture, materials and construction. 
(i)  Electrical transformers and trash enclosures shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and shall be screened from view of public roadways and sidewalks by walled enclosures or landscape screening . Wall -mounted utility boxes shall be painted the same color as the nearest building on site. 
(j)  Water system backflow preventers shall be located inside buildings . Where it is not feasible to locate a water system backflow preventer inside a building , the backflow preventer shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and shall be screened from view of adjacent public roadways and sidewalks by walled enclosures or landscape screening . 
(k)  The amount of off-street bicycle parking required by Subsection 14-8.6(E) shall be increased by twenty-five (25) percent. 
(8)  Architecture 
In addition to the requirements of Section 14-8.7, Architectural Design Review, the following provisions shall apply. 
(a)  Lot configuration and available street frontage permitting, the longest faade of all new buildings on lots abutting St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road shall be aligned parallel with the street frontage of St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road as applicable. 
(b)  The primary entrance to any new building on a lot abutting St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road shall be visible from St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road as applicable. 
(c)  Building walls along street frontages shall not extend more than twenty feet, measured horizontally, without openings. Doors, windows or display windows shall be considered openings. 
(d)  Doors intended for vehicular access to buildings on lots abutting St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road shall not face St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road as applicable. 
(e)  Except as noted in this subsection, rooftop equipment shall be fully screened so that the equipment is not visible from the adjacent public rights-of-way . Screening shall be integrated with the associated building's architecture, materials and construction. Screening of renewable energy generating equipment (such as solar photovoltaic panels and wind turbines) mounted on buildings is not required; however such equipment shall be incorporated into the architectural design of a building to the extent possible. 
(9)  Landscaping Standards 
In addition to the requirements found in Section 14-8.4, Landscape and Site Design, the following provisions shall apply. 
(a)  On-site storm water detention or retention facilities shall be located underground unless constructed as part of parks or open space, or unless constructed as part of an active water harvesting system, in which case the active water harvesting system shall be incorporated into the architectural design of a building to the extent possible. 
(b)  Qualifying residential projects shall provide a minimum five (5) foot wide landscaped area around the base of exterior building walls . 
(c)  Street trees shall be planted at a maximum spacing of thirty (30) feet on-center along the street frontages of development sites on St. Michael's Drive or Cerrillos Road as applicable. Existing street trees within the above areas may be counted toward this requirement. Street trees shall have a minimum four (4) inch caliper at time of planting and shall have a minimum mature height of twenty-five (25) feet. The required spacing of street trees may be adjusted to allow for the clustering of trees as part of a development's landscape design as determined by the land use director . The location and minimum mature height of street trees may be adjusted where conflicts exist with overhead or underground utility lines, wall - or building -mounted signage, site visibility triangles, crosswalks, bus stops, or on-street parking spaces. 
(d)  A minimum of thirty (30) percent of required plant material shall be evergreen. 
(e)  Areas of the parkway that are located along the street frontages of development sites, and that are not developed with sidewalks as required by Subsection 14-5.5(D)(7)(c), shall be landscaped as part of the required landscaping of a development . 
(f)  Qualifying non-residential projects and other non-residential development adjacent to existing residential development located outside of the Midtown LINC Overlay District shall provide a continuous landscaped buffer strip of not less than fifteen (15) feet where abutting the existing residential development . Plant material in the landscaped buffer strip shall conform to the requirements for open space provided in Subsection 14-8.4(H). 
(10)  Signage 
In addition to the requirements found in Section 14-8.10, Signs, the following provisions shall apply. 
(a)  Pole-mounted signs are prohibited. 
(b)  Monument signs shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(c)  Signs shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any public right-of-way unless wall - or building-mounted signs or directional signs . 
(d)  Wall - or building-mounted signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet. 
(e)  Roof-mounted signs are prohibited. 
(f)  The provisions of Subsection 14-8.10(B)(4), Maximum Number of Colors and Lettering Styles, do not apply within the Midtown LINC Overlay District. 
(g)  The provisions of Subsection 14-8.10(B)(5)(d) do not apply to signs mounted on the building walls of qualifying projects within the Midtown LINC Overlay District. 
(h)  Wall signs associated with a qualifying project within the Midtown LINC Overlay District and whose sign faces are mounted perpendicular to a building wall may extend up to five (5) feet from the wall , including signs that project over a front property line, providing that such a sign shall not impede or endanger pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(11)  Site Furnishings 
(a)  A minimum of one bench per ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet of ground-floor building area is required on the site and shall be located adjacent to the street frontage of the development , or to the primary building entrance, or within a public or private amenity provided by the development . 
(b)  At least one bench per development shall be shaded by a tree or a shade structure. 
(c)  Where multiple benches are required, a trash receptacle shall be provided adjacent to one of the benches. 
(d)  All site furnishings on a development site, including bicycle racks required by Subsection 14-8.6(E), benches, trash receptacles and light fixtures shall be of a coordinated design style and color. 
(12)  Outdoor Lighting 
In addition to compliance with Section 14-8.9, Outdoor Lighting, the following provisions apply. 
(a)  Pole-mounted lights shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and shall not be placed within buffer strips as required by Subsection 14-5.5(D)(9)(f). 
(b)  Lamps of building -mounted light fixtures shall not be placed more than twelve (12) feet above the exterior grade at the perimeter of a building unless the outdoor lighting is part of the illumination of a wall -mounted sign in accordance with Subsection 14-5.5(D)(10)(g). 
(13)  Additional Requirements for Qualifying Projects 
In addition to the requirements of this Subsection 14-5.5(D), qualifying projects shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Qualifying projects shall utilize a detailed alternative development water budget ("Option B" water budget) in accordance with Subsection 14-8.13(B)(2)(b) and applicable adopted administrative procedures. 
(b)  Qualifying projects shall utilize the following water-saving fixtures, appliances, and systems where applicable, throughout all new construction: 
(i)  waterless urinals; 
(ii)  dual-flush, high-efficiency toilets (HETs) (rated 1.28 gallons or less per flush); 
(iii)  EPA WaterSense &reg; certified showerheads (or equivalent fixtures rated at 2.0 gallons per minute or less); 
(iv)  ENERGY STAR &reg; compliant clothes washers; 
(v)  active water harvesting systems. 
(c)  The land use director shall not issue a construction permit for a qualifying project until a restrictive covenant is recorded by the owner of the development at the office of the county clerk that requires that the development will contain no uses that do not meet the requirements for a qualifying project for a period of at least ten (10) years from the completion of the project's construction. The covenant shall be in a form approved by the land use director and the city attorney and shall be notarized prior to recordation. The covenant shall be considered part of a development plan approved pursuant to Subsection 14-3.8(B)(9). The land use director shall maintain copies of recorded covenants pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. 
(14)  Fee Incentives for Qualifying Projects 
The following fee incentives apply to qualifying projects within the Midtown LINC Overlay District: 
(a)  Construction Permit Fees; Plan Review Fees 
Qualifying projects are exempt from the payment of construction permit fees and plan review fees as set by Resolution of the governing body, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Development Review Fees 
Qualifying projects are exempt from the payment of development review fees as set by Resolution of the governing body, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Development Water Budget Fees 
Qualifying projects shall obtain water to meet approved development water budgets through the water rights transfer program or through the water conservation credit program or through a combination of both, and at the reduced rate specified in Subsection 14-8.13(E). 
(d)  Impact Fees 
Qualifying projects are exempt from the payment of impact fees in accordance with Subsection 14-8.14(D). 
(e)  Wastewater Utility Expansion Charge (UEC) 
The wastewater utility expansion charge (UEC) is waived for qualifying projects in accordance with Article 22-6.6, Exhibit A, Section 7. 
(f)  Water Utility Expansion Charge (UEC) 
Qualifying projects are exempt from the payment of the water utility expansion charge (UEC) in accordance with Article 25-4.2, Exhibit B, Rate Schedule 8. 
(15)  Review 
This Subsection 14-5.5(D) shall be reviewed by the governing body three (3) years after the date of its adoption. 
14-5.6 - ESCARPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 
(A)  Purpose and Intent 
(1)  The escarpment overlay district is established in order to: 
(a)  Promote the economic, cultural, and general welfare of the people of the city ; 
(b)  Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city ; 
(c)  Conserve the value of buildings and land; 
(d)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land; and 
(e)  Preserve the natural environment and the distinctive and historic ridgetop and foothills area environment as a visual asset for the benefit of the community and to maintain and encourage the sense of the city as a small community. 
(f)  Reduce the risk to life and health of residents in the escarpment by reducing wildfire risk; and 
(g)  Encourage the conservation of water, especially for maintaining landscaping materials. 
(Ord. No. 2004-43 1) 
(2)  In order to further the purposes underlying the creation of the Escarpment Overlay District, this section: 
(a)  Prohibits development in the ridgetop subdistrict of the escarpment overlay district, other than driveway access and utility alignments, for lots created after February 26, 1992, as provided hereinafter; 
(b)  Regulates the permissible color, architectural style, size, and height of structures ; 
(c)  Regulates the permissible artificial exterior lighting for structures , streets and drives; 
(d)  Regulates the permissible locations for placement of all utilities and driveway access; 
(e)  Establishes criteria for landscaping , grading , and revegetation; and 
(f)  Regulates such other matters as are appropriate to preserve the environment of the escarpment overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 2006-55  2) 
(3)  Intent: 
(a)  Preservation of the city's aesthetic beauty and natural environment is essential to protect the general welfare of the people of the city , to promote tourism and the economic welfare of the city , and to protect the cultural and historic setting of the city ; 
(b)  Development is highly visible on or about the ridgetop areas of the foothills for great distances and detracts from the overall beauty of the natural environment and adversely impacts the aesthetics of the mountain and foothill vistas as seen from the city ; 
(c)  Land within the escarpment overlay district is environmentally sensitive due to the presence of steep slopes , erosion problems, drainage problems and other environmental attributes; 
(d)  The interest and welfare of the people of the city is to prohibit development on ridgetop areas of the foothills to the extent possible as allowed by law; and 
(e)  The interest and welfare of the people of the city is to restrict development in the escarpment overlay district to preserve the aesthetic beauty and natural environment of the ridgetop areas of the foothills and to protect the mountain views and scenic vistas from the city to the extent possible. 
(B)  District Boundaries   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  4) 
(1)  The boundaries of the escarpment overlay district, as well as the boundaries of the ridgetop and foothills subdistricts and the location of the viewline , are established and shown on the city's official escarpment overlay district map, which shall be maintained and provided in a digital format superseding the escarpment overlay district maps adopted by Ord. 1992-9. 
(2)  The official escarpment overlay map shall be located and secured in the land use department. The land use department in conjunction with the GIS division shall be responsible for tracking and maintaining all official escarpment overlay changes to the map and shall be the final authority of reference as to the current escarpment overlay status of lands, buildings and other structures in the city . (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(3)  Except as set forth in Subsection (4) below, amendments to the escarpment overlay map shall be made by the governing body following the procedures as set forth for rezoning in this chapter. The official map shall be changed to reflect such action of the governing body within thirty days. 
(4)  Nonsubstantive changes to the official escarpment overlay map may be made by the land use department in conjunction with the GIS division as follows: (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(a)  Nonsubstantive changes to the official escarpment overlay map are changes that affect the appearance, style, color, or graphic presentation of the map. Examples of such changes include, but are not limited to: revising the style, format, or layout of the map in order to enhance clarity; adding explanatory text or labels; and correcting spelling or grammar. In addition, nonsubstantive changes shall also include corrections based on oversight or error, for the purpose of identifying official actions that are not reflected or are incorrectly reflected on the official escarpment overlay map. 
(b)  Such corrections shall be administratively approved in writing by the land use department director and the geographic Information systems manager. The land use department director may make nonsubstantive changes to the official escarpment overlay map at any time. The director may submit a nonsubstantive change to the governing body for their approval if the director desires the advice and consent of that body. Nonsubstantive changes submitted to the governing body for review do not require a public hearing, public notification, or action by the planning commission. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(C)  Development and Permit Approval; Required Submittals   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  5) 
(1)  No approval of any subdivision, resubdivision , planned unit development , cluster development , multiple family dwellings, or any other type of development shall be granted for land situated in whole or in part in the escarpment overlay district unless all of the applicable requirements of this section are satisfied. 
(2)  Each parcel of land proposed for subdivision or resubdivision , which is located in whole or in part in the escarpment overlay district, shall be shown on a plat meeting all other requirements of this chapter. The plat shall also: 
(a)  Show the location of the escarpment overlay district, the ridgetop subdistrict, the foothills subdistrict and the viewline ; 
(b)  Show the location of all buildable sites located within the escarpment overlay district in compliance with Subsections (D) and (E) below; 
(c)  Include a landscape plan to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (G) below; 
(d)  Include natural topography, storm drainage, grading , and erosion control plans to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (H) below; and 
(e)  Show the location of all streets, drives, easements, utility lines, and such other information as is necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable paragraphs set forth in Section 14-5.6. 
(3)  Each proposed planned unit development , cluster development , multiple family dwellings, or any other type of development , which is located in whole or in part in the escarpment overlay district, shall be shown on one or more plans which meet all other applicable requirements of this chapter. The plan(s) shall also: 
(a)  Show the location of the escarpment overlay district, the ridgetop subdistrict, the foothills subdistrict and the viewline ; 
(b)  Include a site plan which shows the location of all buildable sites located within the escarpment overlay district in compliance with Subsections (D) and (E) below; 
(c)  Include a landscaping plan to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (G) below; 
(d)  Include natural topography, storm drainage, grading , and erosion control plans to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (H) below; and 
(e)  Show the location of all streets, drives, easements, utility lines, and such other information as is necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable paragraphs set forth in Section 14-5.6. 
(4)  A grading permit or building permit for a single-family dwelling, or any development or other activity requiring either a grading permit or building permit , shall be issued for land situated in whole or in part in the escarpment overlay district only upon compliance by the applicant with all of the relevant requirements of this section and this chapter including but not limited to requirements of the underlying zone, and any conditions on development previously imposed by the city . No grading permit or building permit shall be issued unless the grading permit or building permit application is accompanied by a plan, which may incorporate by reference approved plans previously submitted to the city in connection with any subdivision, resubdivision , planned unit development , cluster, or other development approval, and which sets forth or incorporates by reference the following information: 
(a)  The location on the lot of the escarpment overlay district, the ridgetop subdistrict, the foothills subdistrict and the viewline ; 
(b)  The location of all buildable sites located within the escarpment overlay district in compliance with Subsections (D) and (E) below; 
(c)  A site plan, floor plan and exterior building elevations for development on the lot to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (F) below; 
(d)  A landscaping plan for development on the lot to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (G) below; 
(e)  Natural topography, storm drainage, grading , and erosion control plans for development on the lot to demonstrate compliance with Subsection (H) below; and 
(f)  The location on and adjacent to the lot of all streets, drives, easements, utility lines, and such other information as is necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable paragraphs set forth in Section 14-5.6. 
(5)  If a grading permit or building permit is sought for the purpose of remodeling or extending an existing structure lying in whole or in part within the escarpment overlay district, a building permit shall be required and will be issued only upon compliance with this section. Any remodeling or extensions of the roofline or footprint shall be located and designed to comply with this section. All other requirements of this section, including, but not limited to, the location of the extension and criteria governing height, architecture, landscaping , terrain management, and utilities, shall be applicable to such remodeling or extension. 
(D)  Location of Structures; Buildable Site   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  6) 
(1)  For all lots subdivided or resubdivided on or before February 26, 1992, all structures shall be located within the foothills subdistrict unless the only buildable site is located within the ridgetop subdistrict. For all lots subdivided or resubdivided after February 26, 1992, development in the ridgetop subdistrict of the escarpment overlay district, other than driveway access and utilities, is prohibited. 
(2)  All structures or parts of a structure shall be located inside the approved buildable site as shown on the approved plat . If no buildable site is indicated on the approved plat , the buildable site shall be approved by staff at time of building permit . Modifications to the buildable site shown on the plat can be made by staff at time of building permit . In all cases the buildable site shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Subsection (D)(1) above; and 
(b)  The definition of buildable site as set forth in Article 14-12 of this chapter. 
(3)  Structures shall be sited as far from the viewline as possible unless staff approves an alternate siting meeting the following criteria: 
(a)  The alternate siting shall be located within the approved buildable site as set forth in Subsection (2) above. 
(b)  In no case shall a structure's alternate siting be permitted in the ridgetop subdistrict for a lot subdivided or resubdivided after February 26, 1992. 
(c)  For lots subdivided or resubdivided on or before February 26, 1992, with a buildable site in the foothills subdistrict, the structure shall be designed and built as far from the viewline as possible in the foothills district. However, staff may upon request of an applicant : 
(i)  Approve an alternate siting in the foothills subdistrict if such siting of the structure will decrease the visual impact beyond that which would exist if the structure were to be sited in the foothills district as far from the viewline as possible; or 
(ii)  Approve an alternate siting in the ridgetop district if such siting of the structure will decrease the visual impact beyond that which would exist if the structure were to be sited in the foothills district as far from the viewline as possible. 
(d)  For a lot subdivided or resubdivided on or before February 26,1992, without a buildable site outside the ridgetop subdistrict, the alternate siting may be approved if such siting of the structure will decrease the visual impact of the structure beyond that which would exist if the structure were to be sited as far from the viewline as possible. 
(e)  For lots subdivided or resubdivided after February 26, 1992, the structure shall be designed and built as far from the viewline as possible in the foothills subdistrict. An alternate siting in the foothills subdistrict may be approved if such siting of the structure will decrease the visual impact beyond that which would exist if the structure were to be sited as far from the viewline as possible. 
(f)  In determining the visual impact, staff shall consider the following in accordance with the administrative procedures adopted by Resolution No. 2006-113 as may be amended by the governing body : 
(i)  the public interest is protected and the modification does not nullify the intent or purpose of this chapter; 
(ii)  existing topography; 
(iii)  effect on existing vegetation; 
(iv)  location of existing infrastructure ; 
(v)  proposed site improvements; and 
(vi)  any other change that would protect the public interest, reduce the visual impact and further the objectives of this section. 
(4)  Siting of all structures within the escarpment overlay district shall be approved by the city staff. No building or grading permit shall be granted until approval for siting of the structures has been granted by the city staff. 
(a)  A preapplication meeting with city staff is required for a building permit , grading permit , driveway cut or any other type of development , for any property that is located entirely or partially within the escarpment overlay district. The applicant shall indicate on a buildable site diagram all areas of the lot meeting the definition of buildable site as defined in Article 14-12. If the applicant is requesting an alternate location as set forth in Subsection (D)(3) above, the applicant shall submit all documentation necessary to evaluate the request. At that time, proper siting for the proposed activity will be determined and escarpment overlay district regulations will be reviewed. 
(b)  A building permit application submittal form will be issued by city staff once all of the prerequisites for the escarpment overlay district building permit application are reviewed. This form shall be attached to all sets of the building or grading permit submittal. Issuance of this form does not imply preapproval of the building permit application . 
(5)  For any development requiring a permit in the escarpment overlay district, the property shall be posted by the applicant with a public notice poster obtained from city staff. Such poster shall be prominently displayed, visible from a public street , and securely placed on the property from the time that an application for a permit is submitted to the issuance of the permit . The poster shall indicate the nature of the request, identify the applicant , the property affected and the phone number for the city staff contact. The public may review the application for permit in the land use department. The poster shall be removed when the building permit is posted. Failure to do so may result in the city removing the sign at the applicant's expense. A civil fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(E)  Subdivision or Resubdivision of Land; Multi-Family Dwellings   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  7) 
(1)  No land located in whole or in part in the escarpment overlay district shall be subdivided or resubdivided, nor shall a subdivision or resubdivision plat be approved for such land, if any lot fails to have at least one buildable site on the lot , in compliance with terrain and stormwater management requirements set forth in Section 14-8.2, located entirely outside the ridgetop subdistrict. The purpose of this requirement is to assure that each lot located in whole or in part in the escarpment overlay district contains at least one buildable site located outside the ridgetop subdistrict. To the extent this prohibition increases minimum lot size or decreases density beyond that which is authorized by the underlying zone for a parcel of land, then this section shall operate as a further limitation on the minimum lot size and allowable density . This paragraph applies to lots subdivided or resubdivided after February 26, 1992. 
(2)  In order to minimize, to the extent possible, the further density and minimum lot size restrictions caused by operation of Subsection (1) above, development alternatives such as planned unit developments and cluster developments which site structures in the foothill subdistrict or outside the escarpment overlay district are encouraged. 
(F)  Architectural and Site Standards   
(1)  All new structures or extensions of existing structures located or erected in the escarpment overlay district shall be in compliance with this section. As required by Subsection (C) above, drawings shall be submitted of all exterior elevations of all structures showing building materials, colors, length, and heights; a minimum of two cross sections from the highest point of natural grade or finished grade whichever is more restrictive showing how the existing and proposed contours relate to the building and the plans required pursuant to Subsection (H) below; a site plan; and a floor plan all showing compliance with the standards of this section. All floor plans, elevations, and cross section shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one-eighth (1/8) inch equals one (1) foot. (Ord. No. 2002-37  35) 
(2)  The colors of all structures shall be the browns and tans of local earth tones within fifty (50) feet of the area immediately adjacent to the proposed structures or darker, as approved by the land use department. In no case shall the structures be cream or white except as specifically authorized herein. Stone surfaces shall be left in their natural state . Entries, portals , and trim may be emphasized by the use of white, off-white, yeso or other similar accent colors. Structures painted or stuccoed with bold repetitive patterns or structures used as signs are prohibited. (Ord. No. 2004-43  2; Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(3)  Only clerestories and flat roofs shall be permitted in the escarpment overlay district except that shed roofs are allowed for portals . Metal roofs shall be of a nonreflective, nonglossy material that is muted in color and matches the earth tones or darker or vegetation colors characteristic of the site, as approved by the land use department. Red, yellow, blue, white, black, purple, orange and related colors are prohibited for roofs. All exterior window treatments exclusive of window trim shall comply with restrictions stated above for roof colors. All exterior glazing shall be nonmirrored with a reflectance of less than forty percent. (Ord. No. 2004-43  3; Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(4)  In the ridgetop subdistrict the highest point of any structure shall not exceed a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet above each and every point of measurement along the structure perimeter. This measurement shall be from the undisturbed natural grade of the land at the perimeter, or from the finished grade at the perimeter, whichever is more restrictive in height. The highest point on the structure includes the top of parapets and clerestories, except that chimneys may exceed the maximum height by not more than three (3) feet above the immediately adjacent roof. Adding fill dirt to the natural grade in order to increase the height of the ridgetop is prohibited. 
(5)  The maximum height of any structure in the foothills subdistrict shall be determined by the more restrictive of the following calculations: 
(a)  The highest point on the structure shall not exceed a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet above the highest natural grade at the perimeter of the structure . 
(b)  The highest point on the structure shall not exceed a maximum height of twenty (20) feet above each and every point of measurement along the structure perimeter. This measurement shall be from the undisturbed natural grade of the land at the perimeter, or from the finished grade at the perimeter, whichever is more restrictive in height. 
(c)  The highest point on the structure includes the tops of parapets and clerestories, except that chimneys may exceed the maximum height by not more than three (3) feet above the immediately adjacent roof. Adding fill dirt to the natural grade in order to increase the height is prohibited. 
(6)  For all structures , twenty (20) feet in height in a single plane. No faade shall be more than fifty (50) feet in length in a single plane. All faades with offsets of less than four (4) feet in depth are defined to be in a single plane. 
(7)  Cantilevers of greater than three (3) horizontal feet in depth are prohibited. 
(8)  Cantilevered decks of greater than three (3) horizontal feet in depth are prohibited. Decks greater than three (3) horizontal feet in depth and more than five (5) feet above grade whether cantilevered or supported are prohibited. Decks over roofs of structures and their flat portals shall be permitted provided that the decks do not exceed the maximum height limit set forth in Subsections (4) and (5) above. 
(9)  Exterior lighting shall not directly illuminate the surfaces of structures (excluding entries, garages and portals ), or landscaping . The light source of any exterior indirect lighting shall be less than three (3) feet in height (excluding entries, garages and portals ). (Ord. No. 2006-55  9) 
(10)  The maximum disturbed area by all dwellings, accessory buildings , structures , graded land, and the placement of any impervious surfaces shall not exceed forty percent of the gross area of the lot . Landscaping that does not require grading and stormwater retention or water harvesting areas, whether graded or not, shall not be included as a disturbed area. (Ord. No. 2006-55  8) 
(G)  Landscaping   
(Ord. No. 2004-43  4; Ord. No. 2006-55  10) 
(1)  Landscape plans as required by Subsection (C) above shall be submitted by the applicant showing compliance with the provisions of this section. When planting is proposed within a public roadway right-of-way, landscape plans shall be stamped by a licensed landscape architect or architect . The landscaping plan shall meet the standards set forth in Section 14-8.4. If the applicant requested an alternate location as set forth in Subsection (D)(3) above and the alternate location was approved based upon existing vegetation, the landscape plan shall include such vegetation. (Ord. No. 2002-37  36) 
(2)  Except as set forth in Subsection (3) below, all cut and fill slopes and retaining walls more than four (4) feet high and with a backfill and/or retained slope of 3:1 or steeper shall have screening vegetation planted and maintained at the base of the slope and those with a grade less steep than 3:1 shall have screening vegetation planted and maintained on the face of the entire cut or fill slope as follows: 
(a)  Screening vegetation shall be planted and maintained in addition to revegetation materials required in Section 14-8.2(F), and shall be selected from a city -approved list of appropriate tree species. No vegetation is required for exposed structured rock surfaces in the natural occurring location. 
(b)  All evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high at the time of planting. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper at the time of planting and shall also be tall enough such that the foliage provides the desired screening effect at the time of planting. All vegetation shall be planted and maintained at a density commensurate with the adjacent existing natural landscape up to a maximum of sixty basal area as approved by the city . The density may be further reduced when deemed necessary to reduce wildfire risk. The commensurate density shall be determined by an inventory of existing natural trees and shrubs of four (4) feet or greater in height in a fifty (50) by fifty (50) foot square within the cut or fill area prior to excavation. An inventory of the existing natural trees and shrubs within the cut and fill area shall be shown on the landscape plan. (Ord. No. 2008-13  1) 
(c)  Existing trees over six (6) feet high and located within six (6) feet of the base of the cut and fill slope may be counted toward fulfilling the number of trees required for screening . 
(d)  Cut slopes with a slope or retaining wall closer than six (6) feet from the edge of a road or driveway may be screened with a trellis supporting planted vegetation or some other similar means which creates a natural screened effect. 
(3)  For public or private roads and driveways having individual cut and fill slopes and retaining walls over four (4) feet high and combined roadway cut and fill slopes with a height of at least eight (8) feet, but not more than twelve (12) feet, landscape screening as set forth in Subsection (2) above, is required for the fill slopes only. If combined slopes are greater than twelve (12) feet, then the cut and fill slopes shall be screened individually as set forth in Subsection (2). (Ord. No. 2002-37  37) 
(4)  For public or private roads and driveways within the ridgetop subdistrict revegetation shall meet or exceed the preconstruction vegetation density outside the road bed. Subsections (2)(a) through (2)(d) of this section shall apply. Alignment of the driveway will be in accordance with Subsection 14-5.6(J). 
(a)  All disturbed areas shall be reseeded and maintained at approximate original ground cover by the owner of the property to the approximate original height. 
(b)  All graded areas shall be regarded to approximate the original terrain conditions and revegetated with a similar type and density of vegetation commensurate with the adjacent existing natural landscape up to a maximum of sixty basal area as approved by the city , which shall include but not limited to planting of trees with a minimum height of six (6) feet for evergreen and two (2) inch caliper for deciduous, as described in Subsection (G)(2)(b) above, and reseeding to approximate the original ground cover. The density may be further reduced when deemed necessary to reduce wildfire risk; and (Ord. No. 2008-13  2) 
(5)  Slopes screened from view from any adjacent public street , way, or place by buildings , walls , or fences are exempt from the provisions of Subsections (2) and (3). 
(6)  At least twenty-five percent of structure screening trees shall be evergreen. The remaining screening vegetation shall be deciduous trees that provide the desired screening effect year-round. All structure screening trees shall leave exposed no more than fifty percent of the structure from the highest point on the structure to the top of the tree at the time of planting. 
(7)  There shall be one tree, existing or planted meeting minimum height and size requirements, for every fifteen (15) linear feet of horizontal wall of each structure which shall be located no closer than five (5) feet and no further than thirty (30) feet from such wall . Escarpment screening trees shall not exceed sixty basal area . (Ord. No. 2008-13  3) 
(8)  No retaining walls in the Escarpment Overlay District shall be greater than six (6) feet in height. When retainage greater than six (6) feet is required, retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of six (6) horizontal feet from face of wall to face of wall . Setback area grading shall not exceed a one percent cross slope and all walls shall be screened in accordance with Subsection (2) above. 
(9)  The landscaping requirements set forth in this paragraph shall be in addition to all other landscaping requirements in this section. 
(10)  All landscaping shall comply with the standards of Section 14-8.4. 
(11)  All vegetation indicated on the landscape plan, existing or proposed, for the purposes of screening or stabilization required by Section 14-5.6 shall be maintained or replaced if necessary. 
(12)  Permitted Trees 
(Ord. No. 2004-43  6) 
(a)  The city -approved list of appropriate tree species for the escarpment overlay district will be maintained by the land use department, permit and development review division. The list will be updated periodically by city staff. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(b)  Applicants who have been issued a building permit prior to September 29, 2004, but have not yet completed the landscaping required by the permit or who have completed the landscaping but whose pion trees have died prior to September 29, 2004, may substitute one or more tree species from the city's approved plant list for the pion on their approved landscaping plan and will be considered to be in compliance with the permit . The substitutions shall meet all requirements of Subsection 14-5.6(G). 
(13)  Plantings should be consistent with wildlife safety guidelines recommended by the city's fire department. (Ord. No. 2008-13  4) 
(H)  Terrain Management   
As required by Subsection (C) above, natural topography, storm drainage, grading and erosion control plans shall be submitted by the applicant showing compliance with the terrain management requirements of Section 14-8.2. 
(I)  Utilities   
(1)  All new and replacement water, gas, electric, telephone, television, and all other utilities, including both main and service lines which service developments within the escarpment district, shall be placed underground within or adjacent to roads. Utilities shall be located in the following priority: 
(a)  within a dedicated public road right-of-way; 
(b)  within an easement of sufficient width to provide ingress and egress for maintenance purposes that is adjacent to a dedicated public right-of-way; or 
(c)  within a private road right-of-way. 
(2)  Water service mains may be located outside road rights-of-way if required by change in water-pressure zone. 
(3)  Sewer lines outside road rights-of-way for both public and private use shall be located to minimize tree removal, to prioritize multiple-service lines in a common trench over single service mains to reduce the number of maintenance roads; and to prioritize gravity flow over lift stations. Public sewer line easements outside road rights-of-way are permitted when required by the city utility. All disturbed easements outside the road rights-of-way shall be reseeded and maintained at approximate original ground cover by the owner of the property to the approximate original height. 
(4)  All utilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the city utility or other companies providing such services. 
(5)  Lots which abut existing easements, private road rights-of-way or public rights-of-way where supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with service from those lines, but new service connections from such utilities shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this section. In the case of existing utilities, if a road widening, an extension of service, or other similar condition occurs as a result of a subdivision or other new development and necessitates the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be located, installed, and maintained in accordance with the above Subsections (1) through (4) of this section, and paid for by the applicant ; 
(6)  The location of water, gas and sewer lines, and relocation of three phase 12.5 KV electric feeder lines, in a manner different from the requirements of this section is permissible if the applicant provides plans and reports certified by a licensed engineer showing the need to locate utilities in a manner different from the requirements of this section in order to protect the public health or safety. 
(7)  For service lines outside a right-of-way in or adjacent to a road, the placement of utilities shall be designed to lessen the visual impact, as follows: 
(a)  The utility alignments shall be carefully routed to avoid locations perpendicular to the horizons; 
(b)  All graded and trenched areas shall be regraded to approximate the original terrain conditions and revegetated with a similar type and density of vegetation commensurate with the adjacent existing natural landscape up to a maximum of sixty basal area as approved by the city , which shall include but not be limited to planting of trees and large shrubs with a minimum height of six (6) feet and reseeding to approximate the original ground cover. The density may be further reduced when deemed necessary to reduce wildfire risk; and (Ord. No. 2004-43  5; Ord. No. 2008-13  5) 
(c)  All revegetation shall be maintained. 
(8)  Any utility apparatus (telephone junction boxes, gas pressure valving, satellite dishes, etc.) three (3) feet or higher from finished grade (excluding utility poles ), and all above ground water tanks , shall be screened year-round from the adjacent public street , way, or place. The screening to be utilized shall be shown on the landscape plan. 
(9)  All street lighting in the district shall be "cut-off luminaires " with a maximum pole height of twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(10)  Water tanks are only permitted in the ridgetop subdistrict if they are placed below natural ground level. Water tanks located within the foothills subdistricts shall comply with the regulations of Sections 14-8.1 and 14-8.2. Access or service roads shall comply with landscape standards in Subsection (G) above. 
(J)  Driveways/Access Alignments   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  11) 
All driveway/access alignments within the ridgetop subdistrict of the escarpment overlay district, shall be located in the following priority: 
(1)  within a dedicated public road right-of-way; 
(2)  within a private road right-of-way; 
(3)  carefully routed to avoid locations perpendicular to the horizons; and 
(4)  located to minimize tree removal. 
(K)  Variances   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  12) 
(1)  Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
(2)  In granting variances or modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, assure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(L)  Effective Date   
(Ord. No. 2006-55  13) 
Amendments to the escarpment overlay district as set forth in ordinance no. 2006-55 adopted September 13, 2006 shall become effective immediately and apply to building permits applications submitted after such date. However, if the design of the structure has been preapproved by the land use department for compliance with the escarpment overlay district requirements and an application for the design of the structure has been submitted for approval to a city board or commission prior to adoption of said ordinance, a building permit may be approved in compliance with the escarpment overlay district requirements in effect prior to said Ordinance. (Ord. No. 2007-45  30) 
(Ord. No. 2001-38 2) 
14-5.7 - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  7) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
(1)  This section is intended to allow the creation of planned districts, each conceived as a unit of cohesive development and integrated uses in either a single development operation or a planned series of development operations that may take place over a period of several years. It is also intended to allow and encourage innovative site planning and design to ensure that each planned unit development compatibly integrates with development on adjoining properties and creates an attractive, healthful, sustainable and stable environment for living and working that is superior to the development attainable under existing zoning regulations. 
(2)  It is further intended that PUD regulations in this section and throughout Chapter 14 accomplish the purposes of land use regulation to the same degree that existing zoning regulations do in cases where planning and development are not on a unified basis. 
(B)  Land Eligible   
A PUD district may overlay any zoning district or any portion of a zoning district as long as it is consistent with existing plans for streets , utilities, parks, and other uses and structures . 
(C)  Rezoning Requirements   
(1)  An application for PUD rezoning shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan and other related documents reasonably necessary to determine compliance with Chapter 14 as may be required by the land use director . 
(2)  At the time an application for PUD rezoning is filed, the applicant may submit a proposed final development plan and request that the requirement for a preliminary development plan be waived. The planning commission and the governing body may approve or deny the request to waive the preliminary development plan as part of their review of the PUD rezoning application . 
(D)  Uses   
Permitted, special use permit and prohibited uses within the PUD are the same as in the underlying zoning district. 
(E)  Standards   
(1)  The development , design and landscaping standards permitted in the PUD may vary from the standards of the underlying district, provided that findings of fact are made that such variation: 
(a)  meets the PUD purpose and intent set forth in Subsection 14-5.7(A) by creating a unified development that is superior to what would otherwise be attainable, 
(b)  is appropriate in relation to the overall development , and 
(c)  minimizes the impact on surrounding properties . 
(2)  The density of population and intensity of land use allowed by the underlying zoning district shall be the overall density and intensity in the PUD. As long as the overall PUD density and intensity remain unchanged, the density and intensity of different local sites within the PUD may vary; 
(3)  Examples of the development , design and landscaping standards variable in the PUD include lot size, housing type, housing configuration, yards / setbacks , height, lot coverage, distance between buildings , terrain management and mountainous and difficult terrain . Where no variation of a development , design or landscaping standard has been approved, the development , design or landscaping standard at issue shall be the same as in the underlying district. 
14-5.8 - RS RESIDENTIAL SUITE HOTEL/MOTEL OVERLAY DISTRICT 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  7) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
It is the intent of the RS residential suite hotel/motel overlay district to provide a means whereby a residential suite hotel or motel may be approved for development in an SC-1 or SC-2 district and to provide criteria for development of such residential suite hotels and motels in conjunction with the planned shopping centers in SC-1 and SC-2 districts. 
(B)  Permitted Principal Uses and Structures   
Property in an RS district shall be used for a residential suite hotel or motel or for any other use permitted in the SC zoning applicable to the property . 
(C)  Development Standards   
(1)  All buildings shall be set back no less than thirty (30) feet from an adjoining residential district. 
(2)  The minimum open space requirement in RS districts is twenty-five (25) percent of the total lot area. 
(3)  Maximum height of all structures in an RS district is thirty-five (35) feet unless otherwise restricted by Chapter 14. 
(D)  Supplemental Zoning Designation   
Any land that is zoned SC-1 and SC-2 is eligible for supplemental zoning designation as an RS overlay district through a rezoning action on a case-by-case basis pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.5 (Rezoning). Application for RS overlay district designation shall be accompanied by a development plan. 
14-5.9 - ER ECOLOGICAL RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  7) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
The ecological resource protection overlay district is established to: 
(1)  protect the ecological resources of Santa Fe; 
(2)  provide trail access to city -owned open spaces for the enjoyment and recreation of all Santa Fe citizens; 
(3)  ensure, maintain and enhance water quality and quantity into the future by protecting groundwater recharge rates; 
(4)  protect the quantity and contiguity of wildlife habitat; 
(5)  ensure protection from noise pollution caused by high speed, limited access highways and other land use operations; and 
(6)  provide a way to comply with federal regulations, including the clean water act and the endangered species act. 
(B)  Land Eligible   
Land eligible for rezoning to ER include: 
(1)  the areas shown on the general plan future land use map designated as open space ; 
(2)  areas within a one percent chance event floodplain ; 
(3)  other important natural drainage areas and wildlife habitat; 
(4)  other areas identified by a resolution of the governing body as meeting the purpose and intent of this section. 
(C)  Uses   
The allowed principal and accessory uses in the ER district are those consistent with the following: 
(1)  development of hike/bike/equestrian trails and limited, passive recreation activities; 
(2)  ecological resource restoration designed to increase the natural and beneficial function of the affected area, including increasing wildlife habitat, increasing the contiguity of wildlife habitat, increasing the variety and number of native plant species, increasing aquifer recharge rate, controlling erosion , flood management or increasing water quality; 
(3)  crossings required to meet community transportation goals, especially where the intent is to provide safety in terms of fire and police department access. The crossings shall be designed to have minimum impact on the ecological resource; 
(4)  City park maintenance facilities and activities; and 
(5)  other public uses that are deemed necessary by the planning commission to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(D)  Standards   
(1)  development , including earth moving activities, shall meet all relevant code requirements; and 
(2)  development in existence at the time of rezoning to ER is exempt from these regulations. 
14-5.10 - NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  7) 
(A)  General Provisions   
(1)  Purpose 
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of Santa Fe, it is deemed by the governing body that neighbors be allowed to conserve their neighborhoods by collectively identifying their neighborhood's distinctive characteristics, including: streetscape , architectural features, density , lot coverage, setbacks , height and some property uses. The neighborhood conservation overlay districts are a means to propose conservation of the substantive physical character of the neighborhoods and are not intended to be used as a tool simply to resist minor changes in neighborhood character. By proposing establishment of these overlay districts and tailoring the regulations to the attributes of the built environment that make the neighborhood distinctive, neighborhoods will have a tool to proactively affect new development and promote better harmony between new and existing structures . 
(2)  Underlying Zoning District Requirements 
Property within a neighborhood conservation overlay district shall be subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district, except for more specific requirements that are adopted for the applicable neighborhood conservation overlay district. 
(3)  Additional Overlay Zoning District Requirements 
If a neighborhood conservation overlay district is contained within one or more other zoning overlay districts, the most restrictive set of requirements shall prevail. A neighborhood conservation overlay district shall not be included in the boundary of another neighborhood conservation overlay district. (Ord. No. 2012-11  12) 
(4)  Nonconforming Structures and Uses 
A structure or use located in a neighborhood conservation overlay district not meeting the requirements for the applicable neighborhood conservation overlay district shall be considered legal nonconforming and shall comply with Article 14-10 (Nonconformities). 
(5)  Variances 
Requests for a variance from the requirements of a neighborhood conservation overlay district shall be heard by the board of adjustment as set forth in Section 14-3.16. Variances from maximum allowable density or permitted land uses established by a neighborhood conservation district are prohibited and shall be considered amendments to the neighborhood conservation overlay district and shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(6)  Appeals 
A person who is aggrieved by a staff decision regarding neighborhood conservation overlay district requirements may appeal that decision to the board of adjustment as set forth in Section 14-3.17. 
(B)  Creation of Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts   
(1)  Except as set forth in Subsection 14-5.10(C), prior to the creation of a specific neighborhood conservation overlay district, a neighborhood plan recommending the creation of the neighborhood conservation overlay district as one of the plan's implementation policies shall be adopted as a general plan amendment as set forth in Section 14-3.2. 
(2)  The creation of a specific neighborhood conservation overlay district shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.1(H)(1)(e) for a city -initiated rezoning. 
(3)  After a neighborhood conservation overlay district is officially created, amendments to the boundaries or the requirements shall also follow the provisions outlined in this section. 
(C)  Creation of Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts Alternative   
The procedures set forth in this subsection apply only when Section 14-3.2(E)(3)(e)(iv) occurs and a neighborhood plan is not prepared. For the purpose of calculating the percentages required in this subsection, each parcel is entitled to a single vote no matter how many persons or entities might own the parcel . 
(1)  Petition 
A neighborhood may petition the city to develop a neighborhood conservation overlay district. The petition shall contain a description of the proposed boundaries of the neighborhood conservation overlay district and the signatures of fifty-one percent of the property owners of record in that area. The city may request proof of ownership. 
(2)  Inventory 
An inventory of characteristics that are proposed to be regulated within the proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district shall be completed by the neighborhood with assistance from city staff. The characteristics may include some or all of those characteristics described in Subsection 14-5.10(D)(2). 
(3)  Public Meetings 
(a)  Upon verification of the petition by the land use director , department staff shall hold at least two public meetings at which the proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district boundaries and requirements shall be discussed and developed. The meetings shall be coordinated with city staff and held at a reasonable time and place to maximize public attendance. 
(b)  Notice for each public meeting shall follow the notice requirements for early neighborhood notification as set forth in Section 14-3.1(H). In addition to the postal notification, persons required to be notified of the public meetings may request an email notification from the city on the same day that postal notification is mailed for second or subsequent public meetings. In the event that the proposed boundaries are enlarged, notice shall be given to those additional property owners and physical addressees as if for the first scheduled meeting. 
(4)  Neighborhood Ballot 
(a)  When the land use director has determined that forty percent of the property owners of record within the proposed boundaries in attendance or represented by written proxy at the public meeting agree to the final proposed requirements governing the proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district, the land use director shall mail a ballot by regular mail to all property owners of record within those boundaries. The ballot shall ask for a single affirmative or negative vote for the proposed requirements. The city shall include a stamped envelope addressed to the land use director for returning ballots. 
(b)  If within thirty days of mailing the ballot, the city receives an affirmative vote of the proposed requirements by sixty-seven percent of the property owners within the proposed boundaries, the proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district requirements shall be deemed to be approved by the neighborhood. The land use director may extend the thirty days for an additional fifteen days due to unforeseen circumstances. 
(c)  If the proposed requirements are not voted on in the affirmative by sixty-seven percent of the property owners , a like or similar petition shall not be submitted within twelve months from the date of verification by the city that the proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district has failed to receive the required affirmative vote. 
(5)  After the proposed neighborhood conservation overlay district requirements have been approved by the neighborhood, the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.5 with notice as set forth in Section 14-3.1(H) shall be followed as for a city -initiated rezoning. After a neighborhood conservation overlay district is officially created, amendments to the boundaries or the requirements shall also follow the provisions outlined in this subsection. 
(D)  Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts Requirements   
(1)  At a minimum, a neighborhood conservation overlay district shall include all residentially zoned property within an area no fewer than two city blocks or four blockfaces unless the land use director determines that the blocks are unusually long or short or that the neighborhood characteristics are significantly different within the blocks. 
(2)  Neighborhood conservation overlay districts may regulate the following: 
(a)  building design, including scale, mass and distinctive architectural characteristics such as front porches , height or roof styles; 
(b)  streetscape , including lot frontage , fences, walls , parking, lighting and landscaping ; 
(c)  density except density bonuses as allowed in Section 14-8.11(G)(1) (SFHP Density Bounus); 
(d)  lot coverage; 
(e)  setbacks ; 
(f)  building height; and 
(g)  property use except as set forth in Subsection 14-5.10(D)(3). 
(3)  Neighborhood conservation overlay districts shall not restrict the following: 
(a)  citywide policies and priorities; 
(b)  dwelling units marketed to or occupied by any certain income such as any residential units covered by the Santa Fe Homes Program; 
(c)  home occupations as set forth in Section 14-6.3(D)(2); 
(d)  group or foster homes ; 
(e)  day care facilities; 
(f)  public or private schools for elementary, middle or senior high students; 
(g)  religious institutions; or 
(h)  other uses determined by the land use director as necessary for the health and safety of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Requirements shall be measurable, definitive and uniform and enforceable by the land use director through the approval procedures set forth in Chapter 14 and the issuance of a construction permit . A neighborhood conservation overlay district shall not apply to a specific application required under Chapter 14 that has been submitted to the land use director prior to the date of adoption of a neighborhood conservation overlay district. If a subsequent but separate application for the same property is submitted after the date of adoption of the neighborhood conservation overlay district, the requirements shall apply. It is not the intent of the neighborhood conservation overlay districts to enforce private covenants. 
14-5.11 - West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District. 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
Because openness, visual integrity, scale and harmony are vital assets in implementing the West Santa Fe River Corridor Master Plan, it is the intent of the West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District to: 
(1)  Maintain a clear sense of visual openness along the river corridor and promote its restoration, in part, by minimizing the negative impacts of adjoining land development; 
(2)  Regulate land development, including site and building design, so that new development reflects the scale of the surrounding neighborhoods while meeting city development standards. 
(B)  Boundaries   
The West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District includes lands bounded by West Alameda Street to the north, La Joya Road to the east, Agua Fria Street to the south and the Agua Fria Traditional Historic Village/city of Santa Fe corporate limit boundary to the west. 
(C)  Building Height   
Maximum building height shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet within the West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District, as defined in "Measurement of Maximum Height," 14-7.1(C)(1): 
(D)  Building Setback from Street   
Minimum setbacks from the street for new developments and new subdivisions. In the case of residential development, setback applies when proposing a minimum of two (2) lots or two (2) housing units. Nothing in this provision is intended to make any existing structure non-conforming. 
(1)  Agua Fria Street: Thirty (30) feet, or twenty percent (20%) of lot depth, whichever is less, from the Agua Fria Street frontage property line. 
(2)  West Alameda Street: Fifty (50) feet from the West Alameda Street frontage property line. 
(E)  Building Setback from Santa Fe River   
A minimum of fifteen (15) feet from whichever one of the following is the most restrictive: 
(1)  River Greenway Boundary, or 
(2)  100-year Floodplain Boundary (FEMA), or 
(3)  City code setback measurement for streams and watercourses, [14-8.2 (D)(4)(e)(i)]. 
(F)  Minimum Frontage Width for Development along West Alameda Street   
Minimum street frontage width of two hundred and fifty (250) feet along West Alameda Street is required for any subdivision, unless approved by the traffic engineer. 
(G)  Common Area Open Space   
In lieu of park dedication to the city, residential subdivisions or developments with a density of five (5) dwellings per acre or greater, or a minimum of twenty-five (25) total housing units or lots, shall have a minimum of ten (10) percent of the total land area of the proposed subdivision or development reserved as common area open space. [See also Land Development Code, "Residential Common Open Space Standards," 14-7.5(B)]. 
(Ord. # 2017-25 ,  1) 
Article 14-6 - PERMITTED USES AND USE REGULATIONS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  8) 

14-6.1 - LAND USE CATEGORIES; TABLE OF PERMITTED USES 
(A)  Land Use Categories   
(1)  Table 14-6.1-1 sets forth the uses allowed and prohibited within the general use zoning districts and the AC overlay zoning district. 
(2)  The descriptions and categorizations of land uses are intended for convenience in classifying specific land uses and are not intended to be exhaustive or mutually exclusive descriptions of all possible specific uses. 
(3)  These regulations are based on the patterns of development and physical activities that comprise the principal and accessory uses of land, rather than on whether the activity is conducted for profit, not for profit or other purposes. 
(B)  Permitted and Prohibited Uses; Explanation of Table Abbreviations (Ord. No. 2014-31  10) 
(1)  Permitted Uses 
A "P" in a cell indicates that a use category is permitted by right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of Chapter 14, including the development and design standards set forth in Article 14-8. 
(2)  Special Use Permits 
An "S" in a cell indicates that a use category is permitted only if reviewed and approved as a special use permit , in accordance with the review procedures of Section 14-3.6. 
(3)  Accessory Uses 
An "A" in a cell indicates that a use category is permitted as an accessory use as described in Section 14-6.3. 
(4)  Prohibited Uses 
A blank cell indicates that the use type is prohibited in the zoning district. A use or structure not specifically or specially permitted in Chapter 14 is prohibited. 
(5)  Additional Regulations 
(a)  Regardless of whether a use is permitted by right or as a special use permit , there may be additional regulations that are applicable to a specific use. The existence of these use-specific regulations is noted through a reference in the column of the use summary table entitled "Use-Specific Regulations." References refer to Section 14-6.2. These regulations apply to all districts unless otherwise specified. Additional regulations are also contained in and referenced in the notes at the end of the table. 
(b)  Uses may be subject to review or approval procedures in Chapter 14, including Section 14-3.8(B)(3), which requires development plan approval for new construction over ten thousand (10,000) or thirty thousand (30,000) square feet gross floor area , or Article 14-4 which requires development plan approval for certain rezoning actions. 
(c)  See Section 14-3.9(C)(2) and (C)(3) for uses allowed in the PRC, PRRC and other master-planned districts. 
(6)  Uses Not Listed in Table 
Any specific use type not listed or included in the Table of Permitted Uses is prohibited unless the land use director determines that it is to be included in an existing use category. 
(C)  Table of Permitted Uses (Ord. No. 2012-37  2; Ord. No. 2013-16  22-29; Ord. No. 2015-14) 
Districts are designated in Table 14-6.1-1 as follows: 
Abbreviations Districts Described District Designations RR 14-4.2C Rural Residential R-1 - R-6 14-4.2D Residential - numeral indicates maximum 
Number of dwelling units per acre, see 
Section 14-7.2. 
  
"(I)" indicates Infill. R-7 - R-9 14-4.2E R7 (I) 14-4.2F RC-5, RC-8 14-4.2G R-10 - R-29 14-4.2H MHP 14-4.2J MHP  
Abbreviations Districts Described District Designations RAC 14-4.2I Residential Arts and Crafts A-C 14-5.4 Arts and Crafts Overlay C-1 14-4.3A Office and Related Commercial C-2 14-4.3B General Commercial C-4 14-4.3C Limited Office and Arts and Crafts HZ 14-4.3D Hospital Zone BCD 14-4.3E Business-Capitol I-1 14-4.3F Light Industrial I-2 14-4.3G General Industrial BIP 14-4.3H Business and Industrial Park SC-1, SC-2, SC-3 14-4.3K Planned Shopping Center (Neighborhood, Community, Regional) MU 14-4.3L Mixed Use  
Table 14-6.1-1 
CATEGORY
Specific Use RR R-1
-
R-6 R-7
-
R-9 R-7
-
I RC-5,
 
RC-8 R-10
-
R-29 MHP RAC AC** C-1 C-2 C-4 HZ BCD I -1 I -2 BIP SC-1 SC-2 SC-3 MU *** Use-
Specific
Regs
14-6.2 RESIDENTIAL Group Living Continuing care community S S S S S S S P S P P P S P (A)(1) Group Residential Care Facility S S S S S S S P S P P P S P Group Residential Care Facility, Limited P P P P P P P P S P P P S P Group Residential Care Facility, Correctional S S S S P* P* P* P* S S S Boarding, dormitory, monastery S S S S S P P P S P S P S S Household Living Dwelling, multiple- family P 1 P P P P P P P P 6 P P P P 6 P 6 P 6 P (A)(5), (A)(6) Dwelling, single-family P P P P P P P P P P 6 P P P P (A)(5) Manufactured homes P P P P P P P P P P 6 P P P P (A)(4) Mobile home, permanent installation S S S S S S S S S S (A)(2) Mobile home park P 9 (A)(3); See 14-6.4(B) Short-Term 
Rental Unit Prohibited except as set forth in Section 14-6.2(A)(5)(a) P P P P P P (A)(5), (A)(6) PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL
AND CIVIC (Ord. No. 2014-31  11) Emergency Services Police and fire stations S S S S S S S S P P P P P P P P P P P P Police substations (6 or fewer staff) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Preschool, Daycare for Infants or Children Small 
(6 or fewer) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Large (More than 6) S S S S S S S S P P P P P S P P P P S Electrical Facilities (See 14-6.2(F) for Planning Commission Review Requirements) Distribution facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (F), (G) Substation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (F) Switching station P P P P P P P P P P P P P (F) Transmission lines P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P (F) Educational Elementary and secondary schools, public and private S S S S S S P* P* P* S P* S P* S S S P* Colleges and universities, residential S S S S S S S S S S P S S (B)(2) Colleges and universities, nonresidential P P P P P P P P P P P Museums S S S S P 10 P P P P P P P P P P Vocational or trade schools, nonindustrial P 10 P P P P P P P P P P Vocational or trade schools, light industrial P* P P P* Community Centers and Institutions Neighborhood and community centers, including youth and senior centers S S S S S S P P P P P P P P P P Religious, educational and charitable institutions (does not include schools or assembly uses) S S S P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* Hospitals and Extended Care Facilities Extended care, convalescent, nursing, recovery care facilities S S S S S S S P P P P P P P Hospitals S S P/S 6 P P (B)(3) Hospital heliport P (B)(3)(b) Human Services Adult day care S S S S S S S P P P P P P P P P P Foster homes licensed by the appropriate state agencies P P P P P P P P P P Human service establishments P* P* P* P* P* P* P* (B)(4) Sheltered care facilities S S S S S S S S S S P S (B)(5) Parks and Open Space Cemeteries, mausoleums and columbariums S S S S S S P (B)(1) Public parks, playgrounds, playfields P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Religious Assembly All S S S S S S P P P P P P P P P P P Utilities All (includes natural gas regulator station, telephone exchange, water or sewage pumping station or water storage facility) S S S S S S S P S S P P P S (B)(6) COMMERCIAL (Ord. No. 2014-31  11) Animal Sales and Service Veterinary establishments, pet grooming S P* P* P* P P P P* P* P* P* 2 Kennel S P* P* P* P P P P* Arts Activities Arts and crafts studios, galleries and shops; gift shops for the sale of arts and crafts P 10 P P P P P P P P P P 2 Arts and crafts schools P 10 P P P P P P P P P P P 2 Dance studios P 10 P P P P P P P P P P 2 Photographers' studios P 10 P P P P P P P P P P 2 Assembly Private clubs and lodges S S S S S S S P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* 2 Financial Services Banks, credit unions (without drive-through) P P P P P P P P P 2 Banks, credit unions (with drive-through) P* P* P P* P* P* P* P* P 2 Food and Beverages Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, no outdoor entertainment S 3,10 S 3 P* P P P P* P* P* P 2 Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, with outdoor entertainment S 3,10 S 3 P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* 2 Restaurant - full service, with or without incidental alcohol service S 3,10 S 3 P P P P S P P P P Restaurant with bar, cocktail lounge or nightclub comprising more than 25% of total serving area. S 3,10 S* 3 P* P* P P P* P* P* P* 2 Restaurant - Fast service/take-out, no drive-through/drive-up S 3,10 P 4 P P 4 P P P S P P P P Restaurant - with drive-through/drive-up P* P* P* P* S P* P* P* P* 2 Medical Apothecary shops or pharmacies P P P P P P P P P 2 Medical and dental offices or clinics S 10 S P P P P P P P P P P P 2 Offices, Business and Professional Business and professional offices excluding medical and dental and financial services S 10 S P P P P P P P P P P P P 2 Public Accommodation Bed and breakfast houses and inns P P P P P Conference and extended stay lodging facilities P P P P Hotels, motels, residential suite hotels P P P P Vacation time share projects P P P (C)(7) Public Transportation Transit transfer facilities S S P P P S S P P S Recreation and Entertainment Commercial recreational uses and structures; theaters, bowling alleys, pool-rooms, driving ranges, etc. P P P P P P P S 2 Exercise, spas or gym facilities P P P P P P P P 2 Nonprofit theaters for production of live shows P* 10 S P P P P P P P P P 2 Retail Sales and Services Antique stores P 10 P P P P P P P P 2 Art supply stores P 10 P P P P P P P P 2 Bookshops P 10 P P P P P P P P 2 Cabinet shops, custom P 10 P P P P P P P Department and discount stores P P P P P P 2 Flea markets P P P (C)(3) Florist shops P 10 P P P P P P P P P 2 Funeral homes or mortuaries P P P P Furniture stores P P P P P P P 2 Neighborhood grocery stores and laundromats S S S S S S S P S S P 2 (C)(4) Office equipment sales and service; retail sale of office supplies P P P P P P P 2 Retail establishments not listed elsewhere P P P P P P P P 2 Retail and service uses that are intended to serve the primary uses and that do not exceed 5,000 square feet P P P P P 2 Retail sales accessory to any permitted use, provided that such commercial uses shall not occupy more than ten percent of the total floor area of all buildings occupied by the principal use A S 2 Sign shops P P P P P P 2 Service Establishments Barber shops and beauty salons P P P P P P P P P 2 Personal care facilities for the elderly S S P P P P P P P P P P P 2 (C)(7) Personal service establishments including cleaning and laundry, appliance repair and similar services P P P P P P 2 Tailoring and dressmaking shops P P P P P P P P P P P P 2 Sexually Oriented Businesses All P P (C)(1) Storage Individual storage areas within a completely enclosed building S P P P P P P P (D)(2) Mini-storage units S P P P P P P (D)(3) Telecommunication Telecommunications Facilities Permitted as set forth in Section 14-6.2(E) (for facilities in public rights of way see Article 27-2 SFCC 1987) Vehicles and equipment Commercial parking lots and garages P P P P P A P P P See 14- 
8.6(B)(6) Service and repair establishments including filling stations and repair garages P P P P S S Tire recapping and retreading P P P P Industrial Automobile salvage and wrecking yards, junkyards or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display or sales of any scrap, salvage or secondhand building materials, junk automobiles or second hand automobile parts P Research, experimental and testing laboratories P P P P P (D)(4) Manufacturing and Production Light assembly and manufacturing P P P P P Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage lots and yards, except wrecking yards, junkyards or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display, or sales of any scrap, salvage or second-hand building materials, junk automobiles or second-hand automobile parts P P A Warehouse and Freight Movement Wholesaling and distribution operations - 3,000 square feet or less of storage P P P P Wholesaling and distribution operations - over 3,000 square feet of storage P P AGRICULTURAL USES (Ord. No. 2016-41  3) Animal production (H) Commercial stable S (H) Urban Farm Ground Level, less than 10,000 sq ft. A A A A A A P P P P P P P P (I) Urban Farm Ground Level, 10,000 sq ft. - 1 acre S S S S S S P P P P P P P P (I) Urban Farm Ground Level, greater than 1 acre S S S S S S S S S P P S S S (I) Urban Farm Roof Level, Open Air, 1000 sq ft. or less S S S S S S S S S S S S S S (I) Urban Farm Roof Level, Open Air, greater than 1000 sq ft., less than 5000 sq ft. S S S S S S S S (I) Aquaculture, less than 750 sq ft. S S S S S S S S (I) Aquaponics, less than 750 sq ft. S S S S S S S S (I) Aquaponics, greater than 750 sq. ft S S S S S S S S (I) Hydroponics, any size S S S S S S S S (I) Composting S S ACCESSORY USES Accessory structures of a permanent, temporary or portable nature such as coverings not constructed of solid building materials, including inflatable covers over swimming pools and tennis courts and such other accessory structures which exceed 30 inches in height from the average ground elevation. A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Children's play areas and play equipment A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Accessory dwelling units A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A 14-6.3 (C)(1) Greenhouses, noncommercial A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Home occupations A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A 14-6.3 (C)(2) Hospital heliport A 8 Other uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted permissible uses and structures A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Private barbecue pits, private swimming pools A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Private daycare for infants and children A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Private garages A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Residential use ancillary to an approved use A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A 14- 
6.3(B)(5), (B)(6) and (B)(7) Utility sheds, located within the rear yard only A A A A A A A A A A A  
* Special use permit required if located within 200 feet of residentially-zoned property unless a qualifying project located within the Midtown LINC Overlay District; otherwise permitted. (Ord. No. 2013-16  29; Ord. No. 2016-39  3) **Uses listed are in addition to those permitted in the underlying district. No more than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area may be devoted to nonresidential uses. ***See Section 14-7.3(B)(1) for additional MU district regulations including minimum percentage of residential use. (Ord. No. 2013-16  22) 1. In the RR district, multiple- family dwellings are limited to four per lot . 2. Hours of operation limited to 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 3. Amplified live entertainment or amplified music for dancing prohibited after 10 p.m. 4. Not to exceed 1,000 square feet gross floor area , sales of alcohol prohibited. 5. Hospital is a permitted use in the Las Soleras Hospital District; requires special use permit in the Christus St. Vincent Hospital District. 6. See Section 14-6.2(A)(7) for additional regulations for principal dwelling units in the C-2, BIP and SC districts. 7. See Section 14-6.3 for additional accessory use regulations; see Section 14-6.4 (Temporary Uses or Structures) 8. In the Las Soleras Hospital District a heliport serving a hospital is a permitted use. 9. See Section 14-7.2(I) for standards for pre-existing mobile home parks and Section 14-6.2(A)(3)(a) for prohibition of new mobile home parks in MHP districts. 10. See Section 14-7.2(H) 3,000 square foot limit applies to specified uses in RAC district. (Ord. No. 2014-31  11)  
14-6.2 - USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS 
(A)  Residential Uses   
(Ord. No. 2016-20; Prior ordinances include: Ord. Nos. 2012-21, 2012-37) 
(1)  Continuing Care Community 
(a)  Density 
Independent dwelling units are subject to the density standards of the district in which the continuing care community is located. 
(b)  Compliance with state and federal law 
Continuing care communities must comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(2)  Mobile Home, Permanent Installation 
In any district in which permanent single- family occupancy of a mobile home on an individual lot is allowed as a special use permit by the board of adjustment, the following minimum standards apply: 
(a)  the mobile home shall be anchored to a concrete foundation and skirted as specified by the land use director ; 
(b)  the rental or lease of mobile homes used as single- family residences on individual lots is prohibited; and 
(c)  minimum requirements for lot size, front , side and rear yards , and all other standards pertaining to single- family residential land use set forth in Chapter 14 apply. 
(3)  Mobile Home Park 
(a)  Applicability 
New mobile home parks are prohibited as of December 10, 2012 (effective date of this Ordinance No. 2012-37). In a district in which mobile home parks are allowed, the minimum standards set out in this section apply. 
(b)  License 
Prior to beginning operation, a mobile home park owner or operator must obtain a business license from the city under the provisions of Article 18-1 SFCC 1987. 
(c)  Inspection 
The city may inspect a mobile home park for conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Transfer of License 
The city may issue a transfer of the license only after the following: 
(i)  application in writing for transfer of a license and payment of the transfer; 
(ii)  an inspection report by the land use director has been submitted to the governing body , stating conformance or nonconformance with the provisions of this section; 
(iii)  approval by the governing body . 
(e)  Revocation of License 
The governing body may revoke a license to maintain and operate a mobile home park , as provided in Article 18-1 SFCC 1987 when the licensee has violated any provision of this section. 
(f)  Posting 
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times. 
(g)  Standards 
Mobile home parks shall comply with the standards set forth in Subsection 14-7.2(1). 
(4)  Manufactured Homes 
Manufactured homes : 
(a)  are permitted in any district in which site-built, single-family dwellings are allowed; 
(b)  shall meet all requirements of other site-built, single-family dwellings in the same district and all applicable historic or aesthetic standards set forth in Chapter 14; and 
(c)  shall be constructed according to the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR Section 3280. 
(5)  Short-Term Rental of Dwelling Units - Residentially Zoned Property (Ord. No. 2016-33) 
(a)  Dwelling Units 
Dwelling units located on residentially zoned property may not be rented for less than thirty days except as set forth in this Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5). 
(b)  Short-Term Rental Units 
Short-term rental units are prohibited on residentially zoned property except as provided in this Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(b). 
(i)  Short-term rental units that are operated in compliance with Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1) (Accessory Dwelling Units) and in compliance with this Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5) are allowed. 
(ii)  Short-term rental units located in a development containing resort facilities approved pursuant to a special use permit which are owned in common by the owners within the development, are allowed. As used in this item, "resort facility" means any combination of swimming pools, spa facilities, golf courses, restaurants and tennis facilities. 
(iii)  The land use director may issue rental permits in a quantity approved by the governing body through adoption, after a public hearing, of a resolution for residential units not otherwise qualifying for permits under Items (i) and (ii) above. Dwelling units on non-residentially zoned property pursuant to 14-6.2(A)(6) and 14-6.2(A)(7) are not subject to the permit limit imposed by this subsection. 
(iv)  Whenever the demand for short-term rental units exceeds the number permitted in accordance with Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(b)(iii) above, the number of additional permits may be increased by the governing body through adoption of a resolution and issued by the land use director. New permits shall be issued in the order that eligible applications are received. 
(c)  General Provisions 
Unless otherwise stated, the following general provisions apply to short-term rental units: 
(i)  no more than one rental is allowed within a seven consecutive day period; 
(ii)  short-term rental permits will not be issued for more than two short-term rentals units directly adjoining each other on a residentially zoned street. For the purposes of this subsection, "directly adjoining" means sharing a common boundary along a public street frontage, but does not include adjoining units in a condominium, townhouse development, in an apartment complex, or residential compound; 
(iii)  off-street parking shall be provided on site as follows: 1) one bedroom, one parking space; and 2) two or more bedrooms; two parking spaces; 
(iv)  all applicable building and fire life safety codes shall be met and all toilets, faucets and shower heads shall meet the water conservation requirements described in Section 25-2.6 SFCC 1987; 
(v)  occupants shall not park recreational vehicles on site or on the street; 
(vi)  short-term rental units located on residentially-zoned property shall be used exclusively for residential purposes and shall not be used for commercial activities or events, defined as intending to make money, offering goods or services for sale, or any other event or activity that is not residential in nature. An activity "not residential in nature" includes gatherings in excess of three (3) times the number of legally allowed occupants in the short-term rental unit (including occupants), unless the activity or event is otherwise permitted by the city; 
(vii)  the total number of persons that may occupy the short-term rental unit is twice the number of bedrooms; 
(viii)  noise or other disturbance outside the short-term rental unit is prohibited after 10:00 p.m., including decks, portals, porches, balconies or patios; 
(ix)  all occupants shall be informed in writing of relevant city ordinances, including the city's nuisance and water conservation ordinances, by the owner/operator of the short-term rental unit. All occupants shall comply with all relevant city ordinances and comply with all provisions of the lodger's tax ordinance; 
(x)  the owner/operator shall pay all applicable local, state and federal taxes, including lodgers' tax, gross receipts tax and income taxes; 
(xi)  should the owner/operator fail to pay all applicable taxes, the owner/operator shall be subject to penalties pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(f). 
(xii)  the owner/operator shall make available to the city for its inspection all records relating to the operation of the short-term rental unit to determine compliance with this Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5); and 
(xiii)  the owner shall maintain adequate short-term rental insurance coverage for the short-term rental unit. Proof of insurance shall be required at the time the permit is issued and such other times as requested by the land use director. 
(xiv)  upon the transfer of ownership of a short-term rental unit, the short-term rental permit shall terminate and revert to the land use department. If the new owner wishes to use the property as a short-term rental unit, a new application shall be submitted to the land use department. 
(d)  Applications 
Unless otherwise stated, an application for a permit for a short-term rental shall be submitted to the city as follows: 
(i)  the application shall include the name and phone number of the owner/operator who is available twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week to respond to complaints regarding the operation or occupancy of the short-term rental unit as well as the name and phone number of city staff responsible for enforcing this section; 
(ii)  the application shall include a statement signed by the owner/operator that the short-term rental shall be operated in compliance with this subsection and all other applicable city codes and that the operation of the short-term rental unit is in compliance with any applicable private covenants, including those that prohibit the presence of short-term rental; 
(iii)  all applicants must submit proof of all required inspections with their initial application. Renewal applications for the same property may submit proof of all required inspections in the form of a statement attesting to compliance with all applicable fire, health and safety requirements. The city shall perform random inspections to ensure compliance with this Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5). 
(iv)  prior to issuance of a permit, a certificate of occupancy is required to ensure compliance with this paragraph and all applicable codes; 
(v)  the permit is not transferable to another person or property; 
(vi)  within ten days of the issuance of the permit, the owner/operator shall mail notice by first class mail, with certificate of mailing, to the homeowners association (if applicable), and to the owners of properties within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property, exclusive of rights of way, as shown in the records of the county assessor, and by first class mail to the physical addresses of such properties where such address is different than the address of the owner and to the land use department. Notice shall be on a form approved by the land use director, and shall contain the name and phone number of the owner and operator who will be available twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week to respond to complaints regarding the operation or occupancy of the short-term rental as well as the name and phone number of city staff responsible for enforcing this paragraph. Copies of all required mailing lists and mailing certificates shall be provided to the land use director within ten days of the mailing. Failure to provide notification as described in this subsection is subject to penalties and prosecution pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(f); 
(vii)  each application shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100) to cover application processing and inspections. This application fee is non-refundable. 
(viii)  The annual permit fee schedule is as follows: 
Table 14-6.1-1
Annual Permit and Registration Fees* Short-term Rental Type Permit Fee per Unit Registration Fee per Unit  14-6.2A(5)(b)(i) - 
Accessory Dwelling Units $325.00  14-6.2A(5)(b)(ii) - 
Resort Units $100.00  14-6.2A(5)(b)(iii) - 
Residential Units $325.00 14-6.2A(6) Non-Residential Districts and  14-6.2A(7) - Commercial Districts $100.00 Initial Application and Processing Fee (one-time) $100.00 *The annual permit fee shall not be prorated for a portion of the year.  
(ix)  The annual fee includes the city's business registration fee and fees for inspections related to issuance of the short-term rental permit. Revenue from fees imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall be used only to administer, manage, and enforce this section. 
(x)  If payment of a permit fee was in excess of that for which a person was liable, the person may claim a refund by directing to the city finance director a written claim for refund no later than one year from the date payment was made. Every claim for refund shall state the amount and basis for the claim. The city finance director may allow the claim in whole or in part or may deny it. If the claim is not allowed in whole, the person may appeal the decision pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(xi)  Unless revoked as set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(f), a permit holder may renew the permit annually. If not renewed by March 15 of each year, the owner/operator may pay a late fee of fifty dollars ($50) to extend the time for filing to renew to April 15. An owner of an expired permit may submit a new application for a short-term rental permit to the land use director in accordance with Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(b)(iv) subject to availability of permits. 
(xii)  A valid permit number shall be included in all advertising of the short-term rental, including listings on web-based rental sites. 
(e)  Violations 
(i)  The land use director shall document all alleged violations of this paragraph and shall pursue enforcement through the municipal court as set forth in Article 1-3 SFCC 1987 or in another appropriate court of law. The city shall give the owner a written notice of violation, which shall be mailed either to the owner's local or business address or agent's address, informing the owner of the violation. If corrective action is not completed within fifteen (15) days of the date of the letter, the city may file a criminal complaint in municipal court. Upon conviction of a first violation, the land use director shall revoke the permit and operation of the short-term rental shall cease within thirty days. 
(ii)  An owner who offers for rent as a short-term rental a dwelling unit that is not permitted for use as a short-term rental is in violation of this paragraph and is subject to penalties, property liens and/or prosecution pursuant to subsection 14-2(A)(5)(f). 
(iii)  An agent who knowingly assists an owner in advertising or renting a dwelling unit as a short-term rental unit that is not permitted under this subsection 14-6.2(A)(5) is subject to penalties and prosecution, and the agent's business license is subject to revocation. 
(f)  Penalties 
(i)  Any owner who fails to report all applicable taxes, including gross receipts tax and lodger's tax, shall be subject to any and all remedies under the short-term rental ordinance and any other applicable city, county, state, or federal law or statute. Such owner shall also be subject to revocation of their short term rental permit pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5)(e)(i). 
(ii)  If an owner is found guilty of operating a short term rental without a valid permit, they shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500). The city may ask the municipal court to treat each day after the initial written notice of violation as a separate violation and assess two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each day of such daily violations for a total cumulative fine amount. If the city is awarded money as part of a judgment following a court hearing and defendant does not make timely payments to the city, the city may bring an action in lien or equity for the collection of any amounts due. 
(g)  Private restrictive covenants, enforceable by those governed by the covenants, may prohibit short-term rental units. 
(h)  Real estate brokers listing residential property in Santa Fe shall provide prospective buyers a current copy of this ordinance. 
(i)  The land use director shall establish administrative procedures necessary to implement, manage and enforce this paragraph. 
(6)  Short-term Rental of Dwelling Units - Non-residentially Zoned Property 
Short-term rental of dwelling units on non- residentially zoned property is permitted as set forth in Table 14-6.1-1, must be registered; are subject to a one-time one hundred dollar ($100) application, inspection and processing fee; and must comply with submission requirements and report all applicable taxes. 
(7)  Dwelling Units in Specified Commercial Districts (Ord. No. 2016-39  4) 
In the C-2 and SC Districts, dwelling units do not include mobile homes or recreational vehicles and shall be either: 
(a)  accessory dwelling units for occupancy only by owners , employees or tenants of nonresidential uses that are operated on the same premises ; 
(b)  part of a planned development ; or 
(c)  part of a use for which a development plan or special use permit is required; or 
(d)  part of a qualifying residential project within the Midtown LINC Overlay District. 
(8)  Effective Date 
The provisions of Subsection 14-6.2(A)(5) of the Land Development Code shall go into effect immediately upon approval of the Governing Body. A ninety (90) day grace period shall be given for effected units to obtain a valid permit. Short-term rental unit owners who possess a valid short-term rental permit at the time this ordinance (Ordinance 2016-20) is adopted shall be considered to possess a valid permit under the new regulations and shall not need to renew their permit until the following year. Short-term rental unit owners who possess a valid short-term permit for a contiguous property issued prior to this ordinance (Ordinance 2016-20) being adopted shall be deemed as a "residential" permit holder upon the adoption of the ordinance and shall renew their permit as a "residential" permit in following years. 
(B)  Public, Institutional and Civic Uses   
(1)  Cemeteries, Mausoleums and Columbariums 
The total lot area shall not be less than ten acres. 
(2)  Residential Colleges and Universities 
The total lot area shall not be less than ten acres. Minimum street frontage shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet. 
(3)  Hospitals 
(a)  Business and Industrial Park District 
Hospitals in the BIP District shall not be located less than fifty (50) feet from the boundary of a residential use or residential zoning district. 
(b)  Las Soleras Hospital Zone District 
(i)  A hospital and a heliport serving a hospital requires a development plan as set forth in Section 14-3.8. 
(ii)  Prior to the submittal for development plan approval for each phase of development within the Las Soleras HZ district, the applicant shall conduct and submit a market analysis and fiscal impact analysis that analyzes in detail the need for the proposed hospital. The market analysis shall address demand, projected service capacity and build-out; identify primary and secondary market area; estimate projected revenue and expense; and identify the scale and extent of local competition. The fiscal impact analysis shall contain an estimate of net local public costs, including capital outlay and operating expenses, and revenues attributable to the proposed project. Additionally, as a condition for and prior to the granting of development plan approval, any new hospital to be constructed shall participate in meetings at which the Santa Fe County health policy planning commission, Christus St. Vincent Hospital and interested local and regional health care providers have been invited to attend to address impacts of dual hospitals in the community. 
(c)  Christus/St. Vincent Hospital Zone District 
In the Christus/St. Vincent Hospital Zone District, hospitals require approval of a special use permit . 
(4)  Human Services Establishments 
Open space is required as provided in Section 14-7.5 for each lodging unit that contains kitchen facilities. 
(5)  Sheltered Care Facilities 
The requirements for sheltered care facilities are as follows: 
(a)  the ratio of floor area to lot area shall not be greater than 0.4; 
(b)  the required yard on all sides is twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, if a solid masonry wall is built around the perimeter of the property , then the yard may be five (5) feet; 
(c)  open space shall equal one hundred percent of the heated floor area. Open space does not include parking area, streets , driveways, heated space, garages , carports or accessory buildings . Open space shall not measure less than fifteen (15) feet in any of its dimensions, shall be noted as open space on the plat and shall meet all other requirements for common open space as provided in Sections 14-7.5 (Open Space Standards) and 14-8.4(H) (Open Space Planting Standards); 
(d)  no more than one sign , one square foot in area, hung flush to the fence or wall of the structure is allowed to advertise the existence of the structure ; 
(e)  complaints about operation shall be investigated by the land use director and, if a complaint is valid, the facility shall be given thirty days' written notice to remedy the complaint. If the operator fails to remedy the complaint within thirty days after written notice, the governing body , after providing notice to the operator and an opportunity of the operator to be heard, may revoke the license to operate the facility; and 
(f)  all sheltered care facilities shall be licensed by the State . 
(6)  Public or Private Utilities 
(a)  The lot area; screening against light, fumes, noise or unsightliness; protection against unattractive nuisance characteristics; and protection against interference with radio and television reception shall be as required by the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Telecommunication facilities are subject to Subsection 14-6.2(E). 
(c)  Electric facilities are subject to Subsection 14-6.2(F). 
(C)  Commercial Uses   
(1)  Adult Entertainment Facilities 
(a)  Purpose 
In adopting this section, it is recognized that businesses that provide certain types of adult entertainment, wherever and by whomever provided, may provide services or goods that have certain characteristics that can have deleterious effects on the public health, safety or general welfare. It is further recognized that the location of adult entertainment, whether in commercial buildings or private homes, is of interest to the city since there may be exposure of such adult services or goods to minors. It is further recognized that many persons are offended by the display of certain sexual acts or materials, by the appearance of nude or partially nude persons exposing parts of the body that customarily would be covered in public and that include private body parts of either males or females and the female breast portion showing the areola; and that persons are providing adult entertainment services or material. Regulation of adult entertainment through the police power of the municipality is reasonable, necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the public welfare and to ensure that adverse effects do not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of neighborhoods, commercial districts or public facilities and do not adversely affect minors. It is not a deprivation of property to prohibit, limit or otherwise regulate adult entertainment as provided in this paragraph. 
(b)  Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  30) 
(i)  A sexually oriented business shall not be located or presented in a residential district, even temporarily; within one thousand (1,000) feet of a district zoned for residential uses or a district in which single-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings are allowed as principal uses and structures ; or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of real property on which is located any of the following facilities: 1) a school, academy, center or other entity that provides instruction primarily for and attended by minors; 2) a religious institution that conducts religious services, education classes or other gatherings for minors; 3) a public park, playground or public recreation facility; 4) eating and drinking establishments; 5) hotels , motels , rooming and boarding houses; 6) commercial recreational uses and structures such as theaters and bowling alleys; 7) private day-care nurseries and kindergartens; or 8) libraries. 
(ii)  This subsection 14-6.2(C)(1) Adult Entertainment Facilities does not apply to sexually oriented businesses existing at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 2000-8 on February 9, 2000. Such businesses shall be considered nonconforming uses and structures and shall be governed by Article 14-10 (Nonconformities). 
(c)  Public Display of Certain Material Prohibited 
Materials offered for sale from adult newsracks shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner that exposes to public view any pictures or illustrations of adult human genitals or specified sexual activities in a manner that exposes the material to the view of persons outside the building in which the adult bookstore or adult motion picture theater is located. 
(d)  Adult Newsracks, Book Stores and Motion Picture Theaters; Violations; Impoundment of Newsracks 
(i)  The provisions of Article 14-10 pertaining to nonconforming uses are applicable to adult newsracks , adult bookstores and adult motion picture theaters and they are required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(ii)  An adult newsrack that violates this section may be impounded by a city police officer or the land use director after: 1) a notice of violation has been affixed to the adult newsrack stating the provision of this section that has been violated and stating that the adult newsrack will be impounded if the violation is not abated within three days; 2) the violation is not abated within three days of the posting of the notice of violation; 3) the police department presents to the municipal court affidavits or other evidence sufficient to show a prima facie violation of this section; and 4) the municipal court issues a written order for the impoundment of the adult newsrack pursuant to this section. 
(iii)  When an adult newsrack is impounded, a complaint for violation of this section shall be filed within fourteen days of the impounding; if such action is not commenced within fourteen days or if a final appealable decision in such action is rendered more than sixty days from the filing of the action, the adult newsrack , together with its contents and all money, if any, shall be released to the person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of the adult newsrack , without requiring the payment of an impound fees. No adult newsrack shall be released because a final appealable decision was not rendered within sixty days of the filing of the action if the claimant of the adult newsrack is responsible for extending the judicial determination beyond the allowable time limit. 
(iv)  The person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of the adult newsrack may have the adult newsrack , together with its contents and all money, if any, returned upon paying an impound fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or upon order of the municipal court, if any, that authorized the seizure of the adult newsrack , or pursuant to the terms of item (iii) of this section. Should there be a dismissal of the action charging a violation of this section or an acquittal of the charges, the court ordering the dismissal or entering the acquittal may provide for the release of the adult newsrack and its contents impounded or the return of an impound fee paid for the release of the adult newsrack impounded pursuant to such charges. 
(v)  All adult bookstores and adult motion picture theaters as defined in Chapter 14 that were lawful before the effective date of Ordinance 2002-37 and that violate any provision of this section shall have ninety days from the effective date of Ordinance 2002-37 within which to terminate the violation. If the violation is not terminated within ninety days, the adult bookstore or adult motion picture theater shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(C)(1)(e) and, in addition, the city attorney may apply to the district court for an injunction to prohibit the offending adult bookstore or adult motion picture theater from operating its business until the violation is terminated. 
(e)  Penalty 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person who violates this section may be punished as follows: 
(i)  by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed ninety days; 
(ii)  by forfeiture of the adult newsrack impounded pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(C)(1)(d), providing a reasonable value of the adult newsrack does not exceed three hundred dollars ($300); 
(iii)  a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300); or 
(iv)  a combination of imprisonment, forfeiture and fine; provided that in no event shall a fine imposed, when added to the reasonable value of the impounded adult newsrack that is forfeited, exceed the sum of three hundred dollars ($300). 
(f)  Licensing of Sexually Oriented Businesses 
(i)  Except as provided in item (iv) below, after the effective date of this section, no sexually oriented business shall be operated or maintained in Santa Fe without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the city . 
(ii)  A license may be issued for only one sexually oriented business located at a fixed and certain place. A person who desires to operate more than one sexually oriented business must have a license for each business. 
(iii)  A license or interest in a license is not transferable to any other person . 
(iv)  All sexually oriented businesses existing and properly registered with the city at the time of the passage of this section must submit an application for a license within ninety days of the passage of this section. If an application is not received within the ninety-day period, the existing sexually oriented business shall forfeit registration and cease operations. 
(v)  A person desiring to secure a license shall make application to the city's accounts receivable office. The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the accounts receivable office. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly to the Santa Fe police department and to the applicant . 
(vi)  The application shall be on a form provided by the accounts receivable office. An applicant , which includes all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant ; all officers or directors of a corporate applicant ; and all stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of a corporate applicant ; or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, shall furnish the information requested on the accounts receivable office form, which shall include the following information under oath: 1) name and address, including all aliases; 2) written proof that the individual is at least eighteen years of age; 3) whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, city or state under a sexually oriented business license or similar business license; 4) whether the applicant has ever had sexually oriented business license suspended or revoked and the reason for such suspension or revocation and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation; 5) all convictions of criminal statutes, whether federal or state or city ordinance violations, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on any charges except minor traffic violations; 6) the address of the sexually oriented business to be operated by the applicant and a full description of the nature of the business ; and 7) if the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and the name and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in the corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(vii)  Within twenty-one days of receiving an application for a license, the accounts receivable office shall notify the applicant whether the license is granted or application denied. 
(viii)  If application is denied, the accounts receivable office shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for the denial. If the applicant requests a hearing within thirty days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held in accordance with Subsection 14-6.2(C). 
(ix)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give requested information or the giving by the applicant of false or misleading information relevant to the application constitutes an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for a license and is grounds for denial of a license. 
(g)  Standards for Issuance of License 
To receive a license to operate a sexually oriented business , an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(i)  If the applicant is an individual: 1) must be at least eighteen years of age; 2) shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application ; 3) the applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this section within five years immediately preceding the date of the application and the municipal court shall provide disposition of all ordinance violations at the request of the accounts payable office. 
(ii)  If the applicant is a corporation: 1) all officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under Subsection (C)(1)(f)(vii) shall be at least eighteen years of age; 2) no officer, director or stockholder required to be named under that subitem shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application ; and 3) no officer, director or stockholder required to be named under that subitem shall have been found to have previously violated this section within five years immediately preceding the date of this application . 
(iii)  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest: 1) all persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least eighteen years of age; 2) no persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application ; and 3) no person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have previously violated any provision of this section within five years immediately preceding the date of this application . 
(h)  Display of License 
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the sexually oriented business . 
(i)  Renewal of License 
(i)  Every license issued pursuant to this paragraph terminates at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. An operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the accounts receivable office. The application for renewal must be filed not later than sixty days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the accounts receivable office. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly to the Santa Fe police department and to the operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the accounts receivable office and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license. 
(ii)  A renewal fee shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than sixty days before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the renewal fee shall be returned. 
(iii)  If the Santa Fe police department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the accounts receivable office. 
(j)  Revocation of License 
(i)  The governing body shall revoke a license for any of the following reasons: 1) discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from an application ; 2) the operator or any employee of the operator, violated any provision of this section or any regulation adopted by the governing body pursuant to this section; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee , the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty days if the governing body finds that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of the violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had actual or constructive knowledge; 3) the operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license; 4) any cost or fee required to be paid by this section is not paid; and 5) any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is illegally served or consumed on the premises of the sexually oriented business . 
(ii)  The governing body , before revoking or suspending a license, shall give the operator at least ten days written notice of the charges and the opportunity for a public hearing before the governing body , as provided in this Subsection (C)(1)(j)(ii). 
(iii)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(iv)  An operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as a sexually oriented business for six months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(k)  Physical Layout of Sexually Oriented Businesses 
A sexually oriented business that has available for customers, patrons or members a booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Access 
Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the sexually oriented establishment and shall be unobstructed by a door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(ii)  Construction 
Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 1) each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall; 2) have at least one side totally open to the public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of any occupants; 3) all walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to the height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleaned; 4) the floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleaned; 5) the lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use shall be a minimum of ten foot candles at all times, as measured at the floor. 
(iii)  Occupants 
Only one person shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. An occupant shall not engage in any type of sexual activity or cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. A person shall not damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
(l)  Responsibilities of the Operator 
(i)  The operator shall maintain a register of all employees , showing the name and aliases used by the employee , home address, age, birth date, sex, telephone numbers, social security number, date of employment and termination and duties of each employee . The information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years following termination. 
(ii)  The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the Santa Fe police department at all reasonable times. 
(iii)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this paragraph shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. The operator shall be punishable for an employee's act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(iv)  Any act or omission of an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this paragraph shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(v)  An employee of a sexually oriented business shall not allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent the sexually oriented business or to allow any minor to view the sexually oriented activities, performances, materials or other related matter or act as defined in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(vi)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(vii)  The operator shall maintain at least ten foot candles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. 
(viii)  The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this paragraph. 
(m)  Administrative Procedure 
A person aggrieved by a final action of a city official, officer or department may file an appeal contesting the final action of the city relating to denial, renewal, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension of a license for a sexually oriented business pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(n)  Exclusions 
All accredited and duly licensed private schools and public schools in Santa Fe are exempt from obtaining a license pursuant to this paragraph when instructing pupils in sex education as part of their curriculum. 
(o)  Enforcement 
The land use department may enter any sexually oriented business at all reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this paragraph. If during the inspection circumstances indicate a violation of an ordinance or other law, the code enforcement officers shall report their findings to the Santa Fe police department for further investigation or other response as indicated. 
(2)  Apothecary Shops or Pharmacies 
The business shall be confined principally to the compounding and dispensing at retail of drugs and medicines and the sale of medical and dental supplies and devices. 
(3)  Flea Markets 
(a) Such uses shall: 
(i)  meet the requirements of Sections 14-8.4 (Landscape and Site Design), 14-8.6 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) and 14-8.10 (Signs). For the purposes of implementing sign regulations of Section 14-8.10, a flea market constitutes one business establishment; 
(ii)  meet the requirements of the garbage, litter and weed ordinances; 
(iii)  not operate as a campground; 
(iv)  not be located on open space or landscaping areas required by Chapter 14 for another building or use; 
(v)  be located on parking areas only so long as enough area remains to meet all parking required by Chapter 14 for both the flea market and the other building or use. This cumulative parking requirement may be reduced pursuant to Section 14-8.6(B)(4); however, if a development plan is required, the reduction may be approved by the planning commission concurrently with the development plan; and 
(vi)  be required to obtain a certificate of occupancy whether or not a construction permit is required. 
(b)  For flea markets with fifteen or more vendors, development plans showing parking, vendor area and landscaping shall be approved by the planning commission as set forth in Section 14-3.8. For flea markets with fewer than fifteen vendors, a site plan showing parking, vendor area and landscaping shall be approved by the land use director . Fewer than five individual vendors located on a property does not constitute a flea market . 
(c)  Complaints about flea market operation shall be reviewed by the land use director and, if valid, the facility shall be given one to five days written notice to remedy the complaint. If the operator fails to remedy the complaint within the time provided in the written notice, the governing body may set a public hearing to consider revocation of the operator's license. The operator shall be given notice of the public hearing and an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  These provisions do not apply to markets located on city property that are subject to an alternate approval process. 
(4)  Neighborhood Grocery Stores and Laundromats 
(a)  a solid masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height shall be erected along side and rear lot lines of neighborhood grocery stores and laundromats with adjoining residential lots ; 
(b)  no more than one wall sign of not more than twenty percent of the front wall area, excluding doors and windows, is allowed; and 
(c)  the maximum floor area ratio is 3.0:1. The maximum floor area is three thousand (3,000) square feet; and 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  14) 
(5)  Private Clubs and Lodges 
(a)  This use type does not include uses the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
(b)  In all residential districts except R-10, R-12, R-21, R-29 and RAC, the following additional standards apply: 
(i)  the facility shall not have a lot area of less than two acres; and 
(ii)  a structure in connection with the facility shall not be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any lot line. 
(6)  Personal Care Facilities for the Elderly 
All state and federal laws and regulations governing the facility shall be complied with prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy . 
(7)  Vacation Time Share Projects 
The provision of operating or management services to single or multiple owners of vacation time share projects is a commercial use whether or not the management services are provided on the same site as the timeshare units, and operators and managers are required to obtain a business registration from the city . 
(8)  Veterinary Establishments 
Except in an RR district, the following shall apply: 
(a)  the facilities provide treatment for animals of a nonagricultural, domestic household nature only, including dogs, cats, caged birds and other animals typically capable of being housed within a family dwelling unit ; 
(b)  the facilities contain no external kennels or areas of boarding, training, breeding or exercising of animals; 
(c)  overnight boarding of animals for medical purposes is only accommodated by soundproof rooms contained within the facility; 
(d)  continuous or repetitious noise or odors discernible at the lot line are cause for investigation by the land use director , potentially leading to revocation of the occupancy permit ; and 
(e)  any treatment facility for large or typically farm animals, including horses, cows, sheep, chickens and pigs, are excluded from the list of permitted uses. 
(D)  Industrial Uses   
(1)  Salvage Yards 
Salvage yards are subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  front yards and yards adjoining residential districts shall have a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet. The yards may be used for customer parking or for landscaping and shall not be used for storage or display; 
(b)  they shall be enclosed by solid walls or solid fences at least six (6) feet in height, with access only through solid gates that are kept closed when not in use; 
(c)  objects shall not be stacked or stored higher than the minimum height of the enclosing wall or fence required in Subsection 14-6.2(D)(1)(b), except within a completely enclosed building ; and 
(d)  all uses shall conform to performance standards as set forth in Section 10-4 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  Individual Storage Areas Within a Completely Enclosed Building 
Storage units that are not directly accessible from outside a building are subject to the following limitations: 
(a)  the plan for operation of the storage area is compatible with other permitted uses existing in the vicinity; 
(b)  the storage area shall not unreasonably interfere with permitted uses because of glare, traffic congestion or any similar nuisance; 
(c)  an individual storage unit shall not exceed two hundred square feet; 
(d)  outdoor storage is prohibited on the site if located within a C-2 district or the BCD; 
(3)  Mini Storage Units 
Storage units that are directly accessible from outside a building are subject to the following limitation: 
(a)  a wall or fencing plan shall be submitted for staff review and approval prior to issuance of a construction permit . Walls or fencesshall provide a visual buffer or screen and be constructed of opaque materials; 
(b)  a landscape plan meeting all the requirements of Section 14-8.4 shall be submitted to the land use director for approval prior to issuance of a construction permit ; 
(c)  the architecture shall be compatible with the zoning district as approved by the land use director . One dwelling unit , excluding manufactured homes , is allowed as part of the storage unit development and it must be architecturally compatible with the storage units. No portion of the storage units or the dwelling unit shall exceed one story in height; 
(d)  lighting shall be of a nature that is not intrusive to surrounding residential uses; 
(e)  mini-storage units approved after July 25, 2007 shall comply with the following: 
(i)  a building shall not be located fewer than one hundred (100) feet from a residentially zoned property unless the required landscaping buffer adjacent to the residentially zoned property is twice the otherwise required width; and 
(ii)  an eight (8) foot masonry wall , either stuccoed on the outside or made of decorative block, is required along any property line abutting a residentially zoned property ; 
(4)  Research, Experimental and Testing Laboratories 
These uses shall comply with the performance standards of Section 10-4 SFCC 1987 and shall not produce any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, gas, glare or electrical interference or otherwise create a risk to health, safety or property of residents or occupants of adjacent or neighboring residential properties . 
(E)  Telecommunication Facilities   
(1)  Purpose 
The purposes of this section are to: 
(a)  comply with applicable state and federal laws and regulations regarding the provision of telecommunications services ; 
(b)  consistent with the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, establish regulations that do not discriminate among telecommunications providers ; 
(c)  promote regulatory certainty; 
(d)  minimize adverse land use impacts of towers and antennas by: 
(i)  encouraging the location of towers in nonresidential districts in order to preserve the character of Santa Fe neighborhoods; 
(ii)  requiring co-location of antennas , minimizing new tower sites, and encouraging the use of minimally visually intrusive technology to the maximum extent technically feasible; and 
(iii)  requiring careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques, including tower alternatives , consistent with applicable state and federal requirements, including FAA requirements; and 
(e)  enhance the ability of telecommunications providers to provide telecommunication services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(2)  Applicability 
(a)  This section applies to all towers and antennas located within the city's jurisdiction, whether upon private or public lands, except as provided in Subsection 14-6.2(E)(2)(b). 
(b)  except as otherwise noted, this subsection shall not apply to the following: 
(i)  towers and antennas located within the city's public rights of way for which a franchise agreement is required pursuant to Article 27-2 SFCC 1987; 
(ii)  towers and antennas located on state or federal land, except to the extent the city has jurisdiction over the same by law or by contract; 
(iii)  towers under seventy (70) feet in height used for receive-only antennas that are owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or otherwise used exclusively for receive-only antennas ; 
(iv)  towers or antennas existing prior to March 25, 1998 or for which a construction permit had been issued prior to March 25, 1998, but only to the extent of permits issued prior to June 11, 2011; 
(v)  towers or antennas constructed or installed on city -owned property pursuant to a lease with the city approved by the governing body prior to June 11, 2011, but only to the extent of permits issued prior to June 11, 2011; 
(vi)  towers and antennas used exclusively for emergency services, including police and fire, and operation of the city water utility; 
(vii)  antennas and other over-the-air receiving devices for the reception of video images that do not exceed one meter in diagonal length or diameter or are designed to receive television broadcast signals only; provided that any such antenna located in a historic district or on residentially zoned property shall, to the maximum extent technically feasible without requiring new or additional construction, be screened from the view of adjacent properties and public rights of way unless the screening would create a greater visual impact than the unscreened antenna . Screening may include existing parapets, walls or similar architectural elements if they are painted and texturized to integrate with the architecture of the building or other structure or landscaping ; 
(viii)  maintenance, repair and replacement of existing telecommunications facilities to the extent that there is no significant adverse visual impact and maintenance or improvements to existing infrastructure such as painting over graffiti on walls or renewing landscaping ; or 
(ix)  the modification of existing telecommunications facilities to the extent that there is no significant adverse visual impact. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the applicability of this section, all telecommunications facilities are subject to the requirements of Chapter 7 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  Administrative Approval 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  12) 
Administrative approval as set forth in this paragraph is separate from and required prior to the submittal of a required construction permit application . 
(a)  The following shall require submittal of an application for administrative review and approval: 
(i)  the addition of an antenna to an existing tower or structure ; 
(ii)  relocation of an existing tower to within fifty (50) feet of the original tower site for the purpose of accommodating the co-location of one or more additional antennas ; 
(iii)  new towers or antennas in C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts; 
(iv)  face-mounted and roof mounted antennas that are painted and texturized to match the building or structure to which they are attached and that do not have significant adverse visual impact; and 
(v)  tower alternatives outside residentially zoned districts . 
(b)  Applications for administrative approval shall comply with the submittal requirements of Subsection 14-6.2(E)(6). 
(c)  Administrative approval shall not be granted for new antennas in the historic, escarpment or south central highway corridor overlay districts, except for the co-location of new antennas, which shall require administrative review and approval pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(E)(3)(a)(i). 
(d)  Within forty-five days of receiving a complete application for administrative approval, the land use director shall review and approve the application if it complies with the requirements of this section. Denial of an application for administrative approval shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for the denial. Denial of an application constitutes a final action and is subject to appeal pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(4)  Planning commission and Historic Design Districts Board Review Required 
(a)  A tower or antenna that is not otherwise permitted or administratively approved shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commissionfor compliance with this section and all applicable city codes. In approving an application , the planning commission shall determine that: 
(i)  the application complies with this section; 
(ii)  the proposed telecommunications facilities are necessary to close a demonstrated significant gap in service coverage of the applicant based on actual signal strength data for the area where the gap is claimed and for the type of gap claimed; 
(iii)  the applicant has demonstrated that no other less intrusive means or alternative to the proposed telecommunications facilities siting and design is practicable; 
(b)  A tower or antenna that is located in a historic district and is not otherwise permitted or administratively approved shall be reviewed and approved by the historic districts review board in accordance with applicable requirements of Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts) and in accordance with this Subsection 14-6.2(E) as follows. In approving an application , the historic districts review board shall determine that: 
(i)  the application complies with applicable requirements of Section 14-5.2 and this section; and 
(ii)  the applicant has demonstrated that no other less intrusive means or alternative to the proposed telecommunications facilities siting is practicable. 
(c)  The planning commission or the historic districts review board may not regulate the placement of telecommunications facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions where such telecommunications facilities comply with 47 C.F.R. 1.1310 et seq. 
(d)  The planning commissionor the historic districts review board may place conditions upon its approval of an application , but the conditions shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of telecommunication services . 
(e)  A denial of an application or an approval of an application with conditions not approved by the applicant shall: 
(i)  be in writing; 
(ii)  cite to the administrative record; and 
(iii)  shall not become final until the writing is approved by the planning commission or historic districts review board, as applicable, at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(f)  The planning commission and historic districts review board shall each review applications submitted under this section as soon as reasonably practicable without regard to the other's schedule or decision. 
(5)  General Requirements 
All towers and antennas , whether administratively approved or requiring planning commission or historic districts review board approval, shall comply with all applicable city codes and with the following: 
(a)  Zoning Districts; Location 
Telecommunications facilities are permitted in all zoning districts in accordance with the requirements of this section. However, to the maximum extent technically feasible, telecommunications facilities shall be sited: 
(i)  on existing structures ; 
(ii)  in nonresidential districts; and 
(iii)  in C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts. 
(b)  Maximum Height 
Telecommunications facilities located on existing structures shall not exceed the height of the structure upon which the facility is located unless otherwise allowedunder this section. Telecommunications facilities located on new structures shall not exceed the maximum height for buildings otherwise allowed as set forth in Chapter 14 with the exception that in C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts the height limit of telecommunications facilities shall be one hundred feet. 
(c)  Aesthetic Requirements 
Subject to applicable federal standards and design and safety codes, the following criteria must be met: 
(i)  telecommunications facilities shall be installed underground to the maximum extent technically feasible; 
(ii)  if above ground, the telecommunications facilities shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to minimize the visual impact upon adjacent lands, public rights of way and residentially zoned property . Acceptable methods to minimize visual impact include concealment, screening , camouflaging, color, materials, texture, shape, size and location; 
(iii)  consideration shall be given to minimize disruption to or alteration of the natural land forms and landscape ; and 
(iv)  permanent lighting of telecommunications facilities shall not be allowed unless there is no alternative available to comply with federal law, in which case all proposed lighting shall be shown in the application . Permanent lighting shall not include equipment status indicator lights exceeding fifteen watts of power. 
(d)  Archaeological Requirements 
Compliance with Section 14-5.3 SFCC 1987 regarding the city's archaeological review districts is required. 
(e)  Signs 
Signs are not allowed unless required for safety reasons or otherwise in compliance with federal, state or local law, or unless permitted by the city . 
(f)  Telecommunications facilities Maintenance 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained so as to be safe, orderly, attractive and in conformity with all applicable federal, state and city laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. Weeds, trash and graffiti shall be promptly removed. All lockable telecommunications facilities shall be kept locked when not being actively serviced. All non-lockable telecommunications facilities shall be kept closed when not being actively serviced. All telecommunications facilities shall be kept free of graffiti. 
(g)  Noise 
All telecommunications facilities shall be designed, constructed and installed in such a manner as to minimize noise to the maximum extent feasible, but in no event shall noise exceed the standards set forth in Article 10-2 SFCC 1987. 
(h)  Restoration of Improvements 
Promptly upon completion of a tower or antenna construction, all public and private property improvements, landscaping , fixtures, structures and facilities damaged in the course of construction shall be restored to a condition not less than its condition before commencement of construction or as otherwise agreed to by the applicant . 
(i)  Airport 
Telecommunications facilities within the Class D airspace surrounding the Santa Fe airport shall be constructed in conformity with all applicable FAA regulations. A copy of any submittals required to be made to the FAA shall be provided to the city's airport manager at the time the submittal is made to the FAA. 
(j)  Co-location Requirement 
A tower or tower alternative shall not be approved unless the applicant and the telecommunications owner agree to allow on a nondiscriminatory basis, to the maximum extent technically feasible, the co-location of other antennas on commercially reasonable terms on the approved tower or tower alternative . 
(k)  Tower Setbacks and Separation Distances Between Towers 
All towers shall be set back a distance equal to at least one hundred percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line, measured from the base of the tower . A tower shall not be sited closer than one thousand (1,000) linear feet to another tower , measured from the base of the towers , unless co-location on the existing tower is not technically feasible or would have a significant adverse visual impact. (Ord. No. 2014-31  13) 
(l)  Certification 
On or before one year after the date of any final action approving an application and annually thereafter, the applicant shall provide to the land use director the certification of qualified independent parties that based on an inspection of the approved telecommunications facilities their structural integrity remains intact and they remain in compliance with the radio frequency exposure limits set out in 47 C.F.R. 1.310 Table 1(A) and (B). 
(6)  Application Submittal Requirements 
(a)  All applications shall be in writing in a form prescribed and as necessary updated by the land use director . If an application is determined to be incomplete, the land use director shall provide written notice to the applicant no later than fifteen business days after the submittal date of missing and incomplete items. Applicants submitting for planning commission approval pursuant to Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 (Telecommunication Services) may, but need not, include telecommunications facilities located outside the public rights of way in that submittal. 
(b)  All applications for telecommunications facilities shall include the following: 
(i)  an application letter describing the proposed telecommunications facilities and signed by an authorized representative of the applicant with knowledge of its contents and attesting to its truth and completeness; 
(ii)  a scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the telecommunications facilities ; on-site land uses and zoning; adjacent land uses and zoning, including when adjacent to other jurisdictions; adjacent roadways; proposed means of access; setbacks from property lines; elevation drawings of the proposed telecommunications facilities and any other structures , equipment cabinets, topography and parking; and other information deemed by the land use director to be necessary to assess compliance with this section; 
(iii)  the setback distance between the proposed telecommunications facilities and an adjacent residentially zoned property or BCD zoned property ; 
(iv)  a map and corresponding inventory of telecommunications facilities owned or operated by the applicant within the city's jurisdiction and within three miles of the city's jurisdiction, including the location, height and design type of each antenna and tower as follows: 1) proposed telecommunications facilities for which an approval is being sought; 2) existing telecommunications facilities ; 3) approved but not yet constructed telecommunications facilities ; and 4) additional telecommunications facilities proposed in the twelve months immediately following the application submittal date. 
(v)  a radio frequency (RF) coverage map showing the level of existing RF coverage and RF coverage after construction of the proposed telecommunications facilities ; 
(vi)  a search ring map illustrating the area within which the applicant explored for potential telecommunications facilities sites; 
(vii)  an analysis assessing the feasibility of alternative sites to the one proposed, including the potential for co-location, in the vicinity of the proposed site, including an explanation of why other sites were not selected for siting; 
(viii)  an analysis assessing the feasibility of alternative antenna configurations, both at the proposed site and in the surrounding vicinity, that might result in less visual impact, including an explanation of why other antenna configurations were not selected; 
(ix)  technical information supporting the proposed height of the proposed antenna mount; 
(x)  written and notarized certifications by the applicant as follows: 1) that co-location, to the maximum extent technically feasible and upon commercially reasonable terms, will be allowed on a non-discriminatory basis if the application is approved, or an explanation of why co-location is not technically feasible; 2) to the extent that the proposed telecommunications facilities are located in the historic, escarpment or south central highway corridor overlay districts or do not comply with the priorities set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(E)(5)(a), that the applicant has investigated alternative siting and that no other practicable alternative exists; 3) that the proposed telecommunications facilities comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements, including without limitation radio frequency radiation exposure limits set out in 47 C.F.R. 1.310 Table 1(A) and (B), building codes and all other safety standards; national historic preservation act requirements for the siting of facilities that are listed or are eligible for listing in the national register of historic places; and all franchises, leases and other contracts, if any, for the use of real property required by any regulatory body with jurisdiction, for the construction or operation of telecommunications facilities in the city have been obtained; 4) that the proposed telecommunications facilities are necessary to close a defined and significant gap in service coverage based on actual signal strength data for the area where the gap is claimed and for the type of gap claimed and that the proposed facilities are the least intrusive method to do so; 5) that the applicant will remove the proposed telecommunications facilities if required to pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(E)(11) and that if the applicant fails to do so, the city may remove the facilities at the applicant's expense and that expense, if unpaid upon demand, shall constitute a lien upon the property where such facilities are located. In the event that the applicant is not the owner of the facilities and property , the applicant shall provide certification to this effect by the owner of the facilities and the property ; and 6) that the proposed telecommunications facility will be completed and will be used to provide telecommunication services within one hundred eighty days of the date the application is finally approved, or, if a construction permit is required, the date the construction permit is issued; 
(xi)  a traffic control plan if required by Section 23-2.17 SFCC 1987; 
(xii)  construction drawings sealed by a professional engineer ; 
(xiii)  written acknowledgment by the applicant that the application and related submittals constitute a public record under the New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act and are required to be made available to members of the public for inspection upon request in accordance with city practice; and 
(xiv)  such other information as may reasonably be required by the land use director . 
(7)  Fees 
Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the governing body . 
(8)  Waivers 
(a)  The planning commission may grant a waiver of the standards set forth in this section or otherwise within its jurisdiction only if the planning commission finds that the waiver: 
(i)  is in the best interest of the community as a whole; 
(ii)  will expedite the approval of an antenna or tower ; 
(iii)  will not jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare, to the extent the city has jurisdiction; 
(iv)  will either mitigate the adverse visual impacts of antenna and tower proliferation or limit the need for construction of new towers or antennas ; 
(v)  will better serve the purposes set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(E)(1); and 
(vi)  if the proposed site is located in the escarpment or south central highway corridor overlay districts, that the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning commission that it has explored all alternatives to the proposed site and to the proposed design and that location outside those districts is not practicable. 
(b)  Factors to be considered in granting a waiver include: 
(i)  the design of the proposed telecommunications facilities , with particular reference to design elements that reduce or eliminate adverse visual impact including lighting; 
(ii)  the nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties , including proximity to residentially zoned property , the BCD and historic, escarpment and south central highway corridor overlay districts; 
(iii)  the surrounding topography; 
(iv)  the surrounding vegetation; 
(v)  the availability of existing towers or other structures for co-location or of alternative antenna configurations with less visual impact; 
(vi)  the proposed ingress and egress; and 
(vii)  improved telecommunication services to Santa Fe residents and institutions. 
(c)  The historic districts review board may grant a waiver of the standards set forth in this subsection or otherwise within its jurisdiction only if the board finds that: 
(i)  the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that it has explored all alternatives to the proposed site in the historic district and to the proposed design; and 
(ii)  the conditions of Sections 14-5.2(C)(5)(c)(i) through (iii), (v) and (vi) have been met. 
(9)  Appeals 
Appeals shall be made in accordance with Section 14-3.17 SFCC 1987. 
(10)  Notice 
(a)  Administrative Approvals 
Applications for administrative approvals shall comply with the following notice requirements: 
(i)  within twenty-four hours of submitting an application to the land use director , the applicant shall provide notification by certificate of mailing, proof of which is submitted to the land use director to be included with the application , to all property owners and addresses within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed site, exclusive of right of way , and, if the proposed site lies within the boundaries of a neighborhood association that has been listed with the land use director , to such neighborhood association; 
(ii)  within twenty-four hours of submitting an application to the land use director , the applicant shall post at the proposed tower or antenna site a public notice poster provided for that purpose by the land use director . The notice shall be prominently displayed, visible from a public street . The applicant shall use its best efforts to ensure that the poster remains in place until the appeal period as set forth in Section 14-3.17 has expired; 
(iii)  the notification and poster shall describe generally the telecommunications facilities proposed for the site and identify the applicant , the nature of the application , the proposed tower or antenna site and the contact phone number of the land use director . 
(b)  Early Neighborhood Notification 
Applications for review by the planning commission shall comply with the early neighborhood notification procedures set forth in Section 14-3.1(F) 
(c)  Public Hearings 
Notice of public hearings shall comply with Section 14-3.1(H). 
(11)  Removal of Abandoned Towers and Antennas 
(a)  This paragraph applies to all towers and antennas regardless of the date of construction. 
(b)  An antenna or tower that is not used for the provision of telecommunication services for a continuous period of six months shall be deemed to be abandoned and the owner of the antenna or tower shall remove it within ninety days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of the telecommunications facilities and the owner of the property upon which the telecommunications facilities are located. 
(c)  Failure to remove an abandoned tower or antenna within the ninety days shall be grounds for the city to remove it at the expense of both the owner of the telecommunications facilities and the owner of the property upon which the telecommunications facilities are located. The city may file a lien on the property where the telecommunications facilities are located for the expenses incurred by the city , including the costs associated with filing the lien. 
(12)  Enforcement 
The land use director has the authority to interpret this section in accordance with its purposes and shall administer and enforce its provisions. 
(F)  Electric Facilities   
(1)  Purpose 
The purposes of this section are to: 
(a)  identify and, to the extent reasonable and practicable, reduce negative impacts on Santa Fe residents due to new and expanded electric facilities ; 
(b)  ensure that electric service providers can continue to provide safe and reliable electric service that meets both the current and future needs of Santa Fe; 
(c)  promote planning and regulatory certainty; 
(d)  ensure the highest degree of coordination between the city , its residents and electric service providers to achieve the objectives of both the providers and the public; 
(e)  encourage thoughtful design of electric facilities through careful siting, landscaping and architectural enhancements consistent with local, state and federal requirements and recognize the need for an electric service provider to operate and maintain the electrical system safely; 
(f)  support the joint use of electric facilities and distribution facilities; and 
(g)  ensure compliance with Section 3-19-11 NMSA 1978 (Legal Status of Master Plan) and all other controlling regulatory requirements under state andfederal law and such other laws and regulations that may be applicable. 
(2)  Electric Facilities Plan 
The governing body shall adopt an electric facilities plan as an amendment to the general plan by passage of a resolution. 
(3)  Annual Informational Meeting for Proposed Electric Projects 
Notwithstanding any other process contemplated by this section, an electric service provider shall provide a list of proposed electric projects and request an annual meeting for an informational presentation with the land use director , the planning commission, the historic districts review board and the public utilities committee. The electric service provider, if requested, shall provide an informational briefing to the governing body . 
(4)  Applicability 
(a)  This subsection applies to electric projects located within the city limits whether upon private or public lands; provided, however, that this subsection applies to electric projects on state and federal lands only to the extent of the city's jurisdiction or in accordance with any contractual understanding. Nothing in this section shall be deemed a waiver of the city's police power authority to seek redress against any person placing electric facilities in such a location or manner as to create a risk to public safety. 
(b)  This subsection does not apply to the following: 
(i)  the installation of distribution facilities consisting of three or fewer poles ; 
(ii)  electric facilities and distribution facilities in existence prior to October 29, 2008; 
(iii)  emergency and temporary facilities or the emergency repair of electric facilities ; and 
(iv)  the installation of any distribution underground system. 
(5)  No Application Required 
The following shall not require submittal of an application for review under this subsection; however, compliance with Subsection 14-6.2(F)(9) is required: 
(a)  station maintenance, including equipment replacement or upgrade inside existing walls to a higher capacity, and maintenance or improvements to existing infrastructure such as painting over graffiti on walls or renewing landscaping ; 
(b)  the modification or addition of equipment, control units or electric structures within a substation to the extent that there is no significant outside visual impact; 
(c)  use of substation property for temporary storage for less than one year of materials to the extent there is no outside visual impact; 
(d)  any line maintenance, including repair, modification or replacement of poles with poles of similar height and appearance, such poles to be not more than ten (10) feet taller than existing poles measured above ground height, and repair or replacement of components with a similar component such as guy wires and anchors, insulators and hardware on existing electric structures ; 
(e)  reconductoring or reframing on existing electric structures or lines to the extent not inconsistent with Subsection 14-6.2(F)(5)(f), below; 
(f)  upgrade of line capacity that does not increase the total number of electric structures by ten percent added electric structures , or more than ten (10) added feet of height on any individual electric structure or any additional new conductor on the electric structures ; 
(g)  installation of equipment, such as switches or splice boxes, and communications cables and appurtenances on existing electric structures or lines; 
(h)  erection and removal of temporary facilities; 
(i)  relocation of electric structures within fifty (50) feet of current site to accommodate pole replacement for maintenance or to provide clearances for public improvements; 
(j)  retirement, topping or removal of electric facilities ; 
(k)  developer- or city -initiated projects that have received planning commission or other city approval; and 
(l)  temporary erection or removal of fencing or other improvements, for less than one year, so long as the fencing or other improvements comply with all other city requirements, regulations and permits ; 
(6)  Administrative Approval 
(a)  The following requires submittal of an application for administrative review and approval by the land use director unless they are located in the escarpment overlay district or a highway corridor district, in which case they shall require approval by the planning commission: 
(i)  station improvements, including relocation of nonelectric- related infrastructure outside the wall, such as driveways or sidewalks and expansion of station size by expanding walls or fences at existing sites; and 
(ii)  relocation of electric structures within fifty (50) feet of the current site other than those to accommodate pole replacement for maintenance or to provide clearance for public improvements. 
(b)  Administrative review and decision shall be made in a timely fashion, and, if not made within thirty days of the date a complete application was submitted, the electric service provider will be provided with written notification explaining why delay continues and expected time frame for decision. 
(c)  The land use director shall review and approve applications if the proposed use complies with all relevant city ordinances and regulations; provided, however, the land use director may choose not to make a decision on an application and refer the application to the planning commission for review upon notice to the electric service provider. 
(7)  Planning commission; Governing Body Approval 
(a)  All electric projects not eligible under Subsections 14-6.2(F)(5) or (6), except transmission facilities, shall require submittal of an application for review and approval by the planning commission. Transmission facilities except those described in Subsections 14-6.2(F)(5) or (6) shall require submittal of an application for review and recommendation by the planning commission for approval by the governing body . 
(b)  The planning commission shall consider the siting policies of the electric facility plan as it may be amended and grant approvals with such conditions as appropriate under Chapter 14 or deny approvals when electric projects are not harmonious with and adaptable to buildings , structures and uses of properties underlying or adjacent to the electric project and other properties in the vicinity of the electric project , and shall specify such requirements for ingress and egress to public streets , provisions for drainage and screening as the planning commission deems necessary for the electric project to achieve conformity with the purposes of this section and the general plan . 
(c)  Pursuant to Section 3-19-11 NMSA 1978, if the planning commission disapproves an application for which it has approval authority, it shall state its reasons to the governing body . The governing body may overrule the planning commission and approve the application by a two-thirds' vote of all its members. 
(8)  Historic District Review; Authority 
All electric projects eligible in Subsections 14-6.2(F)(6) or (7) that are located within a historic district shall require historic districts review board approval. Additional restrictions are set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(9)(j). 
(9)  General Requirements 
(a)  Aesthetics, Lighting, Signs and Noise 
Electric projects shall comply with all city ordinances and regulations with respect to materials, colors, textures, finish, screening and landscaping , and the design of related structures , subject to applicable design codes and safety standards. All electric projects shall also comply with all lighting, signage and noise ordinances and regulations of the city . 
(b)  Design Codes; Safety Standards 
Design and operation of electric facilities is governed by the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) as adopted by the state and other applicable national, state and industry codes and guidelines. 
(c)  Electric and Magnetic Fields (EMF) 
Electric and magnetic fields shall be considered when locating transmission lines and distribution lines in accordance with the electric facilities plan. 
(d)  Property Maintenance 
All real property owned or leased by the electric service provider used for switching stations or substations shall be maintained, without expense to the city , so as to be safe, orderly, attractive and in conformity with all applicable city codes and regulations with respect to the removal of weeds, trash and graffiti. 
(e)  Permits; Plans Required 
Construction permits shall not be required for electric facilities and distribution facilities. For other uses, construction permits shall be required as set forth in the Santa Fe City Code. 
(f)  Restoration of Improvements 
Upon completion of an electric project , the electric service provider shall promptly repair any and all public and private property improvements, landscaping , fixtures, structures and facilities damaged during the course of construction, restoring them to a condition not less than their condition before the start of construction or as agreed to by the affected property owner and the electric service provider. 
(g)  Electric Facility Heights 
Electric facilities shall meet applicable clearances specified in the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC). Transmission facilities are between sixty (60) and one hundred (100) feet in height; distribution facilities are between thirty-five (35) and fifty-five (55) feet in height. 
(h)  Airport 
An electric project within the class D airspace surrounding the Santa Fe airport shall be built in conformity with all applicable FAA regulations. Any facilities requiring FAA submittal shall also be provided for informational purposes to the city . 
(i)  Traffic Control Plan 
A traffic control plan shall be submitted as required by Section 23-2.17 SFCC 1987 (Maintenance of Traffic and Pedestrian Flow). 
(j)  Switching Stations and Substations 
(i)  Walls that protect and screen electric equipment shall be a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height in the historic districts and fourteen (14) feet in height elsewhere. Walls over six (6) feet high shall be set back no less than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. This paragraph takes precedence over other height limits set forth in Chapter 14. 
(ii)  In H districts walls shall be earth tone stucco and articulated so that there is a change in wall height of no less than eight (8) inches at least every twenty-five (25) linear feet of wall and there is a horizontal jog of at least one (1) foot at least every fifty (50) linear feet of wall . Walls shall be constructed so that no block seams are visible and nothing is placed on top of the wall . Gates shall be constructed as see-through wrought iron. 
(iii)  Lighting shall be used only when utility personnel are on site. 
(10)  Application Submittal Requirements 
(a)  General Requirement 
All applications submitted to the land use director shall be in writing. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the land use director shall provide notice, within ten business days of the date the application is submitted, to the electric service provider along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. Electronic submittals will be considered on a case-by-case basis, subject to security requirements. 
(b)  Transmission Line Facilities 
The following information shall be submitted: 
(i)  purpose and need for the electric project ; 
(ii)  analysis of conformity with the general plan and the electric facilities plan, as amended, or successor plans, and relevant guiding policies; 
(iii)  description of the proposed action and alternative corridors examined; 
(iv)  constraints and opportunities associated with each alternative corridor; 
(v)  electric project location map and aerial photograph; 
(vi)  details of typical electric structures , including height diameter and phase spacing; 
(vii)  electric project "in service date" and estimated construction start date; 
(viii)  proposed action cost; 
(ix)  within two hundred (200) feet along the proposed corridor: 1) existing and proposed land uses and existing zoning along the corridor; 2) location of existing watercourses, drainage channels and water bodies; 3) location of existing and proposed streets and roads; 4) topography, natural features, slopes , floodplains and cultural resources; 5) visual considerations and general appearance, including visual simulations; 6) existing and proposed electric project utility easements, including location and width; 7) whether and to what extent rights of way will be used; and 8) other environmental considerations that may be relevant to the electric project such as information on airport control zones and flood hazard zones ; 
(x)  discussion of the public input processes used; 
(xi)  electric and magnetic field profiles; 
(xii)  landscape restoration plan; 
(xiii)  feasibility and estimated cost of an underground option, if requested by the land use director ; and 
(xiv)  a list of all known and related approvals required to complete the electric project , regardless of the jurisdiction requiring approval. 
(c)  Distribution Line Facilities 
The following information shall be submitted: 
(i)  purpose and need for the electric project ; 
(ii)  statement of conformity with the general plan and the electric facility plan, as amended, or successor plans, and relevant guiding policies; 
(iii)  description of the proposed action; 
(iv)  constraints and opportunities; 
(v)  electric project location map and aerial photograph; 
(vi)  details of typical electric structures , including height, diameter and configuration; 
(vii)  electric project "in service date" and estimated construction start date; 
(viii)  proposed action cost; 
(ix)  within fifty (50) feet along the proposed corridor: 1) land uses along the corridor; and 2) whether and to what extent rights of way will be used; 
(x)  discussion of the public input processes used; 
(xi)  landscape restoration, if applicable; and 
(xii)  feasibility and estimated cost of an underground option, if requested by the land use director . 
(d)  Switching Stations and Substations 
The following information shall be submitted: 
(i)  purpose and need for the electric project ; 
(ii)  analysis of conformity with the general plan and the electric facilities plan, as amended, or successor plans, relevant guiding policies; 
(iii)  description of the proposed action and alternative station sites examined; 
(iv)  constraints and opportunities associated with each alternative; 
(v)  electric project location map and aerial photograph with property plat ; 
(vi)  evidence of property control or intent to purchase the property ; 
(vii)  electric project "in service date" and estimated construction start date; 
(viii)  within a two hundred (200) foot radius from property line to include: 1) existing and proposed land uses and existing zoning; 2) location of existing watercourses, drainage channels and water bodies; 3) location of existing and proposed streets and roads; 4) topography, natural features, slopes , floodplains and cultural resources; 5) visual considerations and general appearance, including visual simulations; and 6) other environmental considerations that may be relevant to the electric project such as information on airport control zones and flood hazard zones ; 
(ix)  proposed electric facilities and site design to include a site plan; elevation drawings, including fencing and walls ; outdoor lighting; signs ; vehicular access; parking; revegetation; and landscape plan and terrain management plan, if applicable; 
(x)  discussion of the public input processes used; and 
(xi)  a list of all known and related approvals required to complete the electric project , regardless of the jurisdiction requiring approval. 
(11)  Fees 
Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the governing body . 
(12)  Waivers 
(a)  The planning commission may grant a waiver of the standards set forth in this subsection only if it finds that the waiver: 
(i)  is in the best interest of the community as a whole; 
(ii)  will not jeopardize public health, safety and welfare; and 
(iii)  will better serve the purposes contained in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(1). 
(b)  The planning commission shall consider the following criteria when granting a waiver: 
(i)  the general appearance of the facility; 
(ii)  the nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties ; 
(iii)  the surrounding topography; 
(iv)  the proposed ingress and egress; 
(v)  improved electrical service for Santa Fe; and 
(vi)  such other factors as may be relevant. 
(13)  Appeals 
Final actions of the land use director may be appealed pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
(14)  Public Notice 
(a)  Administrative Approvals 
Fifteen days prior to the submittal of an application to the land use director , the electric service provider shall provide notification by first class mail with mailing certificate, proof of which is to be included with the application , to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property , exclusive of right of way . If the property proposed to be used lies within the boundaries of a neighborhood association that has been listed with the land use director , notice also shall be provided to the neighborhood association. 
(b)  Planning Commission Approvals 
For applications requiring planning commission approval, the electric service provider shall comply with the provisions of Sections 14-3.1(F) (Early Neighborhood Notification Procedures) and (H) (Notice Requirements). 
(c)  Waivers 
For requests for waivers, the electric service provider shall comply with the provisions of Sections 14-3.1(F) and (H). 
(d)  Appeals 
For appeals to the planning commission, notice shall be given as provided in Section 14-3.1(H). 
(15)  Conformity Review 
Compliance with Subsection 14-6.2(F) serves as the utility conformity review set forth in Section 3-19-11 NMSA 1978 and Section 14-3.18(A). 
(16)  Noncomplying Work 
Upon order of the land use director , all work that does not comply with the application requirements and specifications for the work or other requirements of this section shall be removed or made to comply within thirty days or sooner if the work poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the community. 
(17)  Notification of Sale of Land 
The city shall be notified when a parcel of land owned by the electric service provider becomes available for purchase. 
(G)  Underground Electric and Cable Utility Lines   
(1)  Findings; Purpose 
(a)  The governing body recognizes that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of all citizens of Santa Fe that the city immediately takes the steps necessary to adopt policies that conserve open skies and improve public accessibility along city sidewalks and rights of way . 
(b)  The governing body recognizes that overhead electric and cable utility lines and associated in-ground poles and structures adversely affect the open skies and may impede public accessibility along city sidewalks and rights of way . 
(c)  The governing body recognizes that as a planning and land use matter, overhead electric and cable utility lines detract from orderly and modern planning models. 
(d)  Underground electric and cable utility lines have the least environmental impact for any neighborhood. 
(2)  Applicability 
This section applies to electric and cable utility lines, that are collectively referred to as utility lines. This section applies to electric lines of less than forty-six kilovolts unless otherwise specified. 
(3)  New Utility Lines 
All new utility lines shall be placed underground except as provided in Subsections 14-6.2(G)(4) and (5). 
(a)  The developer of a project subject to Chapter 14 shall be responsible for the undergrounding of the utilities needed to serve the project. 
(b)  The utility provider is responsible for the undergrounding of all other utilities pursuant to Subsection 14-6.2(G)(5). 
(4)  Governing Body Waiver 
(a)  The governing body , after review by the planning commission, may grant a waiver of the standards set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(3) if the governing body finds that the waiver: 
(i)  is in the best interest of the community; 
(ii)  will not jeopardize the public's health, safety and welfare; and 
(iii)  will better serve the purposes contained in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(1). 
(b)  The governing body shall consider the following when granting a waiver: 
(i)  the nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties ; 
(ii)  the surrounding topography; 
(iii)  improved electrical and cable services for Santa Fe; 
(iv)  the cost of placing the utility lines underground and all associated costs; and 
(v)  such other factors as may be relevant. 
(5)  Utility Provider Accounting 
(a)  Prior to initiating the underground utility project, the utility provider shall present an accounting to the governing body regarding: 
(i)  the difference in cost for the undergrounding compared to above ground; and 
(ii)  what is the anticipated additional monthly cost to city customers based on customer classification. 
(b)  The governing body may: 
(i)  direct the utility provider to seek approval of the New Mexico public regulation commission for an additional fee to be paid by all city customers to cover the cost of undergrounding; 
(ii)  allocate city funds to cover the cost or partial cost of undergrounding. Possible funding sources include general funds, capital improvement program funds, special assessment districts, project improvement districts, state legislative appropriations, grand money, bond revenues, utility franchise revenues or other appropriate funding; or 
(iii)  authorize the utility lines to be above ground. 
(c)  In making its decision, the governing body shall consider the same criteria as set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(4). 
(d)  This paragraph does not apply to undergrounding required of the developer set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(5)(a). 
(6)  Existing Utility Lines 
The governing body shall initiate a process to: 
(a)  identify and prioritize those areas of the city that are most in need of placing existing utility lines underground in keeping with the purpose set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(F)(1); and 
(b)  identify appropriate funding sources from city and non- city sources for such projects. 
(7)  Undergrounding for Public Health and Safety 
The governing body shall consider an ordinance establishing a hearing process and the standards for when the governing body may order the undergrounding of existing, new or replacement utility lines of any voltage due to public health and safety reasons. Such determination shall be considered by the public regulation commission in approving a statewide rate increase. 
(8)  Administrative Procedures 
To the extent necessary to carry out the provisions of this subsection, the governing body may adopt administrative procedures and policies by resolution. 
(9)  Enforceability 
To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this subsection shall be construed in a manner most consistent with any and all valid and enforceable franchise agreements executed by and between various entities and the city . 
(H)  Agricultural Uses   
(Ord. No. 2016-41  2) 
(1)  Agricultural uses for noncommercial purposes that are accessory uses to a permitted principal use are permitted in all zoning districts but shall not create a public nuisance, subject to Subsection 10-9 SFCC 1987, Nuisance Abatement Ordinance, and shall meet all other applicable city codes. 
(2)  Agricultural uses for commercial purposes are permitted as set forth in Table 14-6.1-1; however, the following commercial agricultural uses are specifically prohibited: 
(a)  animal production; 
(b)  slaughterhouses and slaughtering of livestock; and 
(c)  any other use prohibited by 5-7.1 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  Applicability. No agricultural activity shall be conducted, or farm structure erected, except in compliance with the provisions of this Subsection 14-6.2(H), and shall not supersede the rights of home owners associations (HOAs) or any existing covenants, conditions and restrictions of HOAs or other neighborhood associations. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all agricultural activities, whether such activity is a primary use or an accessory use, except for: 
(a)  Gardens for the personal noncommercial use of residents as accessory uses to residential uses. 
(b)  Community gardens located on city-owned property and regulated by written policies and procedures of the City of Santa Fe. 
(c)  Community gardens for noncommercial purposes permitted as an accessory use. 
(4)  Approval Procedures. 
(a)  Agricultural uses are allowed as an accessory use; with a special use permit; or permitted by right, all as shown in Table 14-6.1-1. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection 14-6.2(H), the procedural and other requirements for home occupations , special use permits and development plans apply to agricultural uses and structures . 
(c)  Agricultural uses and structures shall comply with all other applicable provisions of SFCC 1987, including Chapter VII relating to building and housing, and Chapter XII relating to fire prevention and protection. 
(d)  The governing body may adopt by resolution guidelines for the development and operation of agricultural uses, which shall guide the land use director in the administration of this Subsection 14-6.2(H). 
(5)  Development Standards. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection 14-6.2(H), structures associated with agricultural uses are subject to the development standards established for the underlying and overlay zoning districts within which the property is located. 
(b)  Agricultural home occupations shall comply with Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2). 
(6)  Urban Farm, Ground Level . 
(a)  The principal activity to be performed on a ground level urban farm shall be the cultivation of agricultural crops. 
(b)  Ground level urban farms are permitted as provided in Table 14-6.1-1. 
(7)  Urban Farm, Roof Level 
(a)  The principal activity to be performed on a roof level urban farm shall be the cultivation of agricultural crops. 
(b)  Roof level urban farms are permitted as provided in Table 14-6.1-1. 
(8)  Aquaculture , Aquaponics and Hydroponics . 
(a)  Aquaculture , aquaponics and hydroponics are permitted as provided in Table 14-6.1-1. 
(b)  Operations must comply with applicable Federal and State regulations for water use and discharge, and for the possession, propagation, culture, sale and disposition of living marine organisms. 
(9)  Farm Stands . 
(a)  An urban farm may include a farm stand . Farm stands located in zoning districts which otherwise prohibit retail sales shall be limited to sales of agricultural products that are grown on the premises, shall not be larger than 48 square feet, and shall be erected only during business operating hours and during the farming season. 
(b)  Operation of a farm stand requires a home occupation permit or other type of business license issued by the City of Santa Fe Business Licensing Division. 
(10)  Screening and Buffering. 
(a)  Any composting, loading or disposal areas within or adjacent to a residential or commercial zoning district shall be screened from view by a wall, fence, berm or vegetative screen, or combination thereof. Any fencing shall be constructed of opaque materials and shall comply with the standards and requirements applicable to fences in the zoning district where the property is located. 
(b)  Any material or equipment stored outdoors within a residential or commercial zoning district shall be surrounded by a wall or fence or vegetative screen not less than six (6) feet high, as may be necessary, to screen such material or equipment from view from any public street or public open space. 
(11)  Maintenance and Operation. Urban farms shall be used and maintained in such a manner in which at no time shall they constitute a nuisance or hazard to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(12)  Soil Safety. All urban farms using conditioned soil will be required to comply with the New Mexico Soil and Water Conservation Act, Sections 73-20-25 through 73-20-48 NMSA 1978. 
(13)  Composting . 
(a)  Composting is accessory to an urban farm and shall be used only onsite where any ground level urban farm or roof level urban farm is permitted. Composting shall occupy no more than ten (10) percent of the farm area , and cooked food, raw animal matter, animal waste, and human waste shall not be used in the creation of compost. 
(b)  Composting as a principal use requires approval of a special use permit in industrial zoning districts, and is prohibited in other zoning districts. 
(c)  Maximum Height: 
(i)  Maximum height of composting structures or bins shall not exceed the maximum height permitted for fences and walls in the zoning district where the property is located. 
(ii)  On a roof level urban farm , any composting must be contained within a fully enclosed inflammable bin that does not have direct contact with flammable materials. 
(d)  Setbacks : 
(i)  Subject to Subsection 14-6.3(B)(2) Accessory Uses, compost bins, accessory structures and windrows shall comply with the applicable setback requirements in all zoned districts. 
(ii)  Compost bins, structures and windrows located in a required yard or street frontage in all residential and commercial zoned districts must be screened from street view, and setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line. 
(14)  Water. 
(a)  Urban farms are allowed to use the following water resources: 
(i)  Captured rainwater on-site meeting the requirements of the New Mexico State Engineer's Office (OSE) and Subsection 14-8.4(E). 
(ii)  Passive water harvesting designed to infiltrate water, control runoff and erosion. 
(iii)  Gray water or treated effluent from permitted on-site sources adhering to the requirements of Section 20-7-3 NMAC and Subsection 14-8.4(E)(2) consistent with its adjudicated, licensed, or permitted use. 
(iv)  Well water from existing on-site wells, provided that such wells are permitted by the OSE for agricultural use, are metered, and tested annually by a laboratory certified by the New Mexico environment department to ensure that the well is bacteria-free and that the levels of arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, and uranium are compliant with EPA primary drinking water standards (maximum contamination levels, or MCLs), and such lab reports shall be sent to the land use director . 
(v)  Municipal water system. 
(vi)  Stormwater infiltration where or permitted by the OSE. 
(b)  Any constructed water catchment systems shall meet all permitting requirements of the City of Santa Fe's land use department. 
(c)  Water supplied through the municipal water system shall be charged at the rate applicable to the meter size, and shall comply with all applicable requirements of Section 14-8.13 of the land use development code. 
(i)  Separate meters shall be required for irrigation in commercial and industrial zoned areas unless the total farm area on the lot is less than five hundred (500) square feet, and meter data denoting monthly and annual water use shall be sent to the land use director for monitoring purposes.; 
(ii)  Water efficient irrigation systems are required to be installed and used when water from the municipal water system is used for irrigation. 
(d)  Irrigation systems shall comply with Subsection 14-8.4(E)(4), including installation of an approved backflow prevention device. 
(e)  Watering times shall comply with the outdoor conservation regulations pursuant to Subsection 25-2.7 SFCC 1987. 
(f)  The use of otherwater efficient technologies and water management bestpractices, such as use of ollas or other water-holding materials, are allowed.The land use director shall provide all urban farms with city-authored water efficient irrigation guidelines and low-water use landscape literature, such as landscape irrigation design standards. 
(15)  Abandonment. 
(a)  If an agricultural use ceases for any reason for three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days without the prior written approval of the land use director , the use shall be deemed to be abandoned. 
(b)  Any property used for agricultural purposes pursuant to this section shall be cleared and restored to the state in which it existed prior to commencement of the agricultural use. The property owner shall remove from the property all farm structures within ninety (90) days after the date the agricultural use is discontinued. Site clearing shall consist of: 
(i)  Physical removal of all farm structures , farm equipment and machinery; and 
(ii)  Disposal of all composting and agricultural waste in accordance with local and state waste disposal regulations; and 
(iii)  Stabilization of the site's vegetation as necessary to minimize erosion and invasive species encroachment. The land use director may allow the owner to leave landscaping in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation. 
(c)  If the applicant fails to remove farm structures , farm equipment, and farm machinery in accordance with the requirements of this Subsection 14-6.2(H)(15) within ninety (90) days of the date the agricultural use is discontinued, the land use director shall proceed with enforcement actions as provided for in Section 14-11. 
(I)  General Provisions   
(1)  The governing body or planning commission may further regulate uses in planned districts or impose conditions on those uses when it approves a special use permit , master plan or development plan. 
(2)  Additional regulations concerning uses may be located in the special use permit , master plan or development plan for a particular property . 
14-6.3 - MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL USES; ACCESSORY USES OR STRUCTURES 
(A)  Multiple Principal Uses   
More than one type of principal use may be located within the same building or on the same premises , if each use complies with all applicable provisions of Chapter 14. 
(B)  Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures   
(1)  General Provision 
In addition to the principal use or uses allowed by Chapter 14, land and structures may be used for accessory uses, including those specifically listed as permitted accessory uses in Table 14-6.1-1 or in this section. 
(2)  RR, R1-R-6, R-7, R-7(I), R-8, R-9, RC-5, RC-8, R-10, R-21, R-29, RAC, C-1, C-4, and HZ Districts (Ord. No. 2014-31  14) 
(a)  The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the RR, R1-R-6, R-7, R-7(I), R-8, R-9, RC-5, RC-8, R-10, R-21, R-29, RAC, C-1, C-4 and HZ districts: (Ord. No. 2013-16  31) 
(i)  home occupations , as provided for in Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2); 
(ii)  noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries; 
(iii)  private garages ; 
(iv)  utility sheds , located within the rear yard only; 
(v)  children's play areas and play equipment; 
(vi)  private barbeque pits and private swimming pools; 
(vii)  accessory dwelling units as regulated in Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1); 
(viii)  other uses and structures customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses and structures ; and 
(ix)  accessory structures of a permanent, temporary or portable nature such as coverings not constructed of solid building materials, including inflatable covers over swimming pools and tennis courts, and such other accessory structures that exceed thirty (30) inches in height from the average ground elevation. 
(b)  All accessory uses and structures allowed under Subsection 14-6.3(B)(2)(a) shall: (Ord. No. 2013-16  32) 
(i)  not involve the conduct of business on the premises , except home occupations ; 
(ii)  be located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership; and 
(iii)  not be likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would normally be expected in a single- family residential neighborhood. 
(c)  The following activities are prohibited within residentially zoned districts : 
(i)  Storage or parking, either continuous or intermittent, of commercial or industrial vehicles, except for those vehicles that are authorized by a special use permit or other permitted non-residential use. 
A.  Commercial or industrial vehicles include: 
1.  vehicles requiring a commercial driver's license to operate; 
2.  tour buses or school buses; 
3.  concrete mixer trucks or concrete pumper trucks; 
4.  towing vehicles; 
5.  earthmoving or grading equipment; 
6.  trailers or tractors (except lawn trailers or tractors) 
7.  motorized construction or agricultural equipment; 
8.  cranes; 
9.  roll-off trash containers (except as related to an active construction permit ); or 
10.  any other vehicles designed by the manufacturer for business purposes. 
B.  Commercial or industrial vehicles do not include: 
1.  recreational vehicles or trailers related to recreational vehicles that are used for personal purposes; or 
2.  passenger vehicles, pickup trucks or small trailers that may be used for business purposes related to a registered home occupation business . 
(ii)  Outdoor storage of construction materials, except in connection with active construction activities on the premises ; 
(iii)  Storage of mobile homes or commercial shipping containers; 
(iv)  Vehicles, tents or other structures that do not comply with this chapter or other applicable codes, used as dwellings; 
(v)  Storage of PODS &reg; or similar style moving/shipping containers for more than thirty (30) days; 
(vi)  Storage or parking within any portion of a street yard other than a driveway of a noncommercial vehicle used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be a part of the vehicle or essential for its immediate use; and 
(vii)  Use of any vehicle as a receptacle for the storage of litter or refuse as provide by Subsections 10-1.13 and 10-1.14 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. # 2017-15 ,  1) 
(3)  R-10 through R-29 Districts 
In addition to the list of accessory uses allowed in Subsection 14-6.3(B)(2), greenhouses and plant nurseries also are permitted as accessory uses in this district. 
(4)  AC District 
The permitted accessory uses and structures for the AC district are the same as for the underlying zoning district. 
(5)  C-2 and I-1 Districts 
The accessory uses and structures permitted in C-2 and I-1 districts include those that are: 
(a)  on the same premises and in connection with permitted principal uses and structures ; 
(b)  dwelling units for occupancy only by owners or employees of owners , including live/work spaces, but not including manufactured homes or recreational vehicles ; 
(c)  outdoor storage areas, subject to compliance with the standards of Subsection 14-6.3(D)(3); 
(d)  telecommunication facilities as set forth in Subsection 14-6.2(E). 
(e)  other uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted or permissible uses and structures . 
(6)  I-2 District 
(a)  The accessory uses and structures permitted in an I-2 district include those that are on the same premises as permitted principal uses and structures and only as required for the conduct of the operation, dwelling units for owners or employees , and other uses and structures incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and otherwise meeting the requirements of this district, except that manufactured homes or recreational vehicles are not permitted as accessory uses. 
(b)  This section does not apply to telecommunication facilities that are regulated pursuant to Section 14-6.2(E). 
(7)  Business and Industrial Park (BIP) District 
(a)  This paragraph does not apply to telecommunication facilities that are regulated pursuant to Section 14-6.2(E). 
(b)  The accessory uses and structures permitted in a BIP district are those that support the operation of a permitted principal use. Such uses may exceed the floor area of the permitted principal use. Examples of permitted accessory uses and structures for the BIP district include: 
(i)  dwelling units for owners, tenants or employees; 
(ii)  warehouses and storage buildings; provided that such buildings shall be incorporated into the primary building design and shall be constructed of materials of comparable quality and appearance; 
(iii)  outdoor storage lots and yards; provided that areas for outdoor storage, trash collection and loading shall be fully screened and constructed of materials of comparable quality and appearance to the principal use structure; and provided further that materials stored in outdoor storage lots and yards shall not exceed the height of the enclosure; and 
(iv)  parking structures . 
(C)  Mobile Homes and Recreational Vehicles Prohibited as Accessory Structures 
Mobile homes and recreational vehicles shall not be permitted as accessory structures in any district. 
(D)  Standards for Specific Accessory Uses   
(1)  Accessory Dwelling Units (Ord. No. 2012-21  3; Ord. No. 2014-31  15) 
Accessory dwelling units located on residentially zoned property : 
(a)  are required to meet parking standards as set forth in Section 14-8.6; 
(b)  shall be regulated as per city regulations and policies regarding city utilities; 
(c)  are exempt from the density restrictions set forth in this Chapter 14; provided, however, that only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per legal lot of record ; 
(d)  shall be built only when permission to construct is granted to the owner-occupant of the principal dwelling unit ; 
(e)  shall have lot coverage not exceeding the square footage of the lot coverage of the principal dwelling unit or not more than one thousand five hundred square feet, whichever is less; 
(f)  shall be limited to one story and shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet to the top of the parapet or to the highest point of the roof if there is no parapet; 
(g)  shall be of the same architectural style as the principal dwelling unit ; 
(h)  may be rented as follows: 
(i)  by the owner-occupant who may rent the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit as a short-term rental unit pursuant to Section 14-6.2(A)(5) during which time, the owner-occupant shall occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit ; or 
(ii)  by the owner-occupant who may rent either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit ; or 
(iii)  by the property owner who may rent both the principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit to the same lessee, however, no separate subletting of either unit is allowed. 
(i)  shall not be issued a construction permit until a restrictive covenant is recorded at the office of the county clerk that requires the current property owner and all future property owners to comply with Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1). The covenant shall be in a form approved by the land use director and the city attorney and shall be notarized prior to recordation. A copy of the recorded covenants shall be provided to the land use director with the construction permit application. The land use director shall maintain copies of recorded covenants pursuant to the provisions of this section. An affidavit filed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 2008-5 (ordaining Section 14-6.2(A)(5)) and amending Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1) remains in effect and is automatically amended to reflect the provisions of Ordinance No. 2008-5. 
(j)  shall not be subdivided from a principal dwelling unit or sold under separate ownership from a principal dwelling unit unless the accessory dwelling unit meets all applicable requirements for a principal dwelling unit . In such case, the restrictions set forth in Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1) shall no longer apply and the affidavit or restrictive covenant in Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1) may be voided upon approval of the land use director ; and 
(k)  shall remain in continuous compliance with the provisions of this section to maintain the validity of the certificate of occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit . The certificate of occupancy of an accessory dwelling unit may be revoked for noncompliance with this Subsection 14-6.3(D)(1) as provided in Article 14-11 Enforcement. 
(2)  Home occupations 
(a)  Purposes 
The purposes of the this Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2) are to increase the economic vitality of Santa Fe; provide increased worker independence, self-sufficiency and motivation; decrease traffic congestion through the enhancement of community; increase the safety of the neighborhoods by promoting neighborhood activity; integrate the ideas of working and residing in the same environment; protect the stability and character of the neighborhood; and encourage neighborhood participation in the determination of a successful balance between neighborhood residents and home-based businesses . (Ord. No. 2012-11  16) 
(b)  Standards 
Home occupations are permitted on all property , including residential or mixed-use residential /commercial if the standards provided in this paragraph are met. 
(c)  General Standards 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  33) 
(i)  The home occupation shall involve the primary sale of goods or services in connection with the home occupation , including: 1) goods that are prepared, produced or grown on the premises ; 2) services that are developed on the premises and provided on or off the premises ; 3) the sale of goods that are not produced on the premises and that are only distributed off the premises ; or 4) repair services that take place solely within the home. 
(ii)  The home occupation shall be located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
(iii)  The home occupation shall be conducted by the business owner who resides continuously for a substantial period of time at the premises in which the home occupation is conducted. Continuous residence is determined by the land use director by review of relevant factors. The address listed on a driver's license, voter registration or tax return may not be sufficient to establish continuous residence. 
(iv)  Not more than two persons, other than members of the family who reside on the premises , shall be regularly engaged in the home occupation . 
(v)  Except for on-street parking, as set forth in this section, a home occupation shall be completely contained within the property lines of the lot on which the home occupation is located. A home occupation shall be in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Section 10-4 SFCC (General Environmental Standards); not produce any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, gas, glare or electrical interference; or otherwise create a risk to health, safety or property of residents and occupants of adjacent and neighboring properties . The storage of firearms, ammunition, fireworks or similar explosives for sale or service is prohibited. Mechanical or electrical equipment that is incidental to the home occupation may be used if it does not create visible or audible interference in radio, computer or television receivers or cause fluctuation in voltage of the premises or neighboring premises. Depending upon the nature of the home occupation , the land use director may require proof of compliance with these restrictions prior to issuance of a business registration. 
(vi)  Employees , customers, clients or deliveries shall not enter the premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. weekdays and 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. weekends. Depending on the nature of the home occupation , the land use director may reduce the hours of operation. Deliveries are limited to vehicles that do not exceed eleven (11) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in length. 
(d)  Structural Standards 
(i)  Not more than twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit , including accessory buildings , shall be used to conduct a home occupation . In determining the gross floor area of an accessory dwelling unit , no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet shall be used. 
(ii)  Nothing incidental to the conduct of a home occupation shall be constructed, installed, placed, parked or stored on a residentially zoned lot on which a home occupation is being conducted if it is visible from any adjacent or neighboring property and if it is not in keeping with the residential character of the neighborhoods surrounding the lot , except for signs and parking set forth in item (iii) below. A person who conducts a home occupation and applies for a construction permit shall demonstrate to the land use director that the proposed construction does not violate any section of this Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2). (Ord. No. 2012-11  18) 
(iii)  No more than one sign is permitted, and the area of the sign shall not exceed one square foot. 
(e)  Parking Standards 
(i)  Depending on the nature of the home occupation , the following parking spaces shall be provided on the lot : 1) if there are no employees who reside off the premises and customers or clients do not come to the premises , only parking for the dwelling unit is required; 2) if there are no employees who reside off the premises and customers or clients come to the premises , at least one parking space shall be provided on the lot for every four hundred (400) square feet of the gross floor area of the premises used for the home occupation , in addition to that required for the dwelling unit ; 3) if there are any employees who reside off the premises and customers or clients do not come to the premises , at least one parking space shall be provided on the lot for every employee simultaneously working, in addition to that required for the dwelling unit ; 4) if there are employees who reside off the premises and customers or clients come to the premises , at least one parking space shall be provided on the lot for every employee simultaneously working and at least one parking space shall be provided on the lot for every four hundred (400) square feet of the gross floor area of such premises used for the home occupation in addition to that required for the dwelling unit ; 
(ii)  No more than one vehicle relating to a home occupation may be parked at any one time on the streets adjacent or proximate to the lot on which the home occupation is being conducted; however, in light of the character of the surrounding neighborhood, the land use director may prohibit any vehicles used in connection with a home occupation from parking on the street . This item regulates parked vehicles not associated with the residential use of the dwelling unit . 
(f)  Other Requirements; Inspections 
(i)  The home occupation shall comply with all other applicable codes, including without limitation the currently adopted fire and building codes, the federal American disabilities act and the city's wastewater requirements. Depending on the location of the home occupation , private covenants enforceable by those governed by the covenants may apply. 
(ii)  Inspections by the city are required prior to issuance of the business registration for the home occupation only for those home occupations in which the following occur: 1) employees reside off the premises come to the premises ; 2) customers or clients come to the premises ; or 3) goods for sale are prepared, produced, grown or stored on the premises . The city reserves the right to inspect all home occupations for code compliance at such times as the city receives a complaint or has reason to believe the city's codes may be violated. 
(g)  Notice; Registration; Violations; Complaints; Variances; Appeals 
(i)  A person proposing to conduct a home occupation that will have more than one employee who will reside off the premises or that will have customers or clients coming to the premises , shall as part of the application be required to give notice, by first class mail with mailing certificate, of the home occupation application to all residents and property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the premises and nearby neighborhood associations. The notice shall include the nature of the home occupation , the number of employees , whether customers or clients will be involved, the willingness of the applicant to meet with the neighboring residents and property owners and that the neighboring resident and property owner may review the application at the city offices. The neighboring residents and property owners have fifteen days from the date the notice was mailed to review the application . The land use director shall collect and evaluate this public comment that shall be used in determining whether the home occupation shall be approved and what restrictions, if any, shall be placed on it. 
(ii)  Each person who engages in a home occupation shall register the home occupation with the city on forms designated by the city , shall provide such information as required by the forms to verify compliance with the regulations, and shall renew such registration each year. 
(iii)  A person shall not conduct a home occupation in violation of this section. In addition to any other remedies available, the city may revoke the business registration for the home occupation or the certificate of occupancy for any building in which a home occupation is being conducted in violation of this section. A person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section is subject to a penalty as provided in Article 14-11. 
(iv)  A person who is aggrieved by an approved home occupation business may file a complaint with the city . Within thirty calendar days of the city's receipt of the complaint, the city shall investigate the complaint and issue a written decision as to whether the home occupation against which the complaint was filed violates or complies with this section. If a violation is found, the land use director shall determine the actions that have been or should be taken to address the violation. Complaints shall be kept on file and be open to the public. When investigating complaints, the land use director shall review the file for prior complaints. 
(3)  Outdoor Storage Areas 
(a)  Such uses shall be enclosed by solid walls at least six (6) feet in height, with access only through solid gates that shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(b)  No objects shall be stacked or stored higher than the minimum height of the enclosing wall required in Subsection 14-6.3(D)(3)(a). 
(4)  Agricultural home occupations. (Ord. No. 2016-41  4) Agricultural home occupations shall comply with Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2), except that: 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2)(c)(iv), not more than five (5) persons, other than members of the family who reside on the premises , shall be regularly engaged in the home occupation for urban farms with up to 10,000 square feet of production area. An additional person may be regularly engaged in the urban farm home occupation for every additional 10,000 of square feet of the production area up to a total of ten (10) people. 
(b)  A farm stand and other farm structures shall not be included in the calculation of maximum floor area permitted pursuant to Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2)(d)(i). 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2)(d)(iii), signage shall be permitted as provided in Subsection 14-8.10. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 14-6.3(D)(2)(e), on-site parking shall be required as follows: 
(i)  One parking space shall be provided for each worker who resides off the premises working simultaneously; and 
(ii)  If applicable, three parking spaces on the lot shall be available to farm stand customers during farm stand open hours. 
14-6.4 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES OR USES 
(A)  Temporary Structures and Uses Allowed in All Districts   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  34) 
The following temporary structures and uses are allowed in all districts: temporary structures and operations in connection with and on the site of construction or land development , including grading , paving, installation of utilities, erection of field offices, erection of structures for storage of equipment and building materials and the like; provided that a permit shall not be for a period of more than twelve months, renewable for periods of not more than six months. In addition, the area occupied by the temporary structures and operations shall be screened against fumes, noise and unsightliness. 
(B)  Mobile Home, Temporary Placement   
(1)  In a district where temporary, single- family occupancy of a mobile home on an individual lot is permitted as a special use permit by the boardofadjustment, the following minimum standards apply: 
(a)  the mobile home unit shall be skirted; 
(b)  the rental or lease of manufactured homes as temporary single- family residences on individual lots is prohibited; and 
(c)  minimum requirements for lot size, front , side and rear yards and all other standards pertaining to single- family residential land use set forth in Chapter 14. 
(2)  Upon the granting of a special use permit by the board of adjustment, a temporary permit may be issued by the inspections and enforcement office for a period of twelve months, subject to satisfactory compliance with the requirements in Section 14-6.3(B)(1). The permit may be renewed one time only for a period of up to ninety days by the land use director . 
(C)  Temporary Structures Treated as Permanent Structures   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  35; Ord. No. 2014-31  16) 
Structures other than temporary structures described in Subsection 14-6.4(A) that remain in place for a period of more than ninety days are subject to the same provisions of Chapter 14 as permanent structures , whether or not they are permanently affixed to the ground or constructed of lightweight or nondurable materials. 
Article 14-7 - BUILDING ENVELOPE AND OPEN SPACE STANDARDS AND MEASUREMENTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  9) 

14-7.1 - GENERAL RULES OF MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
(A)  General Requirements   
(1)  Applicability of Other Standards 
In addition to the standards in this Section 14-7.1, development may be subject to standards in other portions of Chapter 14, including those in Articles 14-5 (Overlay Zoning Districts), 14-6 (Permitted Uses and Use Regulations) and 14-8 (Development and Design Standards). 
(2)  General Standard for Measurements 
Measurement of the standards in Chapter 14 shall be made as accurately as possible with measurement methods and technology that are commonly used in the construction industry. Where measurements are subject to specific standards contained elsewhere in Chapter 14 or are adopted by state or other regulatory agencies, those standards shall be met. 
(3)  Responsibility for Compliance 
Each person engaged in the development of property , and the owner of property that has been developed or that is under development , shall comply with the applicable standards of Chapter 14 and provide documentation of compliance to the land use director as necessary to verify compliance. 
(B)  Dimensional Calculations   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  36; Ord. No. 2014-31  17) 
(1)  Net Lot Area 
For lots smaller than one acre, the minimum required net lot area for residential subdivisions excludes any portion of the lot devoted to public and private streets and driveway easements such as lot access driveways and fire access roads. For single-family residential subdivisions, portions of the lot devoted to common open space or other facilities intended to serve primarily the residents of other lots are also excluded. 
(2)  Lot Depth 
The depth is measured between the front and rear lot lines, perpendicular to the front lot line. In the case of irregularly shaped lots , the depth shall be the average of all such measurements along the front lot line. 
(3)  Reserved 
(4)  Lot Coverage 
Lot coverage is the percentage of the total projected area on the ground of structures in relation to the lot area. 
(a)  The types and portions of structures listed in Subsection 14-7.1(D)(2) are excluded from the area covered by structures . 
(b)  Eaves and similar roof projections within two (2) feet of the wall of a building are excluded from the area covered by structures . 
(c)  For residential development , the portion of the lot occupied by easements for private roads and lot access driveways is excluded from the lot area. 
(d)  For single-family residential development on lots smaller than one acre, the portion of the lot occupied by common open space , fire access roads or other facilities intended to serve primarily the residents of other lots are also excluded from the lot area. 
(5)  Structure Perimeter 
Structure perimeter is measured by the projected area of the structure on the ground, including all appurtenances such as eaves, bay windows, awnings and cantilevered decks. 
(6)  Slope Measurement 
Slopes are measured at contour intervals of five (5) feet or less. The slope percent is the relation of vertical rise from or to contour lines calculated as follows: 
(H-L) x 100/D 
where H equals the highest elevation of the portion of the tract measured; L equals the lowest elevation on the portion of the tract measured; and D equals the horizontal distance between H and L. 
(7)  Building Frontage 
As used in Section 14-8.10 (Signs), building frontage is the horizontal distance across the front of a building as near to ground level as possible. In cases where this test is indeterminate or cannot be applied, for example, where there is a diagonal corner entrance or where two or more sides of a building have entrances of equal importance and carry approximately equal amounts of pedestrian traffic, the land use director shall select the building frontage on the basis of the interior layout of the building , traffic on adjacent streets or other indicators available. 
(8)  Floor Area Ratio 
The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot , including covered parking structures but not roof deck parking, divided by the lot area; for example: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area on a ten thousand (10,000) square foot lot is a floor area ratio of 2.0:1. 
(C)  General Height Standards   
The general height limits contained in this article do not apply to structures for which specific standards are provided elsewhere in Chapter 14, including Section 14-8.5 (Walls and Fences). In addition to the maximum height limits and height calculation methods contained in this article, structures may be subject to height limits and calculation methods in Article 14-5 (Overlay Zoning Districts) or elsewhere in Chapter 14. Unless there is a specific provision to the contrary, the most restrictive height limit is applied as provided in Section 14-1.7 (Conflicting Provisions). 
(1)  Measurement of Maximum Height 
No point on a structure shall be higher than the most restrictive of the following calculations: 
(a)  the maximum height specified in the tables of development standards in Sections 14-7.2, 14-7.3 and 14-7.4, measured from the average of the highest point and the lowest point of the finished grade at the perimeter of the structure ; or 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  19) 
(b)  the maximum height specified plus four (4) feet, measured from the finished grade at the closest point on the perimeter of the structure ; and 
(c)  step-back regulations for maximum heights relative to distances from property lines that apply in certain districts as set forth in the tables of dimensional standards. 
(2)  Height of Building Attachments 
Except as further restricted by Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts), the height limitations set out in Chapter 14 may be exceeded for chimneys, antennas , ventilators, elevator housings or other non-freestanding structures placed on and anchored to the roof of a building and not intended for human occupancy, by up to four (4) feet for residential structures and eight (8) feet for mixed use and nonresidential structures . 
(3)  Telecommunication Facilities 
When referring to a tower or other telecommunications structure , height is the distance measured from the finished grade to the highest point on the tower , antenna or other structure , including the base pad and any antenna . 
(D)  Required Yards   
(1)  No structure shall occupy a required yard except as provided in this Subsection 14-7.1(D) or elsewhere in Chapter 14. 
(2)  The following types of structures may occupy required yards if they comply with applicable height, setback and other regulations in Chapter 14 and elsewhere in the Santa Fe City Code, including Chapters 7 (Building and Housing), 12 (Fire Prevention and Protection) and 23 (Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places) SFCC 1987. 
(a)  walls and fences; 
(b)  decks , planters, driveways, walkways, stairways, uncovered porches and similar structures less than thirty inches above grade; 
(c)  above-ground and underground facilities of public and private utilities to the extent provided in Sections 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunication Facilities), (F) (Electric Facilities), and (G) (Underground Electric, Telecommunications and Cable Utility Lines). 
(d)  above-ground and underground transformers, equipment enclosures or vaults and similar facilities of public or private utilities when located and screened as provided on an approved subdivision plat , development plan or as approved by the land use director ; 
(e)  underground pipes, wires and conduits such as service laterals that provide utility service to the property on which they are located or that interconnect permitted structures and equipment on the property ; 
(f)  above-ground wires such as service drops that are necessary to connect permitted structures to existing overhead utility distribution facilities; and 
(g)  eaves or other roof projections may extend into required yards a distance of two (2) feet or less. 
(3)  Minimum street yards may be reduced to match the average existing yards of the street within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property . 
(4)  Yard requirements on corner lots are: 
(a)  at least one street yard shall be of the size required in the district for street yards ; 
(b)  other street yards on the lot shall have no less than half the depth generally required for street yards in the district; provided, however, that the street yard shall not be less than seven (7) feet; and 
(c)  this Subsection 14-7.1(D)(4) does not apply to the BCD. 
(E)  Separate Regulations for Properties in Escarpment Overlay District   
Properties in the escarpment overlay district are subject to the slope calculations, lot disturbance limitations and other regulations set forth in Section 14-5.6 (Escarpment Overlay District). 
(F)  Visibility at Driveways and Yards   
(1)  Adequate Visibility; Waiver 
The provisions of this Subsection 14-7.1(F) may be waived by the public works director upon a determination that adequate visibility exists consistent with the standards adopted by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). This Section 14-7.1 is not intended to limit the authority of the public works director to impose stricter requirements pursuant to the authority provided in Chapter 23 SFCC 1987 (Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places). 
(2)  Visibility at Driveways 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  18) 
At driveways that provide access to a public or private street , no parking lot , fence, wall or other structure , hedge or planting that will obstruct drivers' views of traffic shall be erected, placed or maintained within a triangular area on either side of the driveway as follows: 
(a)  for driveways serving nonresidential uses on all streets and roads and driveways serving residential uses on arterial and collector roads, the required visibility triangles for each driveway are determined by the public works director based on AASHTO standards; 
(b)  for driveways serving residential uses on streets and roads classified as subcollectors or lanes, obstructions between a height of three (3) feet and six (6) feet are prohibited within the required visibility triangles as determined by the more restrictive of: 
(i)  measurements of five (5) feet along the edge of the driveway and fifteen (15) feet along the street property line; and 
(ii)  measurements of fifteen (15) feet back from the nearest travel lane along the edge of the driveway and thirty (30) feet along the travel lane. See Illustration 14-7.1-1. 
Illustration 14-7.1-1 Visibility at Driveways on Lanes and Subcollectors 


(3)  Visibility at Intersections 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  19) 
On any corner lot , no fence, wall , hedge or other planting or structure that will obstruct drivers' views of traffic shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area as follows: 
(a)  For intersections on streets and roads classified as arterials and collectors, the required visibility triangles for each intersection are determined by the public works director based on AASHTO standards. 
(b)  For ninety degree intersections on streets and roads classified as subcollectors or lanes, obstructions between a height of three (3) feet and six (6) feet are prohibited within the required visibility triangles formed by the right-of-way lines at points that are twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. On any corner lot of other than ninety degrees or on corner lots with grade variations, the visibility requirement shall be adjusted by the public works director based on AASHTO standards to ensure public safety. See Illustration 14-7.1-2. 
Illustration 14-7.1-2 Visibility at Intersections 

(4)  Street Setback for Garage or Carport 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  20) 
(a)  A garage or carport with a vehicle entry facing the street shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the street property line as shown on Illustration 14-7.1-3, except as provided in Subsection (4)(b). This Subsection 14-7.1(F)(4) applies to public and private streets including lot access driveways , but does not apply to alleys. 
(b)  A carport with a vehicle entry facing the street may be constructed in accordance with the minimum street yard requirements applicable to principal structures for the district within which it is located, provided that: 
(i)  the carport is set back at least seven (7) feet from the street property line; and 
(ii)  the carport is fully open on three or more sides and is constructed of materials and an architectural style that is the same as, or compatible with, the principal dwelling unit ; and 
(iii)  use of the carport is restricted to temporary parking of currently-registered, operable passenger automobiles, light trucks or motorcycles for the non-commercial use of the residents; and 
(iv)  storage of any material other than the personal motor vehicles described in Subsection (4)(b)(ii) is prohibited. 
Illustration 14-7.1-3 Street Setback for Garage or Carport 

14-7.2 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
(A)  Table of Dimensional Standards   
The standards set forth in Table 14-7.2-1 apply to all principal and accessory structures unless otherwise provided in Chapter 14. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  20) 
Table 14-7.2-1: Table of Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  37?40; Ord. No. 2014-31  21) 
TABLE 14-7.2-1: Table of Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts (Note 1, 14) DISTRICT Max. Gross Density (dwelling units per acre) 
Note 2 Minimum Lot Area 
Note 2, Note 3 Maximum Height of Structures 
Notes 6, 8 Minimum Yard Requirements (feet) 
Notes 5, 6, 7 Maximum Lot Coverage (%) 
Note 10 Minimum Required Open Space (square feet) 
Note 9, 10 RR 2 du/acre if both public sewer and water are provided; 3 du/acre if both public sewer and water are provided and common open space is provided as set forth in 14-7.2(G). If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15. Net lot area - single-family dwellings : as per R-1 if both public sewer and water are provided. If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 16. Net lot area - multiple-family dwellings : as required to comply with maximum gross density . As per R-1 - R-6 As per R-1 if both public sewer and water are available. Otherwise: 
Street Note 12 : 25; Other yards : As per R-1 As per R1 Single-family dwellings : See Note 3. Multiple-Family Dwellings : 250 square feet of common and/or private open space for each dwelling unit .  
TABLE 14-7.2-1: Table of Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts (Note 1, 14) DISTRICT Max. Gross Density (dwelling units per acre) 
Note 2 Minimum Lot Size 
Note 2, Note 3 Maximum Height of Structures 
Notes 6, 8 Minimum Yard Requirements (feet) 
Notes 5, 6, 7 Maximum Lot Coverage (%) 
Note 10 Minimum Required Qualifying Open Space (square feet) 
Notes 9, 10 R-1 
R-2 
R-3 R-4 
R-5 R-6 R1=1; R-2=2; 
R-3=3; R-4=4; 
R-5=5; R-6=6 
If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15. Net lot area - single-family dwellings : 
4,000 sq. ft. minimum; 2,000 sq. ft. if common open space is provided (Note 3) If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 16. Net lot area - multiple-family dwellings : as required to comply with maximum gross density . Residential structures : 24; Nonresidential structures : 35 (See Note 6 for required height stepback from side and rear property lines) Street Note 12 : 7 (20 for garage or carport; Note 4) Side: 5 or 10 (See Note 6 for required height stepback from side and rear property lines) Rear Note 13 15, or 20% of the average depth dimension of lot, whichever is less 40; may increase to 50 if private open space is provided (See 14-7.5(C)(1): 
Increase in maximum lot coverage if private open space is provided.) Single-family dwellings : None except as provided for lot size averaging per Note 3. Multiple-family dwellings : 250 square feet of common and/or private open space for each dwelling unit . R-7 
R-8 
R-9 R-7=7; R-8=8; R-9=9. If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15. Same as R-1 to R-6 districts. Same as R1-R6 Districts Generally, setbacks are established by a development plan approved by the Planning Commission. Otherwise, same as R1 to R6 Districts. 40; 55 if private open space provided See 14-7.5(C)(1): 
Increase in maximum lot coverage if private open space is provided. Same as R-1 to R-6 districts. R7(I) 7. If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15. Same as R-1 to R-6 districts. Same as R1-R6 Districts Same as R1 to R6 districts Same as R-1 to R-6 districts Single-family dwellings : Same as R-1 to R-6 Districts RC-5 
RC-8 Gross Density Factor: RC- 5=5; RC-8=8. If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15. Same as R-1 to R-6 districts. All structures : 24 Gross floor area of all stories above the ground level shall not exceed 50 percent of the ground floor area; provided that in calculating the allowable second floor area of attached buildings the total gross heated area of the attached buildings shall be used regardless of ownership status. Street Note 4, 12 : None required if a yard wall between 6 and 8 feet high is built between building and street; otherwise, 7-foot street yard required. Side: 5-foot side setback required. Rear: If wall between 6 and 8 feet high is built, 5-foot rear setback required, and if no wall , 15-foot setback required. No portion of any story above ground-level story shall be closer than 15 feet from property line. Same as R-7 to R-9 districts. Same as R-1 to R-6 districts R-10 
R-12 
R-21 
R-29 R-10=10; R-12, R-21 and R-29=10 or per development plan or special use permit approval (see 14-7.2(F)). If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15. Net lot area - single-family dwellings : 3000 sq. ft. (may be reduced to 2000 sq. ft. if common open space is provided) Note 3. If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 16. Multiple-family: As required to comply with gross density factor. R-21 and R-29: 24 (36 with development plan or special use permit approval, see 14-7.2(E)). R-10 and R-12: 24 (See Note 6 for required height stepback from side and rear property lines) Generally, setbacks are established by a development plan approved by the Planning Commission. See Subsection 14-7.2(D). Multiple-family of 6 or more units: 40. Single-family or multiple-family of fewer than 6 units: 40; 55 if private open space is provided. (See 14-7.5(C)(1): 
Increase in maximum lot coverage if private open space is provided.) Single-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings : 250 square feet of common and/ or private open space for each unit RAC Same as for R-21 district. Same as R-21 district. All structures : 24 (See Note 6 for required height stepback from side and rear property lines) Same as for R-7 through R-9 districts. Same as for R-10 to R-21. Also see  14-7.2 (H): "Maximum Nonresidential Use Area in RAC District." Same as for R-21 district MHP See 14-7.2(I). If public sewer and water are not provided, see Note 15.  
NOTES:  1. Provisions of overlay districts, including historic, escarpment or neighborhood districts may override standards in this table. Refer to Article 14-5 Overlay Zoning Districts and zoning map.  2. See Section 14-7.2(B) Calculation of Allowable Dwelling Units, number of lots created and number of dwelling units constructed cannot exceed allowed density .  3. See also Section 14-7.2(C) Lot Size Averaging in Single-Family Subdivisions.  4. See Section 14-7.1(F)(4) Street Setback for Garage or Carport: A garage or carport with a vehicle entrance facing the street must be set back 20 feet from the street property line as shown in Illustration 14-7.1-3.  5.  side and rear required yards , including the requirements in Note 6 of this Table 14-7.2-1, may be reduced with the concurrence of adjoining property owners as shown on a recorded agreement, plat or other recorded declaration signed by the adjoining property owners in a form approved by the land use director , and in compliance with the Building Code as set forth in Article 7-1 SFCC 1987 Building Codes; General Provisions. The yard reduction must be offset by provision of a corresponding increase in the yard provided on the adjoining lot .  6. Within ten (10) feet of a side or rear property line, no point on a structure shall be higher than fourteen (14) feet above the finished grade at the closest point on the perimeter of the structure . Within fifteen (15) feet of a side or rear property line, no point on a structure shall be higher than twenty-four (24) feet above the finished grade at the closest point on the perimeter of the structure . (Ord. No. 2013-16  40)  7. See also Section 14-8.4(J)(3) Buffer for Nonresidential Development Abutting Residential.  8. See also Section 14-7.1(B) for calculation of maximum height limits.  9. See Section 14-7.5 for qualifying open space regulations.  10. See Section 14-7.5 (D) for amount of open space required for non-residential uses.  11. See Subsection 14-7.1(B)(1) for calculation of net lot area.  12.  Street yard requirements apply to lot access driveways .  13. The required rear yard is 5 feet for the types of accessory structures specified in Subsection 14-6.3(B)(2) that are 14 feet or less in height and that are separated from principal structures on the same lot by at least 10 feet.  14. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the height limit and other development standards for accessory structures are the same as for the associated principal structures . Additional development standards for specified accessory uses are found in Subsections 14-6.3(B)(2) and 14-6.3(D).  15. The maximum gross density in districts that permit residential use is 0.4 dwelling units per acre if neither public sewer or water is provided, and one dwelling unit per acre if either public sewer or water is provided.  16. The minimum required net lot area for single-family dwellings is 2.5 acres if neither public sewer or water is provided, and is 1 acre if either public sewer or water is provided. 
   
(B)  Calculation of Allowable Dwelling Units   
Prior to any development approval, the maximum allowable number of dwelling units shall be calculated for the site as a whole as follows: 
(1)  determine the total number of acres in the site to two decimal places, as certified by a professional land surveyor or professional engineer ; and 
(2)  determine the total flood way acres in the site to two decimal places, as certified by a professional land surveyor or professional engineer ; and 
(3)  subtract the sum of the flood way acres calculated in Subsection 14-7.2(B)(2) from the total number of acres of the site calculated in Subsection 14-7.2(B)(1); 
(4)  multiply the remaining acres by the applicable gross density factor of the district as shown in Table 14-7.2-1; 
(5)  for a parcel , any portion of which lies in the area labeled as mountainous and difficult terrain on Exhibit "I" following Chapter 14 and where twenty-five percent or more of the parcel has a natural slope greater than twenty percent, multiply the result calculated in Subsection 14-7.2(B)(4) by 0.75; 
(6)  if the result is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number except as set forth in Subsections 14-7.2(B)(7) or (8). This is the allowable number of dwelling units for the site; 
(7)  if the calculation is for a family transfer subdivision as set forth in Subsection 14-3.7(F)(2)(b) and the result in Subsection 14-7.2(B)(6) is other than a whole number, the number may be rounded up if it is five-tenths or more; 
(8)  if the result in Subsection 14-7.2(B)(6) is other than a whole number, the number may be rounded up if it is five-tenths or more; provided that the additional unit resulting from the rounding up meets the requirements of Santa Fe Homes Program (SFHP) set forth in Section 26-1 SFCC 1987 (Santa Fe Homes Program) or is a low-priced dwelling unit meeting the requirements set forth in Section 26-2.3 SFCC 1987 (Requirements for Low-Priced Dwelling Units); 
(9)  SFHP development incentives pursuant to Section 14-8.11(G) may increase the maximum number of dwelling units allowed on any site; however, if a development plan has been approved, in no case shall more dwelling units be constructed than described on the approved development plan. 
(10)  The minimum net lot area requirement for single-family dwellings shall be as established in Subsection 14-7.1(B)(1), Table 14-7.2-1 and Subsection 14-7.2(C); however, the number of dwelling units , and the number of lots occupied by single-family dwellings in a residential subdivision shall not exceed the number provided by this Subsection 14-7.2(B). (Ord. No. 2014-31  22) 
(11)  The allowable number of dwelling units shall not be exceeded for the site as a whole, regardless of subdivisions or lot splits. In the event of subdivision, including lot split, the allowed number of dwelling units shall be allocated among all resulting parcels so that no parcel exceeds the allowable number of units for that parcel calculated separately and the total number of units on all parcels shall not exceed that of the original site as a whole. A note shall be placed on the plat or development plan prior to recording the first and each subsequent subdivision or lot split that prohibits a further increase in the number of dwelling units for each portion of the site unless approved by the governing body as a rezoning action or other action authorized by Chapter 14. 
(C)  Lot Area Averaging in Single-Family Subdivisions   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  23) 
(1)  It is intended that the common open space required in single- family subdivisions where the lot area has been reduced from that of a conventional subdivision be a compensation to occupants for reduced lot area. It is further intended that common open space be usable and be provided for occupants outside of the lot but within the subdivision. 
(2)  The minimum lot area requirement for single- family structures is specified in Table 14-7.2-1; however the lot area may be reduced to a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet if common open space is provided equal to the sum of lot area reductions within the subdivision. 
(D)  Minimum Yard Requirements   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  24) 
Minimum yard requirements in the R-10, R-12, R-21 and R-29 districts shall be established by an approved development plan or as set forth in this Subsection 14-7.2(D). 
(1)  To facilitate creative and responsive housing types in medium to high density developments , an applicant may request approval of a development plan establishing minimum required yards different than the default required yards required by Subsection 14-7.2(D)(2). The required yards shall be based upon their relationship to the overall development and its purpose and their relationship to surrounding properties . 
(2)  If minimum required yards are not established by an approved development plan as set forth in this Subsection 14-7.2(D), the minimum required yard shall be: 
(a)  with the exception of detached utility sheds which must be located as set forth in Section 14-6.3(B)(2)(a), the minimum street yard shall be ten (10) feet for multiple-family buildings containing six or more dwelling units , and seven (7) feet for all other buildings . The distance between a garage or carport facing the street and the front property line shall be as provided in Section 14-7.1(F)(4); and 
(b)  except as otherwise provided in Table 14-7.2-1 Notes 13 and 14, the other required yards shall be a minimum of five (5) feet subject to the stepback requirements of Section 14-7.1(C)(1)(c) General Height Standards and Table 14-7.2-1 Note 6. For all structures other than multiple-family buildings containing six or more dwelling units , zero-foot other yards are allowed with the concurrence of adjoining property owners as provided in Table 14-7.2 Note 5. 
(3)  Other permissible structures have the same required yards as those set forth in this Subsection 14-7.2(D) unless otherwise specified 
(E)  Increase in Maximum Height in R-21 and R-29 Districts   
(1)  A height up to thirty-six (36) feet in R-21 and R-29 districts may be approved provided that the request is part of a development plan or special use permit requiring approval by a land use board or the governing body . 
(2)  In evaluating the proposed height, the following factors shall be considered: 
(a)  if the future land use designation shown on the general plan is high density residential ; 
(b)  the need for the increased height; however, financial gain or loss shall not be the sole determining factor; 
(c)  if the height is needed to make the proposed development more affordable, what level of affordability will be provided and how that affordability will be guaranteed long term; 
(d)  heights of existing buildings in the vicinity; and 
(e)  impacts of the increased height upon the neighborhood and the community so that the increased height does not significantly interfere with the enjoyment of other land in the vicinity and is consistent with the spirit of Chapter 14 and in the general public's interest. 
(3)  In approving the proposed height, the planning commission or board of adjustment may establish such conditions as the commission or board deems appropriate. 
(4)  This Subsection 14-7.2(E) does not supersede height restrictions established within a historic district or other overlay district. 
(F)  Increase in Maximum Density in R-12, R-21 and R-29 Districts   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  41) 
(1)  Residential density up to twelve dwelling units per acre in an R-12 district; up to twenty-one dwelling units per acre in an R-21 district; and up to twenty-nine dwelling units per acre in an R-29 district may be approved provided that the proposed density is part of a development plan or special use permit requiring approval by a land use board or the governing body . 
(2)  In evaluating the proposed density, the following factors shall be considered: 
(a)  if the future land use designation shown on the general plan is high density residential ; 
(b)  the need for the increased density ; however, financial gain or loss shall not be the sole determining factor; 
(c)  if the increased density is needed to make the proposed development more affordable, what level of affordability will be provided and how that affordability will be guaranteed long term; 
(d)  densities of existing developments in the vicinity; and 
(e)  impacts of the increased density on the neighborhood and the community so that the increased density does not significantly interfere with the enjoyment of other land in the vicinity and is consistent with the spirit of Chapter 14 and in the general public's interest. 
(3)  In approving the proposed density, the planning commission or board of adjustment may establish such conditions as the commission or board deems appropriate. 
(4)  The provisions of this Subsection 14-7.2(F) do not apply to construction or modification of an individual single-family dwelling and related accessory structures on a legal lot of record. 
(G)  Increase in Maximum Density in RR District   
In the RR district, if public sewer and water are provided, the maximum gross density may be increased to three dwelling units per acre if forty percent of the site remains undeveloped and is dedicated to a homeowners' association or other private entity as common open space accessible to the residents of the development . The land to remain undeveloped is also intended to serve as a buffer to adjoining property and to protect natural features and may be counted toward the common open space requirements set forth in Table 14-7.2-1 and Section 14-7.5(B). As an alternative, and on approval of the city as to its suitability, all or part of the designated open space may be dedicated to the city as park or open space accessible to the public. Land dedicated to the city may be counted toward the park and open space requirements set forth in Section 14-8.15 (Dedication and Development of Land for Parks, Open Space, Trails and Recreation Facilities). 
(H)  Maximum Nonresidential Use Area in RAC District.   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  25) 
Not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of the gross floor area of a building shall be devoted to nonresidential uses that are not also permitted uses or special use permit uses in the R-21 district. 
(I)  Mobile Home Park Standards   
(Ord. No. 2012-37  5) 
(1)  Applicability 
The provisions of this Subsection 14-7.2(I) apply to mobile home parks in existence prior to December 10, 2012 (effective date of this Ordinance No. 2012-37). 
(2)  General Site Standards 
(a)  Qualifying open space shall be provided as required for development in the R-7 district as provided in Subsection 14-7.5(C). 
(b)  The mobile home park site shall be graded to ensure proper drainage. 
(c)  The mobile home park shall provide spaces that are well defined and delineated. Minimum lot size per mobile home unit shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
(d)  Each mobile home space shall provide a mobile home stand of concrete footing adequate to support a mobile home . The stand and space shall be graded to provide adequate storm drainage away from the mobile home . 
(e)  A maximum of seven mobile home spaces per acre shall be allowed in any mobile home park . 
(f)  There shall be at least a twenty (20) foot clearance between mobile homes . No mobile home shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any building or to any property line. accessory structures such as decks and stairways may be attached to the mobile home to which they provide access, but shall be separated from other buildings and structures by ten (10) feet. 
(g)  Each mobile home space shall be provided with two off-street parking spaces, which shall be paved or covered with crushed stone or other suitable material. No on-street parking shall be allowed. 
(h)  Walkways not less than thirty-six (36) inches in width shall be provided from all mobile home spaces to all service buildings . 
(i)  All driveways and walkways within the mobile home park shall be hard-surfaced and well lighted. 
(j)  All private subcollector, lane and place streets within the mobile home park shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet. Private collector streets within the mobile home park shall have a minimum pavement width of thirty (30) feet. All public streets shall comply with the right-of-way requirements and subdivision design standards set forth in Article 14-9 SFCC 1987 ( Infrastructure Design, Improvement and Dedication Standards) except as specified in this Section 14-7.2. 
(k)  The perimeter of the mobile home park shall be landscaped and fenced. Landscaping shall consist of deciduous canopy trees spaced no more than twenty (20) feet apart, having a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the time of planting. Fencing shall consist of either a six (6) foot tall solid wall or fence constructed of opaque materials. 
(l)  All mobile home park signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 14-8.10 (Signs). 
(3)  Service Buildings 
(a)  If provided, service buildings that house sanitation facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems. 
(b)  Service buildings shall be: 
(i)  well-lighted at all times of the day and night; 
(ii)  well-ventilated with screened openings; 
(iii)  constructed of moisture-proof material, which may be painted woodwork, that allows for repeated cleaning and washing; 
(iv)  maintained at a temperature of at least sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit during the period from October 1 to May 1; and 
(v)  have floors of water-impervious material. 
(c)  All service buildings and the grounds of the mobile home park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that menaces the health of any occupant or the public or constitutes a nuisance. 
(4)  Solid Waste Containers 
Solid waste containers shall be provided, maintained and emptied in accordance with applicable regulations and as approved of the Solid Waste Division. 
(5)  Fire Protection 
Every mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located within the mobile home park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the fire department. 
(6)  Supervision 
An attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park , its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the permittee, for violations of any provision of this Section 14-7.2 to which the permittee is subject. 
(7)  Manufactured Homes in Mobile Home Parks 
Manufactured homes are permitted in mobile home parks in existence prior to December 10, 2012 (effective date of this Ordinance No. 2012-37). 
14-7.3 - NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICTS 
(A)  Table of Dimensional Standards   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  42; Ord. No. 2014-31  26) 
The standards set forth in this table apply to all principal and accessory structures unless otherwise provided in Chapter 14. 
TABLE 14-7.3-1: Table of Dimensional Standards for Nonresidential Districts (Note 1) D
I
S
T
R
I
C
T Minimum District and Lot Size Maximum Height of Structures Minimum Setback
Requirements
(feet) 
See Note 1 for additional 
setback regulations Maximum Lot Coverage (%)
See Note 8 for non-residential open space requirements C-1 Same as R-21 district including residential density and open space requirements: See Table 14-7.2-1 (Ord. No. 2013-16  42) 36 Nonresidential Uses: 
Street : 10 
Side: 5 
Rear: 10 
Residential Uses: Same as for R-21 district. Nonresidential 
Uses: 60 
  
Residential Uses: 40 C-2 None 
  
Also see 14-7.5(D)(8)(c): Open Space Requirements 45 Street : 15 
Side: 0 
Rear: 10 (See Note 2 for setback abutting residential district) 60 C-4 For residential uses, same as contiguous residential district (See Note 10) For nonresidential uses, see 14-7.5(D)(8)(d): "Minimum Open Space Requirements" (Ord. No. 2013-16  42) 24 (See note 6 for height stepback from property lines) (See note 6 for height stepback from property lines) 
Nonresidential Uses: 
Street : 10 
Side: 5 
Rear: 10 
Residential Uses: Same as R-21 zoning district Nonresidential 
Uses: 60 
Residential Uses: 
40 HZ 21,780 sq ft 70 for a hospital in the Las Soleras Hospital District; 
36 otherwise Same as for R1-R5 Districts. In the Christus St. Vincent Hospital Zone District: Gross floor area shall not exceed 30% of total lot area. 
  
In the Las Soleras Hospital Zone District: floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.8:1 I-1 None, except as may be needed to satisfy other limitations applicable to an I-1 District. 65 (provided that any part of the building exceeding 36 feet in height shall be set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet of additional building height above 36 feet) Same as for C-2 District. 50 I-2 None, except as may be needed to satisfy other limitations applicable to an I-2 District. Same as I-1 District. Street : 15 
Side: 10 if abutting a residential district; 5 if not abutting a residential district 
Rear: 25 if abutting a residential district; 10 if not abutting a residential district 60 BIP Minimum District Size: 4 acres Note 3 No portion of any structure located within 25 feet of any residential zoning district or residential use shall exceed 24 feet in height 
Maximum height calculation shall not include a parapet. 
- Structures may exceed 24 feet, not to exceed 36 feet, exclusive of the parapet, provided the structure wall shall be stepped back two horizontal feet for each vertical foot of additional height up to the maximum permitted. No building , parking or loading facilities, or driveway shall be located less than 50 feet from the boundary of any residential use or residential zoning district Note 4 None, except to meet the open space , setback , parking, and other applicable requirements PRC 
NOTE 9 Minimum District Size: 160 acres -- -- -- PRRC 
NOTE 9 Minimum District Size: 160 acres -- -- -- SC1 
SC2 
SC3 Minimum Lot Requirements: Note 5 
SC1: 5 acres 
SC2: 10 acres 
SC3: 40 acres 
  
See also 14-4.3(K)(2), 
"Rezoning to the SC district" SC1: 35 
SC2: 45 
SC3: 45 The requirements for minimum yards in SC districts shall be equivalent to the minimum yard requirements in any adjoining zoning district. None MU None, except as may be needed to satisfy other limitations applicable to a MU district 
Also see  14-7.5(D)(8)(b) for open space requirements. A maximum height of 35 feet shall be permitted where two or more stories are included in a building ; where the mixed-use development is located adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning , all buildings and structures within 70 feet of the adjoining residential property line shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
Also see 14-7.3(B)(1) for step-back requirements. Street : Equivalent to the minimum yard requirements in any adjoining residential zoning district if not separated by a street ; otherwise none is required. 
Side: 30 feet from property line when abutting a residential district; 5 feet from property line if not abutting a residential district. Right of way may be counted as part of setback . 
Rear: 30 feet from property line when abutting a residential district; 10 feet from property line if not abutting a residential district. Right of way may be counted as part of setback . 
Also see 14-7.3(B)(1) for separation requirements. None, except as may be needed to satisfy other limitations applicable to a MU district 
Also see 14-7.3(B)(1) for footprint requirements and residential requirements  
TABLE 14-7.3-1: Table of Dimensional Standards for Nonresidential Districts (Note 1) NOTES:  1. Additional regulations, see also:  Section 14-5 Overlay Districts and official zoning map. Provisions of overlay districts, including historic, escarpment or neighborhood districts may override standards in this table;  Section 14-8.4(J)(3), fifteen-foot buffer required for nonresidential uses adjacent to residential uses;  Section 14-8.4(I)(2)(d), five-foot planting strip where parking lot abuts required street yard ;  Section 14-8.2(D)(4)(e)(i), setback from shoulder of arroyo, stream or watercourse; and  Section 14-7.1(D), required yards .  2. Additional regulations: Rear yard ten feet, except on the rear of a lot abutting a residential district, in which case there shall be a required rear yard of not less than twenty-five feet or twenty percent of the depth of the lot , whichever is the least. See also Section 14-8.4(J)(3) Landscape Buffer for Nonresidential Uses, fifteen-foot buffer required for nonresidential uses adjacent to residential uses.  3. Additional regulations: The minimum total area of a BIP district shall be four acres. The minimum total area may be further divided into individual lots ; however, the site shall be master planned in its entirety and the master plan approved by the planning commission.  4. Additional regulations: The planning commission may consider reduced required yards to allow for greater flexibility in site design, and based on the proposed use and site development proposal. Required yard reduction may also be mitigated by other factors, including topography, proposed fences or walls or dense landscape separation. In no case, however, shall the required yards be less than twenty-five feet.  5. Additional regulations: Lots may be combined to meet the minimum site requirements or subdivided smaller than the minimum site requirements; provided that the planned shopping center district shall be preserved in such ownership or control so as to ensure the continued maintenance of private common use areas, including open space , drives, walks and off-street parking and loading facilities. This shall be accomplished by contracts, agreements, deed restrictions, covenants running with the land or other instruments in writing.  6. Within ten feet of a side or rear property line, no point on a structure shall be higher than fourteen (14) feet above the finished grade at the closest point on the perimeter of the structure . Within fifteen feet of a property line, no point on a structure shall be higher than twenty-four feet above the finished grade at the closest point on the perimeter of the structure .  7. RESERVED  8. See Section 14-7.5(D) for amount of open space required for non-residential uses.  9. In the PRC and PRRC districts, development standards shall correspond to the approved master plan as provided in Subsections 14-3.9(C)(3) and 14-3.8(C)(3).  10. Maximum residential density and minimum residential open space requirements for a C-4 parcel are the same as permitted in the lowest- density contiguous residential district. If there is no contiguous residential district, requirements are the same as for the closest residential district. In no case shall the requirements be more restrictive than for the R-8 district. (Ord. No. 2013-16  42)  
  
(B)  Additional Regulations   
(1)  MU District Standards 
(a)  Architectural Step-Backs 
Third floors shall have a step-back (balcony or roof area) of a minimum of five (5) feet from all the building's faades at the ground level. 
(b)  Separation of Uses 
Where  any of the following uses exist on an adjoining site, group living or household living uses shall be separated from the following uses by a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet: 
(i)  a drive-through use or facility, including gas stations, car washes, restaurants and banks; 
(ii)  animal hospitals or clinics with external overnight boarding; 
(iii)  child day care facilities with more than thirty children; 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  21) 
(iv)  outdoor storage of material; 
(v)  restaurants and bars operating between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(vi)  liquor stores; 
(vii)  hotels and motels ; and 
(viii)  any land use that the planning commission determines will produce environmental impacts, processes or products that are incompatible with residential uses, and that is noted on the approved master plan or development plan. 
(c)  Building Tenant Space 
No single commercial tenant space shall exceed a total of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(d)  Residential Uses 
(i)  Residential uses shall consist of at least forty percent of the development's total floor area if located adjacent to residentially zoned districts. If not, residential uses shall consist of at least twenty percent of the development's total floor area. The master plan, plat and development plan shall show this residential /commercial mix. 
(ii)  Buildings of twenty-five (25) feet or less in height shall not exceed a maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre and buildings of between twenty-five (25) feet and thirty-five (35) feet or less in height shall not exceed fourteen (14) dwelling units per acre. 
(iii)  Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of qualifyingprivateor common open space . 
(2)  Property Formerly Zoned Industrial Park 
Any property previously zoned industrial park with master plan approval on or before the date of adoption of the BIP zoning district shall be governed by and subject to the approved master plan. Where a conflict exists between the approved master plan and the requirements of this Section 14-7.3, the more lenient standard shall prevail. 
14-7.4 - BUSINESS-CAPITOL DISTRICT 
(A)  Table of Dimensional Requirements for Townscape Subdistricts   
14-7.4(A)-1 Table of Dimensional Requirements for Townscape Districts Note 1 
Maximum Height of Structures (feet); Stepback Note 2 Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio Building Placement and Setback Requirements (feet) Minimum Open Space Requirements Landscape Treatment in Yards Height of Walls and Fences (feet) Placement of Off-Street Parking Portals Alameda Street 56 
  
Stepback: 
1' Horiz.: 
2' Vert. above 36' 67%, for portion of block bounded by Cathedral Place, Alameda, Paseo de Peralta and Palace Avenue. None for remainder of this district No requirements None generally, except on lots fronting Alameda Street, where open space equal in area to the front footage multiplied by 2.5 feet must be provided adjacent to front property line Required for lots fronting Alameda St. Note 3 With the exception of buildings fronting Alameda Street, buildings set back from the public ROW shall have a solid wall of stuccoed masonry no less than 3 and no greater than 3 feet high along public ROW No requirements Portals prohibited within ROW on lots fronting Alameda Street Barrio De Analco West portion: 24 
East portion: 18 67% West portion: Buildings may be 7 feet maximum from property line 
East portion: No restrictions No requirements Note 3 Walls and fences up to 8 feet high permitted Parking prohibited in required front yards Permitted within ROW at discretion of Governing Body Cerrillos Road 45 
  
Stepback: 
1' Horiz.: 
2' Vert. above 27'; wall stepbacks shall be a minimum of 10 horizontal feet. No requirements 15 minimum on Cerrillos; where a lot abuts a residential district outside of the BC district, the requirements for the residential district shall be met along the common property line No requirements Note 3 No restrictions No restrictions Prohibited within ROW Don Gaspar 24 No requirements Building setback requirements: 
Street: 10 
Side: 5 
Rear: 15 No requirements No requirements No restrictions Parking prohibited in required front yards Prohibited within ROW East Marcy/East Palace 27 No requirements Building setback requirements: 
Street: Note 4 
Side: 5 
Rear: 10 Open space of no less than 10 percent of the lot area shall be located adjacent to the front property line to serve as yard or courtyard Landscape treatment required in yards and open space. Street trees and landscape treatment required if planting strip exists. Asphalt or concrete pavement prohibited in planting strip. Note 3. Walls, fences, and hedges permitted to maximum of 4 feet Parking prohibited in required front yard Prohibited within ROW Loretto Note 5 No requirements No requirements None generally, except on lots fronting Alameda Street, where open space equal in area to the front footage multiplied by 2.5 feet must be provided at some points adjacent to the Alameda property line Note 3 Walls or fences not to exceed 7' required for front yards on Old Santa Fe Trail frontage. 
Elsewhere, walls or fences not to exceed 8' required for front yards where buildings are set back from the right-of-way Note 6 Prohibited within ROW on lots fronting Alameda Street, elsewhere permitted at discretion of Governing Body Marcy 42 
1' Horiz.: 
1" Vert. above 24'; 
wall stepbacks shall be a minimum of 10 horizontal feet. No requirements Note 7 An open space of no less than 10 percent of the lot area shall be located adjacent to the front property line to serve as a yard or courtyard Same as East Marcy/East Palace Subdistrict 4 maximum Parking prohibited in front yard Prohibited within ROW McKenzie Street 24 No requirements Building setback requirements: 
Street: 10 
Side: 5 
Rear: 15 No requirements Note 3, Note 8. No restrictions Parking prohibited in required front yard Prohibited within ROW Old Santa Fe Trail 24 No requirements 10 maximum from front property line No requirements Landscape treatment required in front yard Walls and fences not exceeding 5 feet are required for front yards. Fences may be of wrought iron. Parking prohibited in front yard Permitted over ROW at discretion of Governing Body Plaza/San Francisco 36 No requirements Note 9 No requirements No requirements If in H District, as specified in 14-5.2 Parking must be located off-site or in rear yard, with access from rear Permitted within ROW at discretion of Governing Body Rosario Blvd./NW Paseo de Peralta 36 67% On the north side of Paseo de Peralta, buildings shall be set back from the sidewalk a minimum of 20 feet; residential district setback applies along common property line where lot abuts a residential district. None, except to meet yard requirements Note 3 No requirement, except to meet landscape treatment requirements No restriction Prohibited within ROW Sandoval/Montezuma 36 67% Where lot abuts residential area, must meet setback requirements for abutting residential district along common property line No requirements Required; Note 3 No restrictions No requirements Prohibited on lots fronting Guadalupe and Sandoval Streets, elsewhere permitted within ROW at discretion of Governing Body State Capitol 48 50% Minimum setback from street must equal building height; minimum side yard building setbacks of 5 feet No requirements Required; Note 3 No walls allowed, except for retaining walls, existing walls around parking lots, and walls or fences around delivery or trash areas No requirements Prohibited within ROW Westside 24 No requirements Building setback requirements: 
Street: 10 
Side: 5 
Rear: 15 No requirements No requirements No restrictions No requirements Prohibited within ROW  
Notes:  1. Provisions of overlay districts including historic, escarpment or neighborhood districts may override standards in this table. Refer to Article 14-5 Overlay Districts and zoning map.  2. Wall stepbacks are expressed as ratio of increased horizontal setback required to vertical height increase, above a specified building height. Example: 1' Horiz: 2' Vert. above 36' means that a wall stepback equivalent to one horizontal foot for each two vertical feet over thirty-six feet is required. The stepback required shall be measured horizontally from the face of the building faade or portal . Wall stepbacks shall be measured vertically from grade for all walls except those that directly abut another zero lot line building , in which case the vertical measurement may be taken from the roof plane of the abutting building ; and those to which a portal is attached, in which case the vertical measurement may be taken from the roof plane of the portal .  3. On-site parking must be separated from public sidewalks by a solid wall no less than three feet in height or by a landscaped area no less than four feet in width measured from the back of the sidewalk; or, in the absence of a sidewalk, from the property line, and planted with plant materials whose mature height is at least three feet six inches. Landscaping must be protected from vehicular damage by placement of physical barriers.  4. There is a ten-foot building setback requirement in the East Marcy/East Palace Subdistrict, except (a) on the north side of Marcy Street between Otero Street and Paseo de Peralta; and (b) both sides of Palace Avenue between Paseo de Peralta and Delgado Street, where a front required yard building setback equal to the average depth of existing front yards on the block is required.  5. No portion of a building shall exceed sixty-five vertical above a point at grade level at the center of the site. The part of a building exceeding thirty-six vertical feet above a point at grade level at the center of the site shall be set back from each abutting public street right-of-way line at least one foot for each two feet of building height above thirty-six feet.  6. No restrictions, except that for a depth of forty feet from the property line for that portion of the Old Santa Fe Trail frontage from Water Street to a line drawn directly west from the northern-most wall of Loretto chapel, there shall be no parking.  7.  Front required yard equal to the average depth of existing front yards on the block shall be required for (a) the east side of Washington Avenue between Place Avenue and Paseo de Peralta (Hillside); and the west side of Grant Avenue between Place Avenue and Paseo de Peralta. Elsewhere in the subdistrict there are no required yards .  8.  Landscape treatment required in required yards and open space . Street trees and landscape treatment required if planting strip exists. The planting strip should have a minimum width of three feet. Asphalt or concrete pavement prohibited in planting strip .  9.  Buildings fronting San Francisco Street between Sandoval and Cathedral Place shall be built to the street property line. Buildings elsewhere in the subdistrict should also be built to the street property line, but where a building is set back from the street right of way , a solid wall shall be built at the street property line unless at least eighty percent of the yard is paved and designated for public pedestrian use. There are no required yards in this subdistrict.  
(B)  Additional Regulations   
(1)  Standards for Entire District 
(a)  Baseline Land-Use Intensity 
For the BCD in general, the baseline floor area ratio shall be 2.0:1, except for the Plaza/San Francisco, Alameda, redevelopment and Loretto subdistricts, where the baseline floor area ratio shall be 2.5:1; provided, however, that a baseline floor area ratio of 2.5:1 shall not be allowed if it is judged to be incompatible with an adjacent neighborhood or townscape subdistrict. Areas within a structure , the ceiling of which are below average finished grade, and at-grade parking areas, do not count toward the allowable floor area. 
(b)  Land-Use Intensity Credits: 
(i)  a land-use intensity credit of up to fifty percent of all floor area in residential use may be granted in conjunction with approval of a master plan, development plan or special use permit , provided that no floor area ratio shall exceed 3.0:1. The additional floor area granted may be used for any permitted use. Floor area granted as a credit is not eligible for any additional credit. Floor area of parking structures above-grade count toward gross floor area except for the floor area of roof deck parking. Subsurface areas and at-grade parking areas do not count toward the allowable floor area; 
(ii)  the final floor area ratio of a project, including land-use intensity credits , shall be limited by infrastructure capacity and townscape standards, where applicable; and 
(iii)  calculation of the floor area ratio shall include existing structures on a legal lot of record where development is proposed. 
(c)  Drive-in or Drive-through Facilities 
Drive-in or drive-through facilities are permitted as principal or accessory uses and structures in the Rosario Boulevard/Northwest Paseo de Peralta, Sandoval/Montezuma and Cerrillos Road Subdistricts, where traffic generated by the use will not substantially interfere with existing vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Drive-in or drive-through facilities are prohibited in the other subdistricts of the BCD. 
(2)  Standards for Redevelopment Subdistricts 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  43) 
(a)  Land-use Intensity: 
(i)  transfer of allowed floor area, including land use intensity credits , within a property or between contiguous properties with a single ownership and within a project is allowed; and 
(ii)  public benefit uses shall not count against the allowable floor area for a parcel . 
(iii)  The maximum baseline floor area ratio permitted is 2.5:1 unless provided otherwise in the master plan or at the time of rezoning pursuant to Section 14-4.3(E)(4)(b)(ii). 
(b)  Maximum Height of Buildings 
The maximum building height permitted in a redevelopment subdistrict shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet; provided, however, that the maximum height shall be compatible with the character of adjacent subdistricts and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional Standards 
Additional standards for redevelopment subdistricts are located in the subdistrict master plan. Development in a redevelopment subdistrict shall comply with the master plan. If no master plan has been approved for a portion of a redevelopment subdistrict, development must conform to the standards of the adjacent or nearest BCD subdistrict. 
(3)  Design Objectives for Individual Townscape Subdistricts 
The best existing qualities of the individual townscape subdistricts should be preserved, while encouraging diversity of design in the individual townscape subdistricts. New development should be harmonious with the specific physical characteristics and development and design objectives listed below: 
(a)  Alameda Street Subdistrict: 
(i)  allow more intensive development because of the lack of historical or well-defined townscape characteristics; 
(ii)  strengthen continuity of block forms; 
(iii)  strengthen the built edge of street sections and extend features of the Plaza streetscape to this district; 
(iv)  improve the sense of enclosure to pedestrian spaces; 
(v)  separate vehicles and pedestrians; 
(vi)  emphasize the river park by allowing relatively dense buildings north of the Alameda in contrast to the park; 
(vii)  recognize the importance of the river as an urban design feature; and 
(viii)  provide some natural landscape on the north side of the Alameda to reflect the natural landscape of the Santa Fe river park. 
(b)  Barrio de Analco Subdistrict: 
(i)  maintain narrow streets and closely spaced small buildings ; 
(ii)  avoid the widening of existing streets ; 
(iii)  maintain the historic character and residential scale of buildings ; and 
(iv)  maintain and encourage enclosed courtyards. 
(c)  Cerrillos Road Subdistrict: 
(i)  recognize this area as one undergoing renewal; 
(ii)  encourage the redevelopment of large parcels ; 
(iii)  provide flexible and permissive standards to encourage redevelopment and imaginative design; 
(iv)  develop this area as an entranceway to the downtown with consideration for safety due to high traffic volume; 
(v)  discourage massive, block-shaped buildings ; and 
(vi)  encourage the concept of this area as a gateway to downtown Santa Fe. 
(d)  Don Gaspar Subdistrict: 
Maintain the small scale and residential character and streetscape . 
(e)  East Marcy/East Palace Subdistrict: 
(i)  maintain the continuity of blockfaces , including street trees and yards ; 
(ii)  retain the residential scale of the area by limiting building heights and requiring yards ; 
(iii)  encourage low walls that are compatible with the characteristic open yards ; and 
(iv)  encourage a sense of openness. 
(f)  Loretto Subdistrict: 
In recognition of City Council Resolution 1971-3, the design and development standards in the Loretto subdistrict: 
(i)  encourage the continued redevelopment of this subdistrict; and 
(ii)  provide for architectural harmony within the subdistrict and with adjoining subdistricts. 
(g)  Marcy Street Subdistrict: 
(i)  maintain street trees and stands of trees as dominant elements in the subdistrict; 
(ii)  maintain avenue features, such as broad streets , planting strips , street trees and wide sidewalks; 
(iii)  maintain a sense of openness to provide occasional view of the mountains; 
(iv)  separate pedestrians from vehicles using planting strips and street trees while providing an enclosed space; and 
(v)  maintain the relationship between the height and mass of trees and the height and scale of buildings . 
(h)  McKenzie Street Subdistrict: 
(i)  maintain the residential scale; 
(ii)  maintain yards , with or without fences; and 
(iii)  maintain separation of individual structures . 
(i)  Old Santa Fe Trail Subdistrict: 
(i)  maintain the small scale quality of buildings and streets ; 
(ii)  maintain the existing width of the old Santa Fe Trail; 
(iii)  maintain the scale of buildings ; and 
(iv)  encourage compliance by the state in design of future development . 
(j)  Plaza/San Francisco Subdistrict: 
(i)  maintain narrow streets and continuous street faades ; 
(ii)  encourage additional portals for pedestrian use and provide continuity of building mass; 
(iii)  limit building height to heights characteristic of existing buildings ; 
(iv)  encourage high walls to separate open or vacant areas from the public right of way and provide continuity of street faade ; 
(v)  except for Plaza and Cathedral areas, confine landscaping to interior patios or walled courtyards; and 
(vi)  emphasize verticality of faades on San Francisco Street. 
(k)  Rosario Boulevard/NW Paseo de Peralta Subdistrict: 
(i)  recognize the area as one in the process of change; 
(ii)  facilitate the redevelopment of large parcels within single ownership; 
(iii)  provide flexible standards that encourage redevelopment and diversity of design; 
(iv)  emphasize the strategic position of this area as a gateway into downtown Santa Fe; and 
(v)  provide standards that minimize the impact or height and bulk of structures on the entryways to the downtown. 
(l)  Sandoval/Montezuma Subdistrict: 
(i)  recognize that the area is in transition; 
(ii)  encourage adaptive reuse of existing buildings on Guadalupe Street and existing bungalows on west Manhattan, Read, Garfield, Montezuma and Aztec Streets; 
(iii)  maintain and strengthen the continuity of the existing street faade on the east side of Guadalupe Street; 
(iv)  encourage access from side streets ; 
(v)  discourage additional curb cuts on main streets ; and 
(vi)  encourage redevelopment of under-used property along Sandoval Street and Cerrillos Road. 
(m)  State Capitol Subdistrict: 
(i)  retain the open "campus" quality of this area as a contrast to surrounding developed areas; 
(ii)  recognize the area as complementary to the Santa Fe river park; and 
(iii)  maintain intensive landscape treatment . 
(n)  Westside Subdistrict: 
Maintain the small scale and residential character and streetscape . 
14-7.5 - OPEN SPACE STANDARDS 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  27) 
(A)  General Provisions   
Open space shall be provided that meets the minimum standards of this Section 14-7.5, Section 14-8.4(H) Open Space Planting Requirements and other applicable requirements of Chapter 14. All required open space shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Open space consists of areas that are landscaped or that preserve natural vegetation, and may include outdoor facilities for passive or active recreation . 
(2)  Open space does not include streets , driveways, parking or loading areas, fire apparatus access roads and turnarounds, storage areas or buildings . 
(3)  Residential open space must be provided for each unit in the total amount specified in Table 14-7.2-1. common or private open space may be provided in any combination that meets applicable standards. Private open space provided in excess of the minimum requirement for a unit may not be used to reduce the open space for any other unit. 
(B)  Residential Common Open Space Standards   
(1)  The intent of common open space is to provide useable outdoor space for residents of developments , promote compact urban form, screen and buffer conflicting zoning categories and, in general, enhance the quality of the urban environment. Where appropriate, open space should contribute to the preservation of Santa Fe's natural features, especially hillsides and arroyos. Consideration shall be given to providing wildlife habitat, especially by providing open space along arroyos, stream corridors and linkages to other habitat areas. To the greatest extent possible, connections shall be provided to public open space and the urban trail system and bicycle paths or in such a way that a future connection is facilitated. The most appropriate use or uses for outdoor space shall be proposed and assessed on a case-by-case basis and may include active or passive use. 
(2)  A minimum of fifty percent of common open space shall be useable space for active or passive recreation or pedestrian ways that include interior sidewalks and patios. The land use director , a land use board or the governing body may require tot lots or other play areas and equipment, walking paths, benches and lighting. 
(3)  Common open space may include areas used for retention or detention of stormwater provided that all other applicable standards are met. 
(4)  Common open space shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet in any dimension and no less than five hundred (500) square feet per segment. 
(5)  Common open space shall be dedicated to a homeowners' association or owned and maintained by the owner of rental housing developments . If dedicated to a homeowners' association , there shall be covenants running with the land restricting the use of common open space to that use and prohibiting subdivision or separation of ownership of the common open space . The restriction shall be noted on the development plan or final plat . 
(6)  Accessory dwelling units are required to provide the same amount of private open space as other dwellings in the district; however, private open space for the accessory dwelling unit may be connected to private open space for the principal dwelling unit , and up to fifty percent of the private open space required for the accessory dwelling unit may be the same private open space provided for the principal dwelling unit . 
(C)  Residential Private Open Space Standards   
The intent of private open space is to ensure easily available access to the outdoors in medium- to high- density developments , and to provide for a sufficient sense of privacy. Requirements for private open space are as follows: 
(1)  the maximum lot coverage may be increased in accordance with Table 14-7.2-1 if open space for each dwelling unit is provided as follows: 
(a)  for lots in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-7I, R-8, R-9, RC-5 and RC-8 districts, an amount not less than fifty percent of the total gross floor area of that dwelling unit ; and 
(b)  for lots in R-10, R-12, R-21 and R-29 districts, an amount not less than thirty percent of the total gross floor area of that dwelling unit . 
(c)  The open space provided to meet the requirements of Subsections (1)(a) and (1)(b) above may be counted toward meeting the open space requirement in Table 14-7.2-1 for multi-family dwelling units . 
(2)  balconies, roof decks or roofed areas such as porches or portals may be included as all or part of the required private open space ; 
(3)  private open space does not include stormwater ponding areas; 
(4)  the minimum dimension for required private open space located on the ground shall not be less than twelve (12) feet, and not less than four (4) feet and forty (40) square feet for balconies, roof decks or other private open space that is not located on the ground; 
(5)  finished grade for required private open space shall have a slope no greater than one (1) vertical foot in ten (10) horizontal feet; and 
(6)  accessory dwelling units shall also be required to meet the private open space criteria in this Subsection 14-7.5(C); provided, however, that private open space for the accessory dwelling unit does not have to be physically separated from the private open space for the principal dwelling unit , and up to fifty percent of the private open space required for the accessory dwelling unit may be the same private open space provided for the dwelling unit ; and 
(7)  there are no planting requirements for private open space . 
(8)  Private open space must be adjacent to and directly accessible from the unit for which it is provided. 
(D)  Nonresidential and Mixed Use Open Space Standards   
(1)  Open space shall be provided in nonresidential and mixed use developments to promote environmental health; foster a sense of openness; provide light and air; preserve existing vegetation or provide new vegetation to help oxygenate the air; provide shade; help control stormwater runoff and erosion ; and improve ground water quality. 
(2)  Nonresidential open space shall be planted and linkage provided to public open space , following the same requirements as for residential common open space in Subsection 14-7.5(B). 
(3)  Planting requirements are the same as for residential open space and may be combined with other landscape requirements, including those for street tree planting and parking lots. 
(4)  The minimum dimension for nonresidential open space shall be ten (10) feet and cover a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet, unless the area is a component of interior parking landscape and meets the requirements for open space credits for water harvesting described in this Subsection 14-7.5(D)(6). 
(5)  The percentage of required open space shall be calculated on the basis of total lot area, and shall be no less than twenty-five percent unless the conditions described in Subsection 14-7.5(D)(6) are met; then the required open space may be reduced by a maximum of ten percent of the total lot size. More restrictive requirements for individual zoning districts apply. 
(6)  To encourage an increase in permeable surface area, to reduce stormwater runoff and erosion , to increase infiltration, and to encourage water conservation and water harvesting , the required open space may be reduced as follows: 
(a)  The open space requirement for development that incorporates a passive water harvesting concept that is a primary component of stormwater management is twenty (20) percent of the total lot area. The open space requirement for development that incorporates an active water harvesting and distribution system that is a primary component of stormwater management and that is a component of outdoor irrigation or suitably treated for indoor use is fifteen (15) percent of the total lot area. The credits shall be earned through the application of engineering calculations that are submitted as a part of the landscape plan and the terrain management regulations provided in Section 14-8.2 Terrain and Stormwater Management. The calculations shall show the percentage of water harvested and the estimated water conserved based on the required water budget provided in Section 14-8.4(E) Water Harvesting and Irrigation Standards; and 
(b)  the open space reduction shall not result in an increase in parking area. 
(7)  An applicant for a construction permit shall not be required to lose existing parking spaces or other previously developed area in order to fulfill the open space requirement, but may not increase the intensity of a use or create an addition that would result in a decrease in open space below the minimum required, unless existing impervious surfaces are retrofitted for stormwater management as described in Section 14-8.4 Landscape and Site Design. 
(8)  Additional Requirements in BIP, MU and C-2 Districts 
(a)  BIP districts 
(i)  To encourage pedestrian amenities and preservation of existing vegetation, open space shall be provided at a minimum of forty percent of the total master plan area. 
(ii)  As an incentive for providing commonly shared site amenities, and as may be appropriate to more urban development , the planning commission may grant double the square footage of site amenities to be counted toward the open space requirement. Site amenities shall be accessible, and include the following examples: 1) interior trail systems; 2) small plazas; 3) fountains; 4) children's play areas; and 5) public art. In no case shall the amount of open space be less than twenty-five percent of the total master plan area. 
(b)  MU districts 
A common, landscaped open area with seating shall be provided with a minimum size of five hundred (500) square feet per acre of development . The area shall be open to the sky and be suitably lighted and be designed to encourage social interaction. 
(c)  C-2 District 
Open space is required for each ground-floor dwelling unit at a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. Dwelling units located above the ground floor are not required to provide open space . 
(9)  Any residential open space provided in a mixed residential and nonresidential development may be credited toward the total MU or nonresidential open space requirement. 
Article 14-8 - DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

14-8.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Purpose   
The purposes of Article 14-8 are to: 
(1)  provide proper standards that ensure a high quality appearance of the Santa Fe area and promote good design while also allowing individuality, creativity and artistic expression; 
(2)  encourage the proper use of the land by promoting an appropriate balance between the built environment and the preservation of open space and natural environmental resources; 
(3)  protect private and public investment through preservation of open space , protection of natural resources, including the existing tree canopy; providing buffers between incompatible uses and along roadways; and encouraging the planting of appropriate vegetation; 
(4)  preserve and protect the identity and character of Santa Fe, and enhance the business economy; and 
(5)  promote water conservation and efficiency through preserving natural areas, encourage good soil management and encourage the use of native or drought tolerant plant materials. 
(6)  ensure compliance with the city's obligations to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Phase II permittee. 
(B)  Applicability   
Unless otherwise noted, the requirements of this article apply to all land development activity covered under Chapter 14. 
14-8.2 - TERRAIN AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Purpose   
The purpose of this Section 14-8.2 is to protect, maintain and enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and natural environment of Santa Fe. The following considerations shall be used during the design and planning process for all proposed developments subject to this Section 14-8.2: 
(1)  ensure sound and orderly development of the natural terrain; 
(2)  protect life and property from the dangers of flooding and the hazard of improper cuts and fills ; 
(3)  minimize erosion and sedimentation; 
(4)  minimize destruction of the natural landscape ; 
(5)  protect the scenic character of Santa Fe from the visual blight of indiscriminate cuts and fills and vegetation removal resulting from extensive grading and utility scars; 
(6)  treat stormwater runoff as a valuable natural resource in Santa Fe, a community that is prone to drought, by encouraging water collection and infiltration on site; 
(7)  control the adverse impacts associated with accelerated stormwater runoff on natural drainage ways and all structures due to increased development and impervious surfaces; 
(8)  minimize erosion and degradation of arroyo channels and improve the condition of the channels where possible; 
(9)  respect, protect, maintain and restore natural drainageways , wetlands, bosques, floodplains , steep slopes , riparian vegetation and wildlife habitat areas; 
(10)  prevent stormwater runoff from entering or damaging acequias or other irrigation facilities; 
(11)  integrate stormwater management measures into the landscape and site planning process as set forth in Section 14-8.4 (Landscape and Site Design); 
(12)  provide aesthetically pleasing solutions to stormwater management and erosion control measures by integrating measures into the overall landscape and site design; and 
(13)  promote improved water quality through compliance with the EPA NPDES MS4 permit and Construction General Permit (CGP). 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  Minimum Standards and Submittal Requirements 
(a)  Minimum standards and submittal requirements for terrain and stormwater management are based on the type of project and all projects shall meet the minimum standards in Subsection 14-8.2(D) (Standards for All Grading). 
(b)  Projects for which a construction permit for grading is required by Section 14-3.10(E) (Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas) shall also meet the applicable minimum standards and submittal requirements in Subsection 14-8.2(E) for minor development or Subsection 14-8.2(F) for all other development . 
(c)  Master plan, preliminary development plan and preliminary subdivision plat applications shall also meet the minimum standards and submittal requirements in Subsection 14-8.2(G). 
(d)  Final development plan and subdivision plat applications shall also meet the requirements in Subsection 14-8.2(H). 
(e)  All city departments that implement construction projects shall comply with the objectives, intent and minimum standards of this Section 14-8.2. 
(2)  Exemptions 
A development is exempt from the requirements of this Section 14-8.2 if it meets the following conditions: 
(a)  less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of total land area is disturbed; 
(b)  no slopes greater than ten percent are disturbed; 
(c)  existing drainage patterns on the property are not changed in a way that would increase the amount of stormwater runoff leaving the property or cause significant change to on-site drainage patterns as determined by the city engineer , and 
(d)  adequate erosion control is provided. 
(3)  Alternate Means of Compliance 
Applicants may propose alternatives to standard stormwater management techniques, so long as these alternatives allow the project to meet the minimum standards and general requirements of this Section 14-8.2. Alternative techniques may be proposed that achieve improved environmental performance, including reduced stormwater runoff, increased infiltration, reduced sedimentation and erosion , and for aesthetic purposes. Proposals for alternative compliance to standard stormwater management techniques are subject to review and approval of the city engineer in writing, stating the basis for such a waiver. 
(C)  Procedures and General Requirements   
(1)  The city engineer may determine the following: 
(a)  the completeness of all required terrain and stormwater management submittals; 
(b)  compliance with all minimum standards; 
(c)  the acceptability of all proposed erosion control and stormwater management methods; and 
(d)  the need for additional information or written approval in order to determine compliance with the purposes, intent and minimum standards of this Section 14-8.2. 
(2)  The preparation of submittals shall be as provided in this Subsection 14-8.2(C)(2) and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 61 NMSA 1978 (Professional and Occupational Licensing) regulating the practice of architecture, landscape architecture, engineering and land surveying. (Ord. No. 2013-16  44) 
(a)  Grading submittals for minor development or for grading incidental to the construction or modification of a structure may be prepared by any person, including the homeowner, who has the legal authority to design the structure ; however, the city engineer may require that submittals be prepared and signed by a professional engineer , architect , professional land surveyor or landscape architect licensed in New Mexico if necessary to fulfill the requirements of this Section 14-8.2, Chapter 61 NMSA 1978 or applicable regulations; 
(b)  Submittals for development other than minor development or incidental to the construction or modification of a structure shall be prepared as follows: 
(i)  topographic plans shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor ; 
(ii)  stormwater management submittals for master plans, subdivisions and development plans shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer . Stormwater management submittals for all other types of development shall be prepared by a professional engineer or an architect or landscape architect registered in New Mexico; and 
(iii)  site restoration submittals shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer , architect or landscape architect licensed in New Mexico. 
(3)  No certificate of occupancy or any type of final construction approval shall be issued by the city unless a parcel is in full compliance with the requirements of this Section 14-8.2 and all inspections have been conducted as described in this Section 14-8.2. 
(4)  Activities permitted pursuant to this Section 14-8.2 may also require notification or permitting by other agencies, including written approval from the Acequia Madre de Santa Fe community acequia association or other official watercourse-related entity, the EPA, the United States army corps of engineers, the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) and the New Mexico Department of Environment. It is the responsibility of each applicant to determine whether additional notification or permitting is required. 
(5)  All inspections shall be documented in written form, shall be made available to the city engineer or code enforcement officer upon request. 
(D)  Standards for All Grading   
When a construction permit for grading is required by this Section 14-8.2, applications for the permit shall show compliance with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Cut and Fill Slopes 
(a)  exposed cut slopes on a site shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, except as otherwise permitted by this Section 14-8.2. In no case shall the height of a cut exceed the height of any building constructed in the excavated area; (Ord. No. 2013-16  45) 
(b)  fill slopes on a site shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Retaining walls for fill slopes shall be no greater than six (6) feet in height as provided in Section 14-8.5(B)(1), except as otherwise provided in Section 14-5.6(G) (Escarpment Overlay District Landscaping). Fill slopes shall be no steeper than 3:1, unless a structural alternative such as a retaining wall or some other measure acceptable to the city engineer is provided; 
(c)  cut or fill slopes for roads shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height; and 
(d)  all cut slopes that are not stabilized by a retaining wall or some other measure acceptable to the city engineer , shall be no steeper than 2:1, unless a structural alternative is provided or unless it can be demonstrated by a geotechnical study that existing soils will naturally accommodate a steeper slope and acceptable revegetation or other erosion control can be achieved. 
(2)  Grading 
(a)  Grading for buildings is limited to fifteen (15) feet beyond the outer edge of the building foundation, patio, wall , driveway, road, parking area or other constructed facility except as necessary: 
(i)  for the construction of stormwater runoff management measures in compliance with this Section 14-8.2; or 
(ii)  to accommodate required horizontal to vertical measurements for cut and fill slopes . 
(b)  Natural slopes thirty percent or greater shall remain undisturbed, except for arroyo crossings and for no more than three isolated occurrences of sloped areas where each individual disturbance shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet, as approved by the city engineer . The city engineer may waive this provision, in writing, stating the reasons and basis for such approval, if evidence is provided by the applicant showing that strict enforcement of this provision would prohibit access to the lot or placement of utilities. This provision applies solely to the construction of roads, driveways and utility placement and is not intended to allow development on natural slopes exceeding thirty percent. The other provisions of the escarpment overlay district ordinance and the terrain and stormwater management regulations shall remain in effect. 
(c)  Phasing for grading and clearing may be required by the city engineer on all sites where construction will not begin immediately after clearing and grading ; 
(d)  A construction permit for grading for driveway construction shall not be issued unless the city engineer has first determined that the driveway provides access to a buildable area as defined in Subsection 14-8.2(D)(3) and that the permit complies with the requirements of Section 14-5.6 (Escarpment Overlay District); and 
(e)  All grading completed on the site shall conform to the approved grading plan. 
(3)  Topography 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  28) 
(a)  Each residential lot shall have a buildable site designated as suitable for a building with a footprint of not less than forty percent of the minimum required net lot area or two thousand (2,000) square feet, whichever is less, which can be developed in accordance with the terrain and stormwater management standards and with other applicable development standards, including required setbacks and access requirements. The planning commission or summary committee may approve residential lots with a smaller buildable site to accommodate lot size averaging or within multi-family developments. 
(b)  At least one-half of the area designated as suitable for building and at least one-half of any building footprint shall have a natural slope of less than twenty percent; the remainder of the area or building footprint may have a natural slope of twenty percent or greater, but less than thirty percent. 
(c)  The first floor finished floor elevation at any point of any portion of a building built on a natural slope of twenty percent or greater shall not exceed five (5) vertical feet above the natural slope at that point. 
(d)  A structure shall not be built on a natural slope of thirty percent or greater. 
(4)  Stormwater Management 
(a)  General Standards: 
(i)  stormwater management measures shall be selected to best accommodate the specific geologic, hydrologic and topographic features of the land to be developed; 
(ii)  stormwater management measures shall be designed as both a comprehensive and integral part of the development ; 
(iii)  stormwater management measures shall be designed to directly address additional flows from the proposed development . Compliance with these standards shall not be achieved solely by alterations to flows upstream of a proposed development ; and 
(iv)  stormwater management plans may be designed to incorporate measures that are shared by two or more developments ; provided that the measures comply with the minimum standards of this Section 14-8.2, including provision of an enforceable legal agreement for construction and maintenance. 
(b)  Discharge Standards: 
(i)  except as otherwise required by this Section 14-8.2, the stormwater runoff peak flow rate discharged from a site shall not exceed pre- development conditions for any frequency storm event up to the one percent chance, twenty-four-hour storm event at each discharge point; 
(ii)  runoff control measures may include the use of detention or retention basins and active water harvesting and passive water harvesting techniques, swales , berms, check dams, vegetative ground cover, permeable pavements , tree wells, dry wells, cisterns and other techniques appropriate for retaining and infiltrating water on site; 
(iii)  stormwater shall not be discharged into any watercourse or drainage channel without adequate reduction of flow velocity, which shall be accomplished by erosion control techniques that may include the routing or energy dissipation of stormwater runoff to a vegetated swale , vegetated basin or stone-protected area. The techniques used shall be sufficient to diminish runoff velocity and spread runoff flow adequately to avoid erosion upon entering the watercourse; 
(iv)  stormwater runoff shall not be routed into irrigation ditches, canals, acequias or watercourses related to an acequia system unless specific plans have been approved in writing by the person legally responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility and the city engineer . The developer is responsible for obtaining all such approvals before submittal of an application ; and 
(v)  an active, historic acequia, whether on site or off site, shall not be disturbed in any way by building development or construction activity unless specific plans have been approved in writing by the person or entity legally responsible for the operation and maintenance of the acequia. The developer is responsible for obtaining all such approvals before submittal of an application . 
(c)  Detention Basin Standards: 
(i)  stormwater detention basins and overflow structures shall be sized and designed to adequately accommodate flows from one percent chance , twenty-four-hour storm events; provided, however, that such basins shall also be equipped with outflow structures that limit flow-through from lesser magnitude storms to runoff rates equal to or less than pre- development runoff rates; 
(ii)  infiltration, detention and retention basins shall provide a means of controlling and removing sediment. Methods may include sedimentation settling ponds, sediment traps, filters on drop inlets or other methods. All basins shall be designed to empty within no more than twenty-four hours; 
(iii)  landscape treatment of detention and retention basins may be required in accordance with Section 14-8.4 (Landscape and Site Design); and 
(iv)  discharge standards for minor development are provided in Subsection 14-8.2(E)(2). 
(d)  Detention in Cisterns 
(i)  Cisterns may be used if they are connected to an irrigation system or other water use. 
(ii)  A maximum of fifty percent of required stormwater detention volume may be stored in cisterns , except that one hundred percent may be stored in cisterns for minor development . 
(iii)  Cisterns shall be installed and operated in compliance with applicable provisions of other regulations, including Section 14-8.4 (Landscape and Site Design) and Chapter 7 SFCC 1987 (Building and Housing). 
(e)  Arroyo, Stream and Watercourse Standards: 
(i)  for arroyos, streams or watercourses that carry one hundred (100) cubic feet per second or more of stormwater flow in a one percent chance event , all structures , paved roads, driveways and parking lots shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the top shoulder of an arroyo plus the depth of the arroyo channel. This setback provision does not apply to stormwater management structures or public access trails. The city engineer may waive this provision, in writing, stating the reasons and basis for such approval, if evidence is provided by a professional engineer demonstrating arroyo bank stability; 
(ii)  for arroyos, streams or watercourses that carry less than one hundred (100) cubic feet per second in a one percent chance event , the city engineer may require a setback based on soils and hydrologic information supplied by the applicant . 
(iii)  except for erosion control measures, stormwater management measures, public access trails or the placement of underground utilities required for development , no grading shall occur within the setback area; 
(iv)  where practical, erosion control and channel stability in arroyos, streams or watercourses shall be achieved using techniques that reduce stormwater velocity and pollution, preserve active floodplains , provide adequate room for flood waters to spread safely and use native vegetation. Arroyo and watercourse banks shall not be armored with concrete, gabion baskets, sheet piling, rip-rap or similar hardened material unless no reasonable alternative exists to protect public infrastructure or pre-existing structures ; and 
(v)  fences, walls and similar structures may not be constructed in or across an arroyo, stream or watercourse. 
(5)  Site Restoration: 
(a)  soil stabilization and erosion control measures for all land disturbed by construction shall be completed within twenty-one days after completion of construction or other activities on site that interfere with soil stabilization measures. If the time of year is not conducive to planting, it may be delayed until the next appropriate planting season if all appropriate temporary erosion control measures are maintained until permanent erosion control measures are implemented; 
(b)  one or more of the following stabilization and erosion control measures shall be used: 
(i)  revegetation with appropriate drought-tolerant plant materials, including grasses or other ground cover; 
(ii)  restoration with bioengineering techniques such as live staking , brush layering , brush mattress and live crib walls ; and 
(iii)  stabilization with stones, terracing or similar techniques; and 
(c)  all trees and shrubs shall be mulched and irrigated until established. Grass seed should either be hydroseeded or covered with biodegradable material or synthetic soil erosion control blankets or matting and irrigated until established. Irrigation shall be pursuant to the irrigation requirements in Section 14-8.4 (Landscape and Site Design). 
(6)  Increase in Minimum Standards 
The city engineer may require implementation of more than the minimum stormwater standards if arroyos on site or immediately downstream of a site show evidence of increased flooding , channel erosion or sedimentation as a direct result of conditions on the site. Increased requirements shall be limited to the following on-site measures: 
(a)  erosion and sediment control measures extended to a broader area of the site than the development area; 
(b)  revegetation or stabilization of highly eroded areas; 
(c)  arroyo restoration or other erosion control measures within highly eroded channels; or 
(d)  a combination of the measures specified in Subsections 14-8.2(D)(6)(a) through (c). 
(7)  Best Management Practices. (Ord. No. 2016-40  2) 
The following best management practices shall be used before and during the construction process: 
(a)  disturbed areas shall be protected from erosion during construction by diverting stormwater around the disturbed area, dissipating the energy of stormwater adequate to prevent erosion , retaining sediment on the disturbed area or other means adequate to retain soil on site, or a notice of intent (NOI) is filed; 
(b)  except as necessary to install temporary erosion and sediment control devices, land shall not be graded or cleared of vegetation until all such temporary devices have been properly installed and inspected. Temporary erosion and sediment control devices may include silt fencing, swales , straw bales, berms, geotextiles, sediment basins or traps and fencing. Control devices shall be kept in place and functional until the disturbed area is permanently stabilized; or notice of termination (NOT) is filed; 
(c)  all significant trees , and other trees and vegetation, areas with substantial grass coverage and drainageways that are to remain undisturbed shall be fenced off prior to the use of any heavy machinery on-site and shall remain fenced during the entire construction process. Fencing material may include snow fencing, plastic mesh or other similar fencing material. To protect the root zone of all significant trees , and other trees and vegetation, fencing shall be placed five (5) feet to the outside of their dripline; 
(d)  to prevent soil from leaving a site, soil stockpiles shall be protected from wind and water erosion throughout the time the stockpile remains by using appropriate erosion control techniques. Staging and soil stockpile areas shall be clearly designated on the site. All topsoil shall be kept on site, within the disturbance zone of a construction site and then reintroduced into planting areas to the extent possible. Stockpiled soil shall not be allowed to enter arroyos or other drainageways ; 
(e)  techniques to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site, such as watering down exposed areas, are required for projects that disturb greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet; and alternate forms shall be readily available and used if watering is not sufficient; 
(f)  protection for storm drain inlets, drainageways and any stormwater conveyance shall be provided to prevent the entry of sediment and pollutants from the site while still allowing the entry of stormwater. 
(E)  Standards for Minor Development; Submittal Requirements   
(1)  Minor Development 
A minor development includes the construction of any structure , including single family residences, additions, sheds, garages , fences, driveways or pavement, that meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  it takes place on a single lot or a subdivision of fewer than three lots ; 
(b)  it results in cumulative total disturbance of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of land on a lot ; 
(c)  it disturbs no slope equal to or greater than twenty percent; and 
(d)  no more than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of new impervious surface is created per lot . 
(2)  Minimum Standards; Discharge Standards 
Minor development must comply with the standards in Subsection 14-8.2(D), except that the minimum volume of water to be contained or infiltrated on site shall be determined by multiplying the total area of new impervious surface, in square feet, by 0.16 feet to arrive at a value expressed in cubic feet, i.e. one hundred sixty (160) cubic feet of water containment is required per one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious surface. 
(3)  Submittals 
Construction permit applications for grading for minor development must provide sufficient information to demonstrate compliance with the standards in Subsection 14-8.2(D) and Subsection 14-8.2(E)(1) and (2), including the following, unless the requirement is waived by the land use director : 
(a)  a brief narrative description of the proposed project; 
(b)  a topographic map of the property to scale, including United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or maps generated by the city , adequate to show elevation contours, natural drainageways and existing and proposed improvements; 
(c)  a brief written description or representative photographs of the type of existing vegetation, such as pion and juniper trees, annual weeds, grass cover, bare ground and so on, and approximate coverage of existing vegetation at the site, and a plan for vegetation removal at the site; 
(d)  a description of all proposed grading or ground disturbance; 
(e)  calculations and a plan drawing showing: 
(i)  the size, volume, dimensions and location of all proposed runoff containment structures or methods and how water will be directed to the structures or methods; and 
(ii)  percolation test results or other means of demonstrating that containment structures will empty within twenty-four hours; 
(f)  a roof run-off drainage plan; and 
(g)  a planting plan for revegetation showing proposed plant materials and a description of the proposed irrigation method or other methods used to establish vegetation and prevent erosion until vegetation becomes established. 
(F)  Submittal Requirements For All Other Development   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  29) 
All other development that requires a construction permit for grading , and that is not classified as minor development under the provisions of Subsection 14-8.2(E), shall meet the following minimum submittal requirements: 
(1)  Submittals for construction permit applications for grading must provide sufficient information to show compliance with Subsection 14-8.2(D) and (E). Unless waived by the land use director , submittals must include: 
(a)  a topographic survey and grading plan with elevation contours shown at not more than two (2) foot intervals on slopes less than thirty percent and five (5) foot intervals on slopes of thirty percent or greater that shows: 
(i)  all sloped areas of zero to twenty percent, twenty-one to thirty percent and greater than thirty percent shall be clearly marked and differentiated by shade, tone or color at a scale sufficient to allow verification of the calculations; 
(ii)  ground elevations that conform to either the United States Geological Survey sea level datum, as modified, or to the city 's monument system; 
(iii)  the designated buildable sites or buildable areas ; 
(iv)  all areas to be graded on the site and the final contours to be achieved by the grading ; 
(v)  all finished floor or grade elevations; 
(vi)  spot elevations, as needed; 
(vii)  areas of soils with severe limitations for the intended use; 
(viii)  the location of temporary erosion control structures and methods used, including staging and stockpile areas; 
(ix)  all significant trees and areas with substantial grass coverage to be removed; 
(x)  a construction schedule when the project will be developed in phases; 
(xi)  the location of fencing around the areas to be protected; 
(xii)  the ratio of horizontal to vertical measurement for cut and fill slopes ; 
(xiii)  the total volume, in cubic yards, of earth to be moved; 
(xiv)  all existing disturbed areas; 
(xv)  special flood hazard areas designated by FEMA on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) ; and 
(xvi)  date, method of survey and certification from a New Mexico professional engineer or professional land surveyor that the plan is in compliance with national map accuracy standards; 
(G)  Standards for Master Plans, Preliminary Development Plans and Preliminary Subdivision Plats; Submittal Requirements   
(1)  Minimum Standards: 
(a)  projects shall meet the minimum standards of Subsection 14-8.2(D); 
(b)  all land below the base flood elevation for a one percent chance event shall be dedicated as a drainage easement and as public or private open space or public right of way ; and 
(c)  for all development where one-half or more of the land within the project site exceeds twenty percent slope , the quantity and peak flow rate of post- development stormwater runoff on all developed or disturbed land shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the quantity and peak flow rate of the pre- development runoff. 
(2)  Submittals 
Submittals for master plans, preliminary development plans and subdivision plats shall include: 
(a)  a conceptual plan and report that shows the general approach proposed for terrain and stormwater management, and how the proposed development meets all of the minimum standards described in Subsection 14-8.2(D); 
(b)  a topographic survey and grading plan as outlined in Subsection 14-8.2(F)(5); and 
(c)  a brief description of the watershed directly upstream and downstream of the parcel , including the size, terrain, type and extent of vegetation cover and degree of development for all areas draining to the project site. 
(H)  Final Development Plans and Subdivision Plats   
(1)  Minimum standards 
Final development plans and subdivision plats shall meet the minimum standards described in Subsection 14-8.2(D) and (G). 
(2)  Submittals 
Submittals for final development plans and subdivision plats shall include: 
(a)  all submittals required pursuant to Subsection 14-8.2(F); 
(b)  a long-term maintenance schedule for the life of the stormwater management measures, including the time frame for completion and the responsible party who shall perform the maintenance; and 
(c)  an as-built certification signature block to be executed by a professional engineer after the project completion to ensure that the constructed stormwater management systems comply with the approved stormwater plans. 
(I)  Inspections and Violations During Construction Process   
(1)  For all nonresidential projects and all residential projects that do not qualify as minor development , an applicant shall notify the land use director to set up an inspection at the following times: 
(a)  when the construction erosion and sediment control devices and measures are in place; 
(b)  when final stormwater management measures are completed; 
(c)  when the final site restoration measures are completed; provided, however, that if final site restoration measures are being delayed due to the season, the applicant shall notify the land use director when temporary erosion control measures, for use until site restoration is complete, in place and ready for inspection; and 
(d)  further construction or issuance of any permits shall not occur until written approval has been granted by the inspector after each inspection that the best management practices and stormwater management control methods have been completed in accordance with approved plans; 
(2)  the land use director may enter upon any property subject to this Subsection 14-8.2 at reasonable times to conduct inspections of grading , erosion and stormwater management measures to determine compliance with city policies and procedures and to carry out duties in the enforcement of this Subsection 14-8.2; and 
(3)  the land use director may waive or consolidate any inspections required under this Section 14-8.2. 
(J)  Dedications, Easements and Rights of Way   
(1)  All land below the base flood elevation for a one percent, twenty-four-hour storm event shall be dedicated as a drainage easement and as public or private open space or public right of way . 
(2)  Dedications to the city may be required by the city engineer for the components of the stormwater drainage system, including access for maintenance. The types of all easements and open space dedications shall be determined by the city engineer . If a dedication is required, it shall be designated on the plan or plat and in effect prior to construction permit approval. 
(3)  An applicant may make requests for acceptance of dedications of a stormwater drainage system to the city ; however, the city is not obligated to accept a dedication offer. Only the governing body may accept dedications to the city . If a dedication is offered to and accepted by the city , it shall be designated on the plan or plat and shall be in effect prior to construction permit approval. 
(K)  Long-Term Maintenance Responsibilities and Inspections   
(1)  Responsibilities 
All stormwater management measures and facilities shall be maintained by the fee simple owner of the property or a property owners association, unless a dedication of the stormwater management system was required and accepted by the city , in which case, the city is responsible for maintenance. The stormwater management system shall be maintained in good condition and promptly repaired. Maintenance shall include the repair and restoration of all grade surfaces, walls , swales , drains, dams, ponds, basins, site restoration measures, associated vegetation and any other stormwater measure constructed on site. The maintenance shall be in accordance with approved stormwater management plans. 
(2)  City Inspections 
The city or its authorized agent may enter upon a property that is subject to this Section 14-8.2 at reasonable times to access the stormwater management system to ensure that the system is maintained in proper working condition that meets the approved stormwater management plans and the objectives and minimum standards of this section. 
(3)  Maintenance Violations 
If, after notice by the city to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner or responsible party within a reasonable period of time, the city may perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner or responsible party of the facility shall be assessed the associated costs of the work. 
14-8.3 - FLOOD REGULATIONS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10; Ord. No. 2012-19  3) 
(A)  Adoption of Special Flood Hazard Areas   
(1)  The city adopts the special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Santa Fe County, New Mexico and Incorporated Areas," with accompanying FIRM , effective June 17, 2008 and December 4, 2012. (Ord. No. 2013-16  46) 
(2)  The city may adopt and establish other flood hazard zones or elevations as identified in: 
(a)  subsequent drainage studies prepared for and accepted by the city ; 
(b)  subsequent letters of map amendment and letters of map revision, as prepared for and accepted by FEMA; and 
(c)  other known flood hazard zones identified by the floodplain administrator and adopted by the governing body . 
(B)  Applicability; Permit Required   
(1)  The requirements of this Section 14-8.3 are in addition to and not in lieu of other provisions of Chapter 14. 
(2)  New development , including substantial improvements to existing structures shall comply with the standards of this Section 14-8.3. However, this Section 14-8.3 does not apply to an application meeting either of the following criteria: 
(a)  the project is limited to work that does not change the footprint, size or enclosed area of an existing structure , such as re-roofing, re-stuccoing or interior remodeling; or 
(b)  the project will not result in an increased flood risk to persons or structures or their contents as determined by the floodplain administrator , who may require certification by a professional engineer . 
(3)  Regardless of applicability of this Section 14-8.3, all development in a special flood hazard area , including excavation and fill operations, requires approval of the floodplain administrator and a permit . 
(C)  General Provisions for Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas   
(1)  All newly created lots shall contain a buildable area that is entirely outside of any special flood hazard area . 
(2)  If an existing lot contains land both within and outside of the special flood hazard area , any new construction , including roads and driveways, shall only be outside of the special flood hazard area , except as allowed by Subsections 14-8.3(E), (F) and (G). 
(3)  If an existing lot contains no land outside the special flood hazard area , any new construction shall only occur in the flood fringe and only pursuant to Subsections 14-8.3(E), (F) and (G). 
(4)  On an application for subdivision plat or development plan approval, where the tract or portions of the tract are located within a special flood hazard area , the applicant shall submit detailed hydrologic data indicating the water surface elevations for a one percent chance event , to be shown for sections of the drainage channel at intervals of no greater than one hundred feet. The special flood hazard area shall be further defined as floodway and flood fringe , if applicable. The floodplain administrator may waive the requirement for the submission of detailed hydrologic data based on a site investigation. The special flood hazard area , FIRM panel number and date shall be accurately depicted by an architect , professional land surveyor or professional engineer on the development plan, subdivision plat, and construction permit where applicable. 
(5)  For purposes of this Section 14-8.3, the special flood hazard area is that shown on the appropriate FIRM . Flood fringe , floodway and base flood elevation shall be shown as required by the floodplain administrator . 
(6)  New and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems located in special flood hazard areas shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration. 
(7)  Onsite liquid waste disposal systems located in special flood hazard areas shall be designed to avoid impairment or contamination. 
(8)  For subdivisions or other developments greater than fifty lots or five acres that are located entirely or partially within a special flood hazard area , base flood elevations are required to be shown on the development plan or subdivision plat for all lots that are entirely or partially within the special flood hazard area . 
(9)  In A and AE zones, recreational vehicles shall be: 
(a)  elevated and anchored; or 
(b)  on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or 
(c)  fully licensed and highway ready. 
(D)  Engineering Criteria   
The analysis, determination and designation of base flood elevation , special flood hazard areas , floodway or flood fringe shall adhere to professional hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques supplemented with data obtained by field examination and surveys as necessary. Engineering practice manuals of the American Society of Civil Engineers and similar competent manuals of professional hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques may be used in accordance with FEMA requirements. 
(E)  Land Use and Development in Floodway   
No uses shall be permitted within the floodway , except those set out in this Subsection 14-8.3(E); provided that such uses comply with the provisions of Article 14-6 (Permitted Uses and Use Regulations) and any other applicable federal or state law; and further provided that such uses do not constrict flow or create a rise in the base flood elevation during the one percent chance event : 
(1)  Cultivating and harvesting of crops according to recognized soil conservation practices; 
(2)  Pasture, grazing land; 
(3)  Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve; 
(4)  Outlet installations for sewage treatment plants and sealed public water supply wells; 
(5)  Passive recreational uses such as parks or trails; 
(6)  Open area residential uses, such as lawns, gardens and play areas; 
(7)  Stormwater management and arroyo or watercourse stabilization facilities, such as check dams and gabions, provided that any such facilities that constrict flow or create a rise in the base flood elevation during the one percent chance event comply with all applicable FEMA requirements and all provisions of this Section 14-8.3 that are more stringent than the FEMA requirements; 
(8)  Legal nonconforming uses occupying structures in existence on June 17, 2008; provided that such uses may not be intensified and that the structures that such uses occupy comply with all applicable FEMA requirements and all provisions of this Section 14-8.3 that are more stringent than the FEMA requirements; 
(9)  Active recreational uses that do not include permanent structures and so long as any temporary structures or equipment are removed when not in active use; and 
(10)  Railroads, streets , driveways, bridges, private and public utility lines that cross the floodway with minimal disturbance as determined by the floodplain administrator , and structural works for the control and handling of flood flows, such as dams, embankments, flood walls , velocity control structures or storm drainage control and handling works (with the exception of required stormwater detention facilities) provided that any such facilities that constrict flow or create a rise in the base flood elevation during the one percent chance event comply with all applicable FEMA requirements and all provisions of this Section 14-8.3 that are more stringent than the FEMA requirements. 
(F)  Land Use and Development in Flood Fringe   
(1)  No uses shall be permitted within the flood fringe except those set out in this Subsection 14-8.3(F); provided that such uses comply with the provisions of Chapter 14, Article 6 (Permitted Uses and Use Regulations) and any other applicable federal or state law. 
(2)  All uses permitted in the floodway pursuant to Subsection 14-8.3(E) are also allowed in the flood fringe . 
(3)  Storage, processing or disposal of materials that in time of flooding are buoyant, flammable, explosive, toxic or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, are prohibited within the flood fringe . 
(4)  No fence, wall or similar structure shall be erected in or across any arroyo, stream or watercourse unless it is designed to break away and not to cause a flow obstruction. 
(5)  At-grade parking facilities are allowed so long as such facilities cannot be reasonably accommodated outside the flood fringe , as determined by the floodplain administrator . 
(6)  Structures or uses within the flood fringe portion of the special flood hazard area meeting the following requirements are allowed upon review by the floodplain administrator and issuance of a permit , to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, plan or policy: 
(a)  residential or nonresidential structures , to be constructed or substantially improved in the flood fringe , shall have the elevation of the lowest floor at least one foot above the base flood elevation . The floodplain administrator may authorize dry flood proofing for protection of nonresidential structures where the elevation of existing streets or utilities make compliance with this provision infeasible, or in other special circumstances. The design and construction methods of dry flood proofing shall comply with 44 CFR Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations as certified by a professional engineer or architect ; 
(b)  structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand flood conditions at the proposed construction site; 
(c)  new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a professional engineer or an architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
(ii)  the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above finished grade; and 
(iii)  openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they allow the automatic entry and exit of flood waters; 
(d)  all new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding ; 
(e)  sanitary and storm sewer drains shall be equipped with valves capable of being closed, manually or automatically, to prevent backup of sewage and stormwaters into the building or structure ; 
(f)  the base flood elevation shall be certified and superimposed on the site plan, and accurately depicted on the elevation drawings for all sides of a building by a professional surveyor , professional engineer or architect . The elevation drawings shall also indicate the lowest floor elevation and location of all windows, doors or other openings. The floodplain administrator may request additional data for the construction permit if deemed necessary; 
(g)  before issuance of a construction permit for the construction of a structure in the flood fringe , a professional engineer shall certify that the structure has been designed to conform with the provisions of this Subsection 14-8.3(F), and that the bottom of all openings in the enclosure are no more than one foot above the base flood elevation . The same professional engineer shall also certify, upon completion of the structure , that construction complies with the submitted plans; 
(h)  a manufactured home or mobile home shall be elevated on compacted fill or pilings. The lowest floor of the manufactured home or mobile home shall be at least one foot above the base flood elevation ; 
(i)  manufactured homes or mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing: 
(i)  over-the-top ties at each of the four corners, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and for manufactured homes or mobile homes less than fifty feet long, one over the-top tie at each of the four corners is required; 
(ii)  frame ties at each corner with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and for manufactured or mobile homes less than fifty feet long, four ties are required per side; 
(iii)  all components of the anchor system shall be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred pounds; and 
(iv)  additions to the manufactured home or mobile home shall be similarly anchored; 
(j)  for existing manufactured home or mobile home parks located in the special flood hazard area , a vehicular circulation plan indicating alternative vehicular access and escape routes during the one percent chance event shall be submitted as part of any improvement, construction or development project; and 
(k)  no new manufactured homes , mobile homes or foundations for either type of structure shall be permitted in the special flood hazard area . 
(G)  Repair or Replacement of Legal Nonconforming Structures in the Special Flood Hazard Area   
A structure that on June 17, 2008 was legally noncomforming because of its location within a special flood hazard area , and that is substantially damaged by flood, fire or other casualty may be replaced or repaired within the special flood hazard area subject to the following: 
(1)  If there is a site on the property outside the special flood hazard area that will accommodate a structure of the same gross floor area as the legal nonconforming structure , the structure shall not be repaired or replaced within the special flood hazard area . 
(2)  If the legal nonconforming structure was located within the flood fringe and there is no other site on the property that will accommodate a structure of the same gross floor area , the structure may be repaired or replaced in the flood fringe . The repaired or replacement structure must not exceed the gross floor area or the footprint of the legal nonconforming structure and the footprint must be sized to minimize flood hazard. 
(3)  If the legal nonconforming structure was located in the floodway but there is a site on the property outside the floodway that will accommodate a structure of the same gross floor area as the legal nonconforming structure , the structure must not be repaired or replaced within the floodway . The footprint of the replacement structure must be sized to minimize flood hazard and must not exceed the gross floor area or the footprint of the legal nonconforming structure ; 
(4)  If the legal nonconforming structure was located within the floodway , and there is no other site on the property that will accommodate a structure of the same gross floor area , the structure may be repaired or replaced in the floodway . The repaired or replacement structure must not exceed the gross floor area or the footprint of the legal nonconforming structure and the footprint must be sized to minimize flood hazard; 
(5)  A structure that is repaired or replaced within the special flood hazard area shall comply with all applicable FEMA requirements and all provisions of this Section 14-8.3 that are more stringent than FEMA requirements; 
(6)  A structure that is repaired or replaced in accordance with this Subsection 14-8.3(G) shall not require a waiver to be constructed in a special flood hazard area ; provided that any necessary variance to other requirements of Chapter 14, including setbacks and terrain management, is granted; and 
(7)  As a condition of construction permit issuance for a replacement structure , anyremaining portion of the legal nonconforming structure in the special flood hazard area shall be demolished or removed. 
(H)  Amendment to FIRM   
(1)  Amendments to the established base flood elevations and special flood hazard areas may be initiated either by the floodplain administrator or by any other person through application to FEMA. The application shall be accompanied by sufficient copies of supporting plans and reports as required by FEMA to meet the minimum requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). If the application is not made by the floodplain administrator , a copy of the submission to FEMA shall be forwarded to the floodplain administrator . Submission of inaccurate information with an application is grounds for denial from FEMA. The floodplain administrator may provide comments to FEMA on any submission for a map change. 
(2)  In addition to the change described in Subsection 14-8.3(H) and on the basis of hydrologic data, the governing body may establish additional flood hazard zones and modify these additional flood hazard zones by ordinance. The amendment may be for non-FEMA-approved changes but shall not be less restrictive than FEMA requirements. Where the change affects land owned by persons other than the applicant, all affected property owners shall be notified of the change by certified mail, return receipt requested. The signed receipts shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator . 
(3)  The governing body's decision to add or amend a special flood hazard area shall be based on appropriate information, including detailed engineering analysis and recommendations in reports and plans done by or for the city or other governing agencies, including those prepared for construction permits and subdivisions. 
(4)  If the governing body denies a change to the flood hazard zone , the reasons for denial shall be stated in a written report. 
(5)  Prior to approval by the governing body , the floodplain administrator shall notify the state coordinator for the NFIP at the New Mexico homeland security and emergency management department. 
(6)  If major alterations to a watercourse are proposed adjacent to the corporate limits of Santa Fe, the floodplain administrator shall notify the Santa Fe county manager and Santa Fe county floodplain administrator of such proposal. 
(I)  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability   
The degree of flood protection intended to be provided by this Section 14-8.3 is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on occasions or the flood height may be increased by natural or manmade causes. This Section 14-8.3 does not imply that areas outside the special flood hazard area or land uses allowed within such area will always be totally free from flooding or flood damages. This Section 14-8.3 does not create liability on the part of the governing body or any official, employee or agent of the governing body for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section 14-8.3 or any administrative decision lawfully made pursuant to this Section 14-8.3. 
14-8.4 - LANDSCAPE AND SITE DESIGN 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
(1)  It is the purpose and intent of this Section 14-8.4 to foster the creation of regionally appropriate, sustainable landscapes . This Section 14-8.4 requires water harvesting and encourages the development of alternate sources of landscape irrigation water, because potable water is an increasingly scarce resource. Water conservation, water harvesting and irrigation efficiency shall guide landscape design, installation and maintenance to foster a responsible and judicious use of our water and other natural resources. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this Section 14-8.4 to protect and promote the health and beauty of natural settings and urban landscapes , to recognize and provide for appropriate changes in the urban context and to protect and preserve public and private landscape resources. This Section 14-8.4 is part of the purpose and intent of Chapter 14, which is to enhance the appearance of Santa Fe's streets and public places in order to promote their role as community amenities and social spaces that contribute to civic pride and vitality. 
(3)  It is also the purpose and intent of this Section 14-8.4 to preserve existing healthy vegetation to the greatest extent possible as an important cultural, environmental and economic resource. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  This Section 14-8.4 applies to, and a landscape plan that demonstrates compliance of the entire property with this Section 14-8.4 is required with, the following: (Ord. No. 2013-16  47) 
(a)  applications for subdivision plat approval, except lot split and resubdivision plats ; 
(b)  applications for development plan approval; 
(c)  applications for master plan approval; 
(d)  applications for construction permits and special use permits as follows: 
(i)  all new nonresidential and multiple- family construction resulting in an enclosed structure with a gross floor area greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet; and 
(ii)  for additions or remodeling of existing nonresidential and multiple- family structures with a construction valuation over one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), landscape improvements to comply with this Section 14-8.4, as prioritized by the land use director , shall be required up to a total cost of twenty percent of the construction valuation; and 
(e)  development on city -owned land. 
(2)  The following requirements of this section apply to all development , including applications for construction of and exterior alterations to single family dwellings and apply to landscaping activities not directly associated with development applications : 
(a)  Subsections 14-8.4(E)(1)(b) (Passive Water Harvesting), (E)(3) (Water Features), and (E)(4) (Irrigation Standards); and 
(b)  Subsections 14-8.4(F)(3) (Controlled or Prohibited Plant Materials), (F)(4) (Turf Limitations), and (F)(5) (Preservation of Existing Vegetation). 
(3)  The requirements of this Section 14-8.4 other than those cited in Subsection 14-8.4(B)(2) do not apply to the following: 
(a)  applications for new or modified single-family dwelling units , except that they shall comply with applicable provisions of Subsections 14-8.4(E) (Water Harvesting and Irrigation Standards) and (F) (Plant Material Standards); 
(b)  interior residential remodeling. 
(c)  where standards of Section 14-7.4 (BCD) conflict with the provisions of this section, the BCD standards shall apply. In any other case in which more than one set of landscape requirements are applicable, the more stringent shall apply as provided in Section 14-1.7 (Conflicting Provisions). 
(4)  Additional landscape requirements may apply to properties subject to terrain management regulations as set forth in Section 14-8.2 (Terrain and Stormwater Management) and to those located in the escarpment overlay district as set forth in Section 14-5.6. Additional landscaping requirements applicable to outdoor and emergency water use are set forth in Chapter 25 SFCC 1987 (Water). 
(5)  Guidelines for design of medians and planting strips may be found in Resolution 2010-66. Landscape irrigation standards may be found in Resolution 2010-17. 
(C)  Compliance and Enforcement   
(1)  Construction permits , development plans, master plans and subdivision plats shall comply with this Section 14-8.4. 
(2)  If the requirements of this section cannot be met prior to the request for a certificate of occupancy , the applicant may provide a financial guarantee in accordance with Section 14-3.12(B) (Temporary Certificate of Occupancy) and with policies issued by the land use director . 
(3)  In the escarpment overlay district, compliance with both this Section 14-8.4 and Section 14-5.6 (Escarpment Overlay District) are required. 
(4)  The land use director shall have discretion to allow alternate means of compliance with the requirements of this section when the proposed alternate means satisfy the intent, and are equivalent to or exceed the requirements of, this Section 14-8.4 and when: 
(a)  site conditions, including the configuration of the lot , topography or existing vegetation, make full compliance impossible or impractical; 
(b)  the proposed alternate means of compliance are appropriate to the design intent, especially in response to landscape or site design consistent with the surrounding area or with the historic character of Santa Fe; and 
(c)  the proposed alternate means of compliance promote good stormwater management, water conservation and water harvesting equal to or greater than the original requirement. 
(5)  Existing landscaping or other improvements may meet the requirements of this Section 14-8.4. 
(D)  Landscaping Plan Submittal Requirements   
When the requirements of this Section 14-8.4 apply, information shall be provided as required by the land use director . Landscaping plans shall be consistent with other required plans including terrain management, utilities and siting of structures . 
(E)  Water Harvesting and Irrigation Standards   
Water conservation and stormwater management shall guide landscape and site planning, design, installation and management. Landscape planning shall begin early in the development process in conjunction with the requirements of Section 14-8.2 (Terrain and Stormwater Management). Landscape design shall apply the principles of xeriscaping and achieve the highest industry standards for irrigation efficiency. Alternative sources of irrigation water shall be developed, including harvested water from roof and site runoff. Gray water use is recommended where appropriate. Potable water shall be used only as a back-up or temporary irrigation water source to the greatest extent possible. The purpose of these strategies is to develop drought tolerant landscapes and to reduce the demand on the potable water system. 
(1)  Water Harvesting 
(a)  The landscaping plan shall include passive water harvesting for landscape irrigation purposes as a minimum requirement. Water harvesting that is a primary component of stormwater management may qualify for open space reduction as provided in Section 14-7.5(D)(6). 
(b)  Passive water harvesting techniques include: 
(i)  surface collection, such as swales , parking lot islands, bar ditches, detention or retention ponds and constructed wetlands. Detention and retention ponds should be integrated landscape features, rather than single-purpose flood control ponds; 
(ii)  in-ground storage, such as soil amendments, constructed rain gardens , French drains , pumice wicks, permeable paving and collection structures with infiltration fields or galleries. In-ground structures shall use techniques and materials that have been proven effective, safe and structurally sound; and 
(iii)  low impact development and green infrastructure guidelines and techniques recommended by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)  Active water harvesting systems include storage and distribution systems such as above-ground rain barrels and storage tanks and below-grade cisterns that use gravity or pumps to distribute water to an irrigation system; 
(d)  Active water harvesting systems shall be maintained and the water used for landscape irrigation purposes. The land use director may inspect, test and monitor the components of active water harvesting systems, including tanks, pumps and controllers, as needed. 
(2)  Gray Water 
Gray water irrigation is appropriate for some landscape installations. Gray water use is regulated by New Mexico department of environment liquid waste disposal regulations, which define minimum lot size and imposes other standards. 
(3)  Water Features 
(a)  Water features , are classified as high water use. 
(b)  The water surface area of the water feature shall not exceed twenty percent of the total allowable cool season turf area and shall be included in the total area of cool season turf allowed as specified in Subsection 14-8.4(F)(4). 
(c)  Water used in water features shall be re-circulated. 
(d)  The water feature shall be designed to prevent seepage and leaks. 
(4)  Irrigation Standards 
Irrigation systems shall be provided for all landscaped areas. Landscape irrigation plans shall integrate water harvesting and stormwater management with the highest industry standards for efficient irrigation use. The development of alternative sources of irrigation water is recommended, including harvested water from cistern collection and gray water . Potable water irrigation may be used as a supplemental or temporary system. Irrigation designers and installers are encouraged to use the City Landscape Irrigation Systems Standards as a guide to minimum specifications for irrigation systems. All new irrigation systems and major renovation of existing systems shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  a code-approved backflow prevention device is required for all irrigation systems connected to the city water system, including existing irrigation systems. Atmospheric vacuum breakers are the minimum required standard for above grade systems such as those connected to hose bibs and frost-free hydrants; 
(b)  an automatic, digital multi-programmable controller is required for all irrigation systems with an irrigated landscaped area larger than one thousand (1,000) square feet installed in commercial, industrial and multiple- family residential development . 
(c)  hand watering for commercial, industrial and multiple- family installations of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area is allowed. Shut-off nozzles are required on hoses used for hand watering; 
(d)  irrigation system operation information, including recommended monthly and seasonal irrigation schedules, and water budgets based on gallons used for landscape plantings for years one and three, shall be included on the irrigation plan or with attached documentation; 
(e)  irrigation systems shall be designed for the site-specific topography, site orientation, microclimate, prevailing winds and soil type so as to prevent runoff, minimize evaporation and promote infiltration; 
(f)  irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent water waste, over-watering and overspray or drainage of water onto any paved or unplanted surface; 
(g)  planting beds shall be swaled , sloped or recessed below grade to prevent fugitive water ; 
(h)  irrigation systems shall be zoned by levels of water use. For the most efficient water use, plants with similar water use requirements shall be grouped together. Separate zones are required for permanent and temporary irrigation lines; 
(i)  overhead spray irrigation is prohibited for watering trees and shrubs, but is allowed for turf and ground cover plants and for temporary irrigation systems for revegetation with drought tolerant plant species. Spray irrigation is prohibited in areas where any dimension is less than ten (10) feet; 
(j)  temporary irrigation systems are allowed and encouraged in conjunction with the use of revegetation with drought tolerant plant material. Temporary irrigation systems shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis and removed after the vegetation is established; 
(k)  turf, sod or grass seeding of cool season turf species shall not be planted on slopes greater than twenty-five percent or in areas where any dimension is less than ten (10) feet. Revegetation using temporary irrigation, with annual plant species used for erosion control to meet the requirements set forth in Section 14-8.2 (Terrain and Stormwater Management) is exempt from this restriction. 
(F)  Plant Material Standards   
(1)  Plant Material Selection 
Plant material selection shall emphasize drought tolerant plant species and shall limit the use of high water use plant species. All required plant material shall be cold hardy to USDA Classification Zone 5 , which is minus fifteen degrees Fahrenheit, or colder. 
(2)  Installation 
Required plant material shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  all required deciduous trees shall be two (2) inch caliper minimum; 
(b)  all required shrubs shall be five gallon minimum except as noted on the City of Santa Fe Recommended Plant List; 
(c)  all required evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
(d)  when more than ten trees are required by this Section 14-8.4, more than one species shall be provided unless otherwise approved by the land use director ; 
(e)  stormwater detention ponds and retention ponds shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and grasses ,with a minimum of one tree and three shrubs per five hundred (500) square feet of required ponding area. Plants located in the bottom third of the detention pond or retention pond must be adaptable to periods of submersion and may require replacement during periodic maintenance to remove silt; 
(f)  any plant material required by this Section 14-8.4 that fails to show healthy growth due to damage, pest, disease or neglect shall be promptly replaced with a similar plant; 
(g)  required new plant material shall be protected from damage by vehicles; 
(h)  new plant material shall be mulched to a minimum depth of two (2) inches and the mulch renewed yearly or as needed. Mulch may be of organic or inorganic material. 
(i)  plastic sheeting is not permitted as weed barrier; and 
(j)  the owner shall properly maintain all materials and installation required by this Section 14-8.4, including proper pruning, soil testing, fertilizing and weeding. 
(3)  Controlled or Prohibited Plant Materials 
(a)  Turf grass sod or turf grass seed mixes installed within the city limits shall contain no more than twenty-five percent Kentucky Bluegrass. 
(b)  Russian Olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia) and Salt Cedar (Tamarix spp) shall not be sold or installed within the city limits. 
(4)  Turf Limitations 
Warm season grasses are recommended for most turf applications. The installation of cool season turf grasses is discouraged, as they require greater quantities of irrigation water. Refer to the City of Santa Fe Recommended Plant List for specific information on grass species. Cool season turf shall be limited to areas with relatively low evaporation from wind and heat or in locations used for active or passive recreational use. The total area of cool season turf shall be limited as follows: 
(a)  single-family dwelling units shall not have cool season turf in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent of the total lot area, whichever is less; 
(b)  multiple- family residential developments shall not have cool season turf in excess of twenty per cent of the required common open space ; 
(c)  industrial and commercial developments shall not have cool season turf in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet or three percent of the required open space , whichever is greater; and 
(d)  public parks and commercial recreational uses are exempt from this restriction, but shall install only the minimum cool season turf required for the active recreational use. 
(5)  Preservation of Existing Vegetation 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  30) 
(a)  The land use director may require the preservation, relocation or replacement of existing significant trees as provided in Subsection 14-8.4(B), except that the public works director may determine the requirements for significant trees located within public right-of-way , within city parks or on other land owned by the city . Determinations shall be made in accordance with the following criteria: 
(i)  priority is given to preserving significant trees that provide screening , buffering, wildlife habitat or linkages to wildlife habitat; 
(ii)  significant trees that are to be preserved or relocated shall be healthy and free from serious insect or parasite infestation; 
(iii)  significant trees to be relocated shall be selected from areas with adequate soil conditions for successful relocation; 
(iv)  the recommended season for relocation of pion (Pinus edulis) trees is September 15 to May 15; 
(v)  if relocation of existing significant trees is not possible within these guidelines, then equivalent plant material shall be provided. Replacement evergreen trees shall be six (6) feet tall or taller, replacement deciduous trees shall be two (2) inches caliper or greater; and 
(vi)  relocated or replacement trees shall be irrigated until they are established. 
(b)  A minimum of forty percent of pion significant trees shall be preserved, relocated on site or replaced as specified in this Section 14-8.4. Pion trees that are preserved or relocated on site and are a minimum of eight (8) feet tall shall substitute for two trees required elsewhere in this Section 14-8.4. 
(c)  No existing deciduous tree with a six (6) inch caliper or greater or evergreen tree over eight (8) feet tall shall be removed without the approval of the land use director or public works director as provided in Subsection (F)(5)(a) above. Trees classified by the New Mexico department of agriculture as noxious weeds that are smaller than a twelve (12) inch caliper are exempt from this review, including Russian olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia), Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila), tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissisima) and salt cedar (Tamarix species). 
(d)  During construction, existing plant material to be preserved shall be enclosed by a temporary fence at least five (5) feet outside the dripline. In no case shall vehicles be parked or materials or equipment be stored or stockpiled within the enclosed area. 
(e)  All areas with exposed soil surfaces disturbed by construction shall be revegetated to minimize erosion and stormwater runoff and to improve the infiltration of precipitation. 
(f)  Destroyed vegetation shall be removed promptly to prevent insect infestation of healthy vegetation. 
(g)  The preservation of plant species classified as noxious weeds is discouraged. 
(h)  Topsoil removed during construction shall be stockpiled on site and reused on site in landscaped areas or areas to be revegetated. 
(G)  Street Tree Standards   
(1)  Street trees are required to reduce heat, dust, glare and the need for cooling or heating; to help clean and oxygenate the air; to reduce road noise; to promote continuity between developments ; and to enhance the appearance of Santa Fe's streets . Consideration should be given to urban density, historic or vernacular character of the location; continuity with native vegetation and the natural landscape ; and the ability to provide water for irrigation. 
(2)  Required street trees do not substitute for required landscape material in parking lots , except as provided in Subsection 14-8.4(I)(2) (Parking Lots - Perimeter Screening). Street trees shall be located as follows: 
(a)  on major and secondary arterials, one tree an average of every thirty (30) to forty (40) feet; 
(b)  on all other streets , one tree an average of every twenty-five (25) to thirty-five (35) feet; and 
(c)  where street trees or planting strips are required but not practical, the equivalent area in square feet and amount of plant material may be provided elsewhere on the site, with approval of the land use director and based on existing conditions or design intent. 
(3)  Location of Street Trees: 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  48; Ord. No. 2014-31  31) 
(a)  on streets, other than major and secondary arterials, street trees shall be located on the subject property adjacent to the property line or within the right of way as approved by the planning commission or the public works director. Street trees located within the right of way shall be planted in compliance with Chapter 23 SFCC 1987 Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places and in compliance with adopted median and parkway standards; 
(b)  on major and secondary arterials, trees shall be planted in a minimum ten (10) foot wide parkway that includes the width of the sidewalk or other pedestrian way. If existing development precludes provision of the ten (10) foot wide parkway , trees shall be planted in a space no smaller than five (5) feet by thirteen (13) feet and preferably multiple trees in longer planting strips ; 
(c)  street trees should be planted to the greatest extent possible in swales or basins that collect run-off and precipitation; 
(d)  street trees shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from light standards, so as not to impede outdoor illumination; 
(e)  street trees shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from fire hydrants so as not to interfere with hydrant operation; 
(f)  street trees located under utility lines shall be a species that maintains a minimum of five (5) feet of clearance from overhead utility lines at maturity; and 
(g)  street trees shall not be required on single- family residential lots . 
(H)  Open Space Planting Requirements   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  32) 
(1)  Required open space shall be planted with a minimum of one tree and two shrubs every five hundred (500) square feet, exclusive of areas developed with patios, game courts, swimming pools or similar hardscape recreational features. 
(2)  In addition to required trees and shrubs, open space areas shall be landscaped with groundcover plants or decorative mulch or naturally occurring groundcover plants shall be maintained. 
(3)  Street trees and landscaping required for parking lots may be counted toward meeting the minimum planting requirements for open space . 
(4)  At least twenty-five percent of required trees and shrubs shall be evergreen. Existing trees and shrubs shall be accepted for required landscaping if they otherwise meet the requirements of this Section 14-8.4. 
(I)  Parking Lots   
(1)  Purpose and General Requirements 
Parking lots are transitional spaces where users change modes of travel from car, bus or bicycle to pedestrian or assisted movement in wheel chairs or by other means. Parking lots shall safely and attractively serve all transportation modes, especially pedestrian. Parking lots shall complement and define the buildings they serve by the use of roadways, pedestrian ways and interior landscaping to emphasize open space , building entrances and other site or architectural elements. Parking lots shall use stormwater harvesting in parking lot islands and perimeter screening strips to reduce the use of potable water irrigation. 
(2)  Perimeter Screening 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  33) 
(a)  When three or more off-street parking spaces are required, perimeter screening shall be provided. The purpose of perimeter screening of parking lots is to define parking areas, mitigate the view of cars and pavement, help direct traffic flow, provide continuity to streetscapes and obtain the environmental benefits of increased planting. 
(b)  in commercial districts, wherever there is a parking lot for more than three motor vehicles and any part of the parking lot is within twenty-five (25) feet of a residential area and not separated by a public right of way , a solid masonry wall not less than four (4) feet in height shall be erected between the parking lot and the residential district boundaries. 
(c)  The parking lot shall be screened from all public streets and adjacent properties by a continuous wall or bermfour (4) feet or more in height, a hedge a minimum four (4) feet high at maturity, other vegetative screening appropriate to the landscape design intent or any combination of these so long as the screening objective is achieved. Topography and adjacent uses shall be taken into account to determine the most effective means of screening . 
(d)  A continuous planting strip must be provided where a parking lot abuts or occupies a street yard . The planting strip must be at least five (5) feet wide. Trees shall be planted an average of twenty-five (25) feet on center, in an area with a minimum dimension of five (5) feet and containing a minimum of seventy-five (75) square feet of permeable surface exclusive of curbing. Street trees may be counted toward the tree planting requirement of this Subsection (I)(2)(d). 
(3)  Interior Parking Lot Landscape Requirements 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  34) 
(a)  The purpose of interior planting requirements in parking lots is to provide visual relief from large expanses of cars and pavement, provide shade to reduce heat and glare , help direct traffic flow and reduce and control stormwater runoff. 
(b)  When forty or more off-street parking spaces are provided, interior lot landscaping shall be provided. 
(c)  No single parking area shall exceed one hundred twenty spaces unless divided into two or more subareas by an internal landscaped street or landscaped pedestrian way that is a minimum ten (10) feet wide. 
(d)  A minimum of ten (10) square feet of permeable landscaped area shall be provided per parking space. A minimum of one deciduous tree shall be planted per ninety (90) square feet of landscaped area. 
(e)  Traffic islands shall have a minimum dimension of six (6) feet and contain a minimum of ninety (90) square feet of permeable surface, exclusive of curbing, and shall be distributed throughout the lot . As a component of a stormwater management plan, traffic islands may be combined to facilitate water harvesting and these combined islands shall be distributed within each subarea. 
(f)  No more than twenty cars shall be parked in a row without a planting island adjacent to the length of the parking space having a minimum area of ninety (90) square feet, and including at least one tree. 
(4)  Stormwater Management 
(a)  Stormwater runoff shall be used to provide irrigation for the perimeter and interior plantings to the greatest extent possible. 
(b)  Stormwater runoff water shall be harvested and infiltrated as close to where it falls as possible. 
(c)  The consolidation of planting islands is allowed to facilitate stormwater harvesting and promote plant growth. The consolidated planting islands shall be distributed in each subarea. 
(d)  The use of biofiltration techniques such as constructed rain gardens to filter pollutants carried by runoff and infiltrate stormwater for irrigation is recommended. 
(5)  Pedestrian Circulation 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  35) 
When forty or more off-street parking spaces are provided, sidewalks for primary pedestrian routes shall be provided. At a minimum this includes pedestrian ways from the primary off-site entrance or entrances to the primary building entrance or entrances. 
(a)  All pedestrian ways shall be landscaped with a minimum six (6) foot wide planting strip on at least one side, exclusive of curbs, and trees an average of twenty-five (25) feet on center, parallel to and adjacent to the walkway. 
(b)  If the planting strip abuts a row of parking, the tree planting areas may be included in the interior lot landscape requirements. 
(6)  Vehicle Overhangs 
Vehicles may not overhang the minimum required landscaped area unless the following conditions are met, in which case adjacent parking spaces may also be reduced by the amount of the overhang: 
(a)  the planting islands have a minimum depth of five (5) feet plus the amount of the overhang for each side of parking, exclusive of curbing, as defined in Section 14-8.6 (Off-Street Parking and Loading); 
(b)  either curbing or wheel stops are provided; and 
(c)  plant material is located outside the overhang area or is no greater than twelve (12) inches in height at maturity; 
(7)  Compliance 
Projects that do not require an increase in existing parking are not required to eliminate parking spaces to comply with the requirements of this Section 14-8.4. Projects that require an increase in existing parking are required to comply with the requirements of this Section 14-8.4. 
(8)  Display Lots and Flea Markets 
Display lots and flea markets are exempt from interior pedestrian circulation requirements, but are required to include interior landscape islands or swales for stormwater management. Such islands shall be planted with one deciduous tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious surface area. 
(J)  Screening and Buffering   
(1)  Wall and Fences 
For any project to which this Subsection 14-8.4(J) applies, publicly visible walls and fences shall be wrought iron or simulated wrought iron, wood or simulated wood, cedar pole, adobe , split-faced concrete block, stone, stuccoed or rectangular mesh wire on wooden posts in combination with vines or other climbing plant material. 
(2)  Residential Developments 
(a)  (Ord. No. 2014-31  36) Residential development on residentially zoned property that abuts major or secondary arterials shall be screened from those streets to mitigate noise and to promote residential privacy as follows: 
(i)  Screening shall be by walls , fences, the planting of trees and shrubs or a combination of these. 
(ii)  The provision of plant material shall, at a minimum, conform to the same requirements as for open space in Subsection 14-8.4(H) (Open Space Planting Require-ments). 
(iii)  An alternative to screening shall be a twenty-five (25) foot setback of undisturbed trees, shrubs, grasses or landscape treatment consisting of appropriate vegetative cover. 
(b)  Walls and fences that are provided as subdivision improvements for a residential subdivision or at the time of initial development of a multi- family residential development comprising four or more lots or units, shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Any wall or fence that is more than three (3) feet in height above finished grade on the side facing the street , shall be set back from the street right of way line a distance equal to or greater than that height. 
(ii)  The setback area required by Subsection (b)(i) shall be landscaped with plant material that consists of predominantly thorny or other barrier plantings that will cover a minimum of seventy-five percent of the ground area of the planter and that will screen a minimum of seventy-five percent of the face of the fence or wall at maturity. 
(iii)  This Subsection (2)(b) does not apply within historic districts or to residential developments approved prior to March 1, 2012. 
(iv)  This Subsection (2)(b) does not apply to construction of walls or fences on individual lots with single- family dwellings subsequent to the initial construction of walls or fences as subdivision improvements. 
(3)  Buffer for Nonresidential Development Abutting Residential 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  37) 
(a)  Nonresidential development that abuts a residential development on a residentially zoned property or an undeveloped parcel in a residential zoning district shall provide a continuous landscaped buffer strip not less than fifteen (15) feet wide. 
(b)  Plant material in the landscaped buffer shall, at a minimum, conform to the requirements for open space provided in Subsection 14-8.4(H). 
(c)  The landscaped buffer may be considered part of any required open space so long as all other conditions of the open space requirement are satisfied. 
(4)  Storage, Trash and Equipment 
(a)  All trash areas, dumpsters, outdoor storage, service areas, ground and wall-mounted mechanical and electrical equipment, excluding transformers, and pedestals shall be screened so that they are not substantially visible from any public street , way or place or any adjacent residential property . 
(b)  Screening shall be by walls , fences or planting of trees or shrubs sufficient to meet the screening objective within two years of installation, or any combination of these so long as the screening objective is achieved. Topography and adjacent uses shall be taken into account to determine the most effective means of screening . 
(c)  All trash areas, dumpsters, grease collection areas, outdoor storage, service areas and other uses that may contribute to stormwater pollution shall be constructed so as not to allow pollutants to be collected in runoff and discharged to the public stormwater system. Topography, adjacent uses and constructed barriers and stormwater treatment controls shall be taken into account and incorporated into the site design to provide the most effective means of preventing stormwater pollution. 
14-8.5 - WALLS AND FENCES 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Applicability   
(1)  The retaining wall height standards in this Section 14.8.5 apply to the portion of a wall , fence or similar structure that supports a higher finished grade on one side than on the other. The height of the retaining wall is measured from the finished grade at the base of the wall to the finished grade at the top of the wall . (Ord. No. 2012-11  22) 
(2)  The fence height standards in this Section 14-8.5 apply to fences, screen walls and similar structures , and hedges. Railings or similar barriers required by building or other codes to protect against falling hazards are exempt when built to the minimum height required by those codes and when constructed to maximize transparency. Fence height is measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence, excluding the height of any retaining wall upon which it is built. 
(3)  Additional regulations may apply to walls and fences, including Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts), Section 14-5.4(A)(4) (South Central Highway Corridor Overlay District Standards) and Section 14-7.1(F) (Visibility at Driveways and Yards). If those or other provisions of Chapter 14 conflict with the requirements of this Section 14-8.5, conflicts shall be resolved pursuant to Section 14-1.7 (Conflicting Provisions). 
(B)  Maximum Height of Retaining Walls and Fences   
(1)  Maximum Height of Retaining Walls 
(a)  No retaining wall shall exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  Retaining walls shall be stepped or terraced so that they are separated by a distance equal to the height of the higher wall . 
(2)  Maximum Height of Fences 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  49) 
(a)  On a property developed for residential use or on undeveloped property zoned for residential use, no fence shall exceed six (6) feet in height except that: 
(i)  along the common property line with a property developed for or zoned for nonresidential use, the maximum height of fences is eight (8) feet; and 
(ii)  within a residential compound , the maximum height of fences is eight (8) feet. 
(b)  On a property developed for nonresidential use or on undeveloped property zoned for nonresidential use, no fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(c)  Walls and fences may exceed the height limit over pedestrian or vehicular gates. 
(3)  Maximum Height of Fences Built on Retaining Walls 
In addition to the height limits in Subsections 14-8.5(B)(1) and (2), the combined height of a fence built on a retaining wall shall not exceed the maximum fence height plus four (4) feet as measured above the finished grade on the downslope side. 
(C)  Additional Fence Regulations for Specified Nonresidential Uses   
(1)  For neighborhood grocery stores or laundromats catering to local pedestrian trade in a residential district, there must be a solid masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height erected along side and rear lot lines with adjoining residential lots . 
(2)  For a parking lot contiguous to a residential district or one or more of the RAC, AC, SC or I districts, a six (6) foot solid masonry wall shall be erected along edges of portions of the parking lot adjoining property in the residential district; provided, however, that in the front required yard , the maximum height of a wall or fence shall be three (3) feet. 
(3)  In outdoor storage yards or salvage yards , a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height, with access only through solid gates that are kept closed when not in use, shall be erected around the entire yard. No object shall be stacked or stored higher than the minimum height of the enclosing wall or fence. 
14-8.6 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10; Ord. No. 2012-11 23) 
(A)  Specific Parking Requirements   
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 14-8.6-1 Parking and Loading Requirements. [Editor's Note: Table is Exhibit A located in the Appendix following Section 14-12.] 
(B)  Standards for Off-Street Parking Spaces and Parking Lots   
(1)  General Standards 
(Ord. No. 2014-4; Ord. No. 2014-31  38) 
All off-street parking spaces and lots shall meet the standards set forth in this Subsection 14-8.6(B) and any additional standards shown on an approved site plan: 
(a)  they shall be designed, maintained and regulated so that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any street , walk or alley; provided that the public works director may approve parking lots serving one or two dwelling units and comprising four or fewer parking spaces designed to allow vehicles to back onto a street classified as a subcollector or lane, onto a walk or alley, or in exceptional circumstances onto a street classified as an arterial or collector; 
(b)  they shall be designed so that vehicles may be removed without moving another vehicle except in attended lots , or single-family dwellings where not more than two spaces assigned for use to the same dwelling unit may be arranged in tandem; 
(c)  they shall have barriers that prevent vehicles from extending over the public sidewalks, abutting lots or the minimum required landscaped area, and that prevent vehicles from obstructing building entries and ADA accessible routes; 
(d)  they shall be designed to discourage parking lot traffic from accessing directly onto major arterial streets , unless no reasonable alternative is available; 
(e)  they shall be appropriately marked to indicate the location of the spaces; and 
(f)  if they are required parking spaces, they shall be available at all times for parking the personal vehicles of employees and customers or residents and guests for which the spaces are required. Required parking spaces shall be unobstructed and shall not be used for storage, display, sales or parking of commercial or other vehicles used by employees in the conduct of the use for which the spaces are required, unless an itinerant vending permit or special use permit has been issued. Required off-street loading spaces shall not be included as off-street parking spaces in the computation of required off-street parking . 
(g)  To the extent feasible, driveway or parking lot aisles shall not direct vehicle traffic toward a primary pedestrian entryway to a nonresidential or multiple family residential building . 
(i)  A driveway or parking lot aisle that is oriented toward a primary pedestrian entryway to a nonresidential or multiple family residential building shall have bollards or other safety barriers that prevent accidental vehicle collisions with the entryway and pedestrians in front of the entryway. 
(ii)  Compliance with the provisions of this Subsection 14-8.6(B)(1)(g) is required for the types of projects identified in Subsection 14-8.4(B)(1) Landscape and Site Design Applicability. For additions or remodeling projects as described in Subsection 14-8.4(B)(1)(d)(ii), the total cost for required safety barriers shall not exceed twenty percent of the project's construction valuation, in addition to the cost of landscape improvements. 
(2)  Parking Space Requirements 
(a)  Required parking spaces shall be arranged and constructed in accordance with parking and driveway standards contained in Illustrations 14-8.6-1, 2 and 3. [Editor's Note: Illustrations are Exhibit B Illustrations of Parking Space Layout and Dimensional Standards located in the Appendix following Section 14-12.]. 
(b)  No required off-street parking space shall be located within the right-of-way of any street , roadway or public alley. 
(c)  Calculations of the number of spaces required shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
(3)  Changes in Use 
(a)  When the type or intensity of use of any building , structure or premises is increased by any means, including through addition of dwelling units , gross floor area or seating capacity, off-street parking shall be supplemented to accommodate the intensified use. 
(b)  For a use that is legally noncomforming with regard to the number of parking spaces provided, the number of spaces that are lacking may be subtracted from the number of required off-street parking spaces for a new use at the same location so that the degree of nonconformity is maintained but is not increased. 
(4)  Combined Uses; Shared Parking (Ord. No. 2016-39  5) 
(a)  Combined uses on the same premises shall provide the combined total number of spaces required for each use separately, unless a shared parking plan is approved. 
(b)  Uses on premises comprising more than one legal lot of record may provide shared parking in accordance with an approved shared parking plan. 
(c)  Parking required for uses located on adjoining lots in RAC, C, BCD, BIP, MU, SC or I districts, for institutional uses located on adjoining lots in residential districts, or for a qualifying project within the Midtown LINC Overlay District, may be provided on a joint basis. Within the joint parking areas, the spaces required for each of the participating uses shall be marked on the parking plan and maintained as allocated to the individual use, unless a shared parking plan is approved. (Ord. No. 2013-16  50) 
(d)  Cumulative parking space requirements for mixed-use occupancies or adjoining mixed uses may be reduced if the applicant demonstrates that the peak requirements of the several occupancies occur at different times, such as mid-day for office uses and evening for residential uses, as supported by a parking demand study. 
(e)  Reduction in the total number of spaces required by the addition of all uses in the BCD or as specified in Subsection 14-8.6(A) may be approved by a land use board pursuant to a special use permit or development plan if the reduction is supported by a parking demand study. 
(f)  Reduction in the total number of spaces required by this Section 14-8.6 for qualifying projects within the Midtown LINC Overlay District shall be approved by the land use director pursuant to Subsection 14-3.8(B)(9) if the reduction is supported by a parking demand study prepared by the qualifying project applicant. In addition to the shared parking provisions of this Subsection, the total number of spaces required as determined by a shared parking plan or parking demand study may be reduced by the number of on-street parking spaces present in the Midtown LINC Overlay District adjacent to a qualifying project . 
(5)  Parking Spaces Designated for Persons with Disabilities 
Parking lots shall comply with applicable standards for provision of parking spaces designated for persons with disabilities contained in construction codes adopted pursuant to Chapter 7 SFCC 1987 (Building and Housing) and pursuant to New Mexico laws and regulations, including standards for compliance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(6)  Parking Structures 
(a)  Parking structures shall have architecturally compatible, articulated faades designed to screen the view of parked vehicles from all floors above the ground floor except on faades abutting an alley. 
(b)  In a MU district, if eighty percent of the ground floor of any side of an above-grade parking structure is adjacent to a public street , except an alley, or adjacent to a public open space or plaza, it shall be constructed to an adequate depth to allow future occupancy by a commercial or other non-parking permitted use allowed in the MU district. 
(7)  Reduction of Parking Requirements for Transit Facility 
The off-street parking requirements set forth in Subsection 14-8.6(B) may be reduced up to five percent if the property owner enters into an agreement with the City wherein the property owner grants the City the right to use a portion of the property for a City transit facility. 
(a)  Whether or not the site is a suitable location for a transit facility is at the sole discretion of the City. 
(b)  The amount of reduction and the terms of the agreement shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Land Use Department, the Transit Division and the City Attorney's Office and shall be based upon the City's specific transit needs at the site, the anticipated reduction in parking demand due to the facility and specific characteristics and considerations of the site. 
(c)  The agreement may be in the form of an easement, dedication or long term lease approved by the Governing Body. 
(C)  Provisions for Specific Districts   
(1)  Off Street Visitor Parking in Single Family Developments 
In single family residential developments , depending on the size and layout of the development and if driveways are located in such proximity to each other that adequate visitor parking is unavailable on the street , the planning commission may require that additional visitor parking of up to one-half space per dwelling unit be accommodated within the development . 
(2)  BCD, C-2 
(a)  In the BCD district, there shall be provided the minimum number of off-street parking spaces as follows: 
(i)  For residential uses, one space for each dwelling unit ; 
(ii)  For commercial uses: (1) One parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of net leasable floor area for office uses; (2) One parking space for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of net leasable floor area for other commercial uses, except that the requirements for hotels and motels shall be one parking space for each rental unit; 
(iii)  For all uses not classified as commercial or residential , the applicable standards set forth in Table 14-8.6-1 located in the appendix following Section 14-12 shall apply; 
(b)  In the BCD or C-2 district, the parking requirements established in this Subsection (D)(2) shall be met at the time of application for certificates of occupancy or for business registration by either on-site off-street parking or off-street parking located within six hundred (600) feet of the nearest property line of the parcel . Leased parking is not acceptable unless documentation is shown for a lease of a minimum of five years and that the lease of such parking will not cause the lessor property to be in noncompliance with parking requirements. The lessee shall submit a site plan with the application that delineates the available parking spaces on the lessor property and the spaces to be leased. The leased parking spaces shall be designated for the exclusive use of the lessee on the site plan and shall be so reserved by clear, appropriate signage on the lessor property . 
(c)  Parking spaces in the BCD that are not in conformance with Appendix Table B shall not be considered legal spaces in determining whether the lessor property has sufficient parking spaces to lease under the provisions of Subsection 14-8.6(D)(2)(b). After the expiration of the lease period, the business registration shall not be issued unless renewal of the lease or a new lease, and compliance of the lessor property with the parking requirements of this Subsection 14-8.6(D)(2)(c), are documented; 
(d)  Any modification of the parking requirements granted by the board of adjustment shall not constitute a waiver of the assessment fee; and 
(e)  Assessment districts - Reserved 
(3)  BIP Districts 
(a)  The configuration and distribution of parking areas may be proposed for the entire site or portions of the site and need not be allocated on an individual lot basis. 
(b)  Quantities and sizes of parking and loading spaces shall be as required in Subsections 14-8.6(A) and (B). Truck loading shall be confined to the rear and sides of buildings . To the extent possible, areas for outdoor storage , trash collection and loading shall not be located adjacent to residential lots . Where such facilities are located adjacent to residential lots , they shall include a solid acoustic buffer. In all cases, the areas shall be effectively screened from public view. Signs shall be installed prohibiting vehicular idling in areas adjacent to residential lots . Areas for outdoor storage , trash collection and loading shall be incorporated into the primary building design and construction for these areas shall be of materials of comparable in quality and appearance to the building . Visual and acoustic impacts of these functions shall be mitigated to the greatest extent possible. When the loading or refuse collection area is adjacent to a residential district, signs shall be installed prohibiting deliveries and collections between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(4)  MU District 
(a)  The configuration and distribution of parking areas may be proposed for the entire site or portions of the site and need not be allocated on an individual lot basis. 
(b)  Quantities and sizes of parking and loading areas shall be as required in Subsections 14-8.6(A) and (B); however, the quantity of parking provided may be reduced if approved by the planning commission concurrently with the development plan. 
(D)  Loading Standards   
(1)  General Requirements 
(Ord. No. 2014-31  39) 
(a)  Loading space shall be paved in conformance with paving requirements specified in off-street parking standards. 
(b)  All permitted or permissible uses requiring loading space for normal operations shall provide adequate loading space so that no vehicle being loaded or unloaded in connection with normal operation shall stand in or project into any public street , walk, alleyway, front required yard , required parking space or access aisle, common ingress-egress easement, or ADA accessibility route, or obstruct a building entry or exit. 
(c)  The minimum dimensions of the loading space shall be scaled to accommodate the largest vehicle used for pickups and deliveries, including vertical clearance. 
(2)  Additional District-Specific Requirements 
(a)  In SC districts, space for normal off- street loading operations shall be provided at the rear or side of or beneath any shopping center building . 
(b)  In I-1, I-2 and BCD districts, there shall be an adequate area for the storing of all vehicles used incidental to or as part of the primary operation of the establishment. 
(c)  In the C-2 district, loading areas shall not be allowed within fifty (50) feet of the front lot line and truck loading shall be confined to the rear or sides of buildings . 
(E)  Off-Street Bicycle Parking   
(Ord. No. 2016-10) 
(1)  Applicability 
Off-street bicycle space parking standards shall apply to all uses except single family residential uses. Off-street bicycle parking is required for new development, or when an existing development increases in intensity by twenty-five percent or more, as measured by increases in floor area, seating capacity, or required parking spaces. 
(2)  Bicycle Parking 
(a)  Standards. Bicycle parking must be provided in racks that meet the standards outlined in Exhibit D. (Editor's Note: Exhibit D is located in the Land Development Appendix following Section 14-12.) 
(b)  Location. Bicycle parking must be located within fifty (50) feet of the main entrance to the building as measured along the most direct pedestrian access route. Location shall not impede pedestrian access. 
(3)  Number of Required Bicycle Parking Spaces. Off-street bicycle spaces and racks shall be provided in accordance with Exhibit C Off-Street Bicycle Parking Tables 14-8.6-3, 14-8.6-4,14-8.6-5 and 14-8.6-6. (Editor's Note: Exhibit C tables are located in the Land Development Appendix following Section 14-12.) 
(F)  Procedures for Securing Approval   
(1)  Applications; Parking Plan 
Applications for construction permits , special use permits , development plans or other development approvals shall include parking plans that show compliance with applicable requirements of this Section 14-8.6, adopted parking and driveway standards and other applicable provisions of Chapter 14 as required by the land use director . The applicant shall also obtain any access permits required by Chapter 23 SFCC 1987 (Streets, Highways and Public Places) or required by state or federal law or regulation. 
(2)  Review of Plans 
Parking plans, including shared parking plans, shall be reviewed by the land use director for compliance with this Section 14-8.6. 
(3)  Special Provisions for Shared Parking Plans 
(a)  An application for a shared parking plan shall contain a parking demand study or other information required by the land use director and shall include plans showing the proposed shared parking facilities in relation to the uses for which they are to be provided. 
(b)  Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the shared parking plan is approved, a shared parking plan may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all land and structures remaining under the special plan and if all land and structures withdrawn from the shared parking plan comply with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Upon approval of a shared parking plan, a copy of the plan shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk and its contents shall: 
(i)  be binding upon the applicants , their heirs, successors and assigns; 
(ii)  limit and control the issuance and validity of all construction permits and certificates; and 
(iii)  restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and structures included within the shared-use plan to conditions and limitations specified in the plan. 
14-8.7 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Findings and Purpose   
(1)  The governing body finds that it is in the interest of Santa Fe's social and economic welfare to preserve and promote Santa Fe's unique cultural heritage, distinct visual character and regional architectural traditions. 
(2)  The governing body finds that creation of an aesthetically cohesive and harmonious urban townscape is essential to maintaining Santa Fe's exceptional cultural and visual character. 
(3)  The governing body finds that in order for Santa Fe's urban townscape to be one of visual cohesion and identity rather than visual clutter and anonymity, architecture outside the historic districts must possess a degree of compatibility with architecture inside the historic districts. 
(4)  Because Santa Fe's distinct visual character and regional architectural traditions are deemed essential to the welfare of the city's citizens, the governing body hereby establishes an architectural design review process to review building massing, form, color, proportion, texture and materials as part of the construction permit process for areas outside the historic districts. 
(5)  The architectural design review process is intended to promote beauty and visual harmony throughout Santa Fe and to encourage respect for the traditional character and quality of wall -dominated architecture. This Section 14-8.7 does not promote or require adherence to a particular architectural style, but rather to the general qualities that have given Santa Fe architecture its unique and appealing character. 
(6)  The architectural design review process is not intended to stifle architectural creativity, to decrease or limit one's use of property or to impose undue economic hardship on any property owner as a result of the requirements set forth in this Section 14-8.7. 
(B)  Applicability and Procedures   
The list of projects subject to the architectural design review requirements of this Section 14-8.7 and the procedure for scoring such projects are set forth in Section 14-3.11(C). 
(C)  Total Points Required   
The total number of points required for a given project are set forth in this Subsection 14-8.7(C); 
(1)  Point Requirements for New Construction 
Point requirements for new construction, excluding additions, vary according to the zoning district in which the project is located. 
TABLE 14-8.7-1: Point Requirements by Zoning District
(Ord. No. 2013-16  51) 
TABLE 14-8.7-1: Point Requirements by Zoning District Zoning District Points Required C-1, C-2, C-4, BCD, PRRC, SC, HZ, MU 205 RR, R-1 - R-6, R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10 - R-29, RC-5, RC-8, PRC, RAC, AC 180 I-1, I-2, BIP 155  
(2)  Additions to Nonconforming Buildings 
Point requirements for additions to a building that conforms to the provisions of this Section 14-8.7 are as set forth for new construction in Subsection 14-8.7(C)(1) for the entire property , including both existing and proposed publicly visible improvements. Point requirements for additions to a building that is legally nonconforming with regard to the provisions of this Subsection 14-8.7(C) shall be as provided in Subsections 14-8.7(C)(2)(a), (b) or (c). 
(a)  If a proposed addition to a legal nonconforming building increases the gross floor area on a lot by more than seventy-five percent of the original floor area, architectural design points shall be calculated based on the entire property , both existing and proposed publicly visible improvements. 
(b)  If a proposed addition to a legal nonconforming building increases the gross floor area on a lot by less than or equal to seventy-five percent of the original floor area, architectural design points shall be calculated based on the new construction only. 
(c)  A specific number of architectural design points is not required for structurally connected additions that do not exceed twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the existing legal nonconforming building and that match the existing architecture. 
(d)  A specific number of architectural design points is not required for structurally connected additions to buildings of unique architectural merit, as determined on a case-by-case basis by the land use director in consultation with the state historic preservation division and the Santa Fe chapter of the American institute of architects, that either match the existing architecture or comply with the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation. Architectural review in such cases shall be performed by the land use director . 
(e)  For the purposes of this Section 14-8.7 "addition" means additional gross floor area constructed on a single lot and "structurally connected addition" means additional gross floor area that directly adjoins and abuts an existing building . 
(3)  Remodeling, Repainting and Restuccoing in a Different Color 
Point requirements for exterior remodeling requiring structural alterations and involving more than fifty percent of a building's total publicly visible faade and roof area are as set forth for new construction in Subsection 14-8.7(C)(1). Architectural design points shall be calculated based on the entire building , both existing and publicly visible new construction. Cosmetic remodeling , repainting, restuccoing in a different color or exterior remodeling requiring structural alterations and involving less than or equal to fifty percent of a building's total publicly visible faade and roof area do not require any specific number of architectural design points; however, no proposed architectural design shall result in the assignment of negative points. For the purposes of this Section 14-8.7, "structural alteration " means the addition or deletion of building elements, including doors, windows or fenestration and any changes in the type of finish material used. 
(D)  Architectural Design Standards and Point Allocations   
Point allotments are granted to building projects according to the criteria set forth in this Subsection 14-8.7(D). The total number of points required for a given project shall be as set forth in Subsection 14-8.7(C). Points shall be calculated only for those architectural design features that are publicly visible from a street , way or public place. All exterior architectural design features shall be considered publicly visible unless the applicant can show otherwise. Partial point allotments shall not be granted. If a building feature or element cannot be evaluated because it is not required and does not exist, the maximum allowable point allotment for that feature or element shall be granted. For the purposes of this Section 14-8.7, "predominant" means having the most publicly visible surface area. 
Table 14-8.7-2: Architectural Design Standards and Point Allocations
(Ord. No. 2016-39  6) 
TABLE 14-8.7-2: Architectural Design Standards and Point Allocations (See Note 1) Architectural Design Standards Points 1 WALLS Predominant Exterior Surface Material Stucco, adobe 30 Brick, natural stone, and integrally colored unit masonry 25; 30* Concrete and non-integrally colored unit masonry 20; 30* Metal siding, glass curtainwall systems, glass block, wood siding, and simulated materials 10; 30* Mirrored glass curtainwall systems -10 Color of Predominant Exterior Surface Material Earthtones, creams, and pastels of earthtone hues including but not necessarily limited to rose, peach, and terra cotta colors 30 Pastel colors of non-earthtone hues, whites, grays, and grayish greens 15; 30* High-intensity colors -10; 10* Metallic colors, glass and black -10 Exterior Surface Treatment (A) Wall surfaces appear monolithic with at least 75 percent of the total wall area one material and one color. Differing shades of the same general hue shall not be considered different colors. Non-solar fenestration, window and door awnings, applied trim, and accent materials, colors, and decorative bands, with the exception of stucco, masonry or concrete control joints, are used in such a way that they do not give a panelized or prefabricated appearance, produce striped or checkerboard patterns, or exceed 25 percent of the surface area of any faade. Fenestration and/or accent colors on wall surfaces under portals or canopies having a horizontal depth of at least six feet shall be exempt from area calculations 10 (B) Wall surfaces do not meet the criteria set forth in paragraph (A) above -10 ROOFS Form (A) Flat roof surfaces entirely concealed from public view by parapets 20 (B) Flat roof surfaces not entirely concealed from public view by parapets, uniformly sloping roofs, or any combination of flat and uniformly sloping roofs, having a height, from springline to peak, that does not exceed the average height of the supporting walls and having a slope with greater than or equal to four feet of vertical rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to 12 feet of vertical rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run 15 (C) Uniformly sloping roofs or any combination of flat and uniformly sloping roofs, having a height, from springline to peak, that does not exceed the average height of the supporting walls and having a slope with less than four feet of vertical rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run or having a slope with greater than 12 feet of vertical rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run 10 (D) Any type of sloping roof having a height, from springline to peak, that exceeds the average height of the supporting walls; non-uniformly sloping roofs; or any combination of flat and non-uniformly sloping roofs -10 Predominant Material (A) All surfaces are concealed from public view 20 (B) Standing, flat, or batten seam metal roofing, or membrane, asphalt or gravel surfaces exposed to public view 15 (C) Flat tiles of clay, concrete or slate 10 (D) Barrel tiles of clay, concrete, or slate; and asphalt shingles 5 (E) Wood shingles or shakes and other materials including but not necessarily limited to plastic, fiberglass or metal roof tiles -10 Predominant Color (A) All surfaces are concealed from public view 15 (B) Dark reds, browns, and earthtones, and natural metals including aluminum, zinc, tin, and lead 10 (C) Low-intensity colors other than those stated above 5 (D) White 0 (E) Bright, non-fading, high-intensity colors and any use of multiple colors -15 BUILDING FORM Massing (A) One-story buildings with over 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and multi-story buildings with over 20,000 square feet of gross floor area which are designed with wall plane projections or setbacks on each publicly visible faade having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the faade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the faade 30 (B) One-story buildings with less than or equal to 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and multi-story buildings with less than or equal to 20,000 square feet of gross floor area which are designed with either offsetting wall planes or upper story stepbacks of at least four horizontal feet, or a recessed entry space or projecting canopy or portal having a depth of at least six horizontal feet, on at least one publicly visible faade 30 (C) Buildings not utilizing the massing techniques described in paragraphs (A) or (B) above 0 DOORS AND WINDOWS Treatment (A) More than 50 percent of doors, windows and glazed surfaces, which are not located under portales or canopies having a horizontal depth of at least six feet, have either frames recessed a minimum of two inches, are cased with trim, have divided lites, or have exposed or otherwise articulated lintels 20 (B) More than 50 percent of doors, windows and glazed surfaces do not meet the requirements set forth in paragraph (A) above 0; 20* Area (A) All wall surfaces which are not located under portales or canopies having a horizontal depth of at least six feet, and which do not include solar fenestration, have less than or equal to 50 percent openings consisting of doors, windows, glazing and other penetrations 20 (B) Wall surfaces do not meet the requirements as set forth in paragraph (A) above 0; 20* Location (A) All doors, windows and glazed surfaces, on structures having a gross floor area greater than 150 square feet, are located at least two feet from outside building corners 20 (B) All doors, windows and glazed surfaces, on structures having a gross floor area less than or equal to 150 square feet, have at least a two inch mullion at inside and outside building corners 20 Glazing (A) All glazing is clear or tinted neutral gray 10 (B) Any use of colored glazing 0; 10* (C) Any use of mirrored glazing -10 EQUIPMENT Screening (A) All roof and wall mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service equipment, including satellite dishes and vent pipes, are screened from public view by parapets, walls, fences, dense evergreen foliage, or by other means 10 (B) All building mounted equipment set forth in paragraph (A) above is either screened; and/or painted to match visually adjacent surfaces 5 (C) All building mounted equipment set forth in paragraph (A) above is not screened and/or painted to match visually adjacent surfaces -10 NOTES: 
1. Point values denoted by an asterisk (*) apply within the Midtown LINC Overlay District.  
(E)  Explanatory Handbook   
The governing body may adopt by resolution guidelines, graphics and other information in handbook form to clarify, explain and expedite the use and enforcement of this Subsection 14-8.7(E). 
14-8.8 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL STRUCTURES THIRTY THOUSAND GROSS SQUARE FEET OR LARGER 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
The purpose of this Section 14-8.8 is to: 
(1)  break up the apparent mass and scale of large retail structures to ensure that the development is compatible with and does not detract from Santa Fe's unique historic character, scale and sense of place; 
(2)  help integrate large retail structures with their surroundings; 
(3)  promote and facilitate a safe and comfortable pedestrian scale environment; 
(4)  encourage a mixture of uses and sizes of structures ; and 
(5)  reduce the visual impact of large areas of parking; 
(6)  address economic impacts of large scale retail structures. (Ord. No. 2012-11  24) 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  Standards 
(a)  In addition to compliance with all other requirements of Chapter 14, new construction and alteration of retail structures exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area shall comply with the standards established by this Section 14-8.8. 
(b)  Existing structures that are legally nonconforming to the provisions of this Section 14-8.8 and that are to be remodeled or enlarged shall comply as provided in Subsections 14-8.8(B)(2) and (3). The extent of modification is based on the cumulative square footage of additions and the cumulative value of remodeling that has occurred since January 1, 2001. 
(2)  Additions 
(a)  Additions of five percent or more to the square footage of the gross floor area of an existing retail structure , that is already at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area or that would become thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area or more after the addition, shall comply with Subsections 14-8.8(E)(3) through (7). 
(b)  Additions of ten percent or more to the square footage of the gross floor area of an existing retail structure , that is already at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area or that would become thirty thousand(30,000)square feet of gross floor area or more after the addition, shall comply with the provisions listed in Subsection 14-8.8(B)(3)(a) and with Subsections 14-8.8(D)(1) and (2) and (E)(5)(a). Compliance with Subsections 14-8.8(E)(2) and (5)(a) shall be to the extent possible as determined by the land use director . 
(3)  Remodeling 
(a)  When the value of proposed remodeling exceeds ten percent of the value of an existing retail structure that is greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area , compliance with Subsections 14-8.8(E)(3) and (4), (5)(b) and (c), (6) and (7) is required. 
(b)  When the value of the proposed remodeling exceeds twenty five percent of the value of an existing retail structure that is greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area , compliance with this Subsection 14-8.8(B) and with Subsections (D)(1) and (2) and (E)(1), (2) and (5)(a) is required. Compliance with Subsections 14-8.8(E)(2) and (5)(a) shall be to the extent possible as determined by the land use director . 
TABLE 14-8.8-1: Regulatory Triggers for Retail Establishments
Thirty Thousand Gross Square Feet and Larger 
TABLE 14-8.8-1 Regulatory Triggers for Retail Establishments 30,000 Gross Square Feet and Larger Santa Fe City Code Requirements Additions > 5% sq. ft. of gross floor area or Remodels > 10% value Additions > 10% sq. ft. of gross floor area or Remodels > 25% value New Buildings Massing ( 14-8.8(D)(1)) X X Entryways & Architectural Features ( 14-8.8(D)(2)) X X Height ( 14-8.8(D)(3)) X Integration into Street Network ( 14-8.8(E)(1)) X X *Minimum Tenant Mix ( 14-8.8(E)(2)) 
Pedestrian Circulation and Amenities ( 14-8.8(E)(3)) X X X Relationship to Residential (Lighting) ( 14-8.8(E)(4)) X X X *Screening ( 14-8.8(E)(4)) X X Surface Parking ( 14-8.8(E)(5)(b))X X X Number of Spaces ( 14-8.8(E)(5)(c)) X X X Public Transit (14-8.8(E)(6) X x X Outdoor Storage and Service ( 14-8.8(E)(7) X X X *To the extent possible  
(4)  Waivers 
The planning commission may grant waivers to the standards of this Section 14-8.8 under the following circumstances: 
(a)  the proposed alternative building or site design satisfies the intent of Chapter 14 as well or better than would strict compliance with the standard or the new siting of parking areas and buildings in relation to the street is not possible with the remodel or addition; and 
(b)  granting of the waiver would not impose significantly more negative impacts on nearby properties . 
(C)  Maximum Commercial Activity Areas   
In no case shall any one retail establishment exceed one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of gross floor area in combination with all outdoor display, sales, rental or storage. The outdoor display, sales, rental or storage of new or used automobiles, recreational vehicles or mobile homes is not subject to this limit. 
(D)  Architecture   
The following standards apply to all publicly visible parts of a structure : 
(1)  Massing 
(a)  Every thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be designed to appear as a minimum of one distinct building mass, preferably with two or more building masses expressed. 
(b)  Horizontal wallplane projections of all publicly visible faades must be a minimum depth of three percent of the length of the faade and must extend at least twenty percent of the length of the faade . 
(2)  Entryways and Architectural Features 
Multiple entryways or architectural features shall be incorporated into the design to break up the apparent mass and scale of large retail structures . Entrances may be to tenant spaces other than the primary retail tenant. 
(a)  For structures less than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area there shall be a clearly articulated public entrance on at least two sides of the structure . At least one of these entrances shall be visible from a public street and connected to that street by a pedestrian sidewalk. It is permissible to have pedestrians cross vehicular traffic within the parking lot so long as a sidewalk is provided. When structures are adjacent to a residentially zoned district and separated from that district by either a public or private street , and where residential uses front or may reasonably be expected to front that street , the structure shall have at least one entryway on that side. 
(b)  Structures with tenants occupying greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area shall provide either a significant pedestrian amenity or a public entrance, at a minimum of one per seventy-five (75) linear feet of publicly visible faade . The public entrance may be to either the principal retail use or to any other tenant. Examples of significant pedestrian amenities include outdoor seating areas, play areas for children and public courtyards. This provision does not apply to more than three sides of any structure . 
(3)  Height 
Height is regulated by the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be further restricted as follows if the retail structure adjoins residential development as follows: 
(a)  the maximum height, not including parapet, of any structure within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district property line shall be twenty-four (24) feet or one hundred ten percent of the average of the heights of adjacent residential buildings , whichever is less; and 
(b)  structures may exceed the heights specified in Subsection 14-8.8(D)(3)(a), up to the limit specified in the zoning district in which they are located, if the structure wall is stepped back two (2) horizontal feet for each vertical foot of additional height up to the maximum permitted after the first twelve (12) feet of height. 
(4)  Architectural Unity 
All new construction , additions and remodeling on the same site shall be related in architectural style, color scheme and building materials. 
(E)  Site and Contextual Planning   
(1)  Integration into the Street Network 
Vehicular access to the site shall be from streets other than arterial wherever possible. If access from an arterial is necessary, right turns in and out from the arterial are required. Insofar as possible, delivery vehicles shall not access the site from sub-collector or smaller streets that serve residential neighborhoods. Internal and new streets shall connect to existing streets or be designed to facilitate future connections to the maximum extent possible. 
(2)  Minimum Tenant Mix 
Developments with a single retail establishment occupying greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area shall provide additional tenant spaces, not greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in gross floor area each, whose total gross square footage is equal to or exceeds twenty-five percent of the largest retail establishment . 
(3)  Pedestrian Circulation and Amenities 
A safe and landscaped pedestrian circulation system shall be provided on-site that connects to public streets and neighborhoods. Pedestrian walkways within the development shall be differentiated from driving surfaces through a change in materials. At least one significant pedestrian amenity, such as an outdoor seating area, play area for children or courtyard, shall be provided for every seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area . Required pedestrian amenities may be combined into one or more locations to create a larger amenity, as long as all other provisions of this Section 14-8.8 are satisfied. 
(4)  Lighting 
Retail structures to which this Section 14-8.8 applies shall make accommodations when located next to residential development or undeveloped residential property as follows: 
(a)  light design and installation shall emphasize low-level uniform lighting to avoid abrupt changes from bright lights to darkness. In order to protect nearby residential properties from the greater or more intensive lighting because of the large retail structures , nuisance glare is prohibited. In addition, structures shall meet the following requirements: 
(b)  parking and security lights shall be no taller than any building on the site, or twenty-four (24) feet above the pavement, whichever is less; and 
(c)  street lights shall not be no taller than twenty-four (24) feet above the pavement. 
(5)  Parking and vehicular circulation 
Parking facilities shall safely and attractively serve all modes of transportation, especially pedestrian. 
(a)  Screening 
(i)  seventy-five percent of the lot frontage adjacent to any arterial street , exclusive of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, shall provide screening of on-site parking by means of on-site buildings or other architectural features, which may include the primary structure . 
(ii)  fifty percent of the lot frontage adjacent to all other streets shall provide screening of on-site parking by means of on-site buildings . 
(iii)  lot frontage adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning districts shall provide screening of on-site parking by means of walls , landscaping or buildings . 
(b)  Surface Parking 
No single parking area shall exceed one hundred twenty spaces unless divided into subareas of fewer than one hundred twenty spaces each by a building , internal landscaped street or landscaped pedestrian way. 
(6)  Public Transit 
A structure that has one or more tenants of seventy-five thousand (75,000) gross square feet or more and that is adjacent to an arterial street , which is or may be on a transit route as determined by the city transit division, shall provide for on-site or adjacent to the site accommodations for public transit access, including a bus pullout and shelter. 
(7)  Outdoor Storage, Display, Sales, Rental and Service 
To the extent possible, areas for outdoor storage , display, sales, rental, trash collection and loading shall not be located adjacent to residential lots . Where such facilities are located adjacent to residential lots , they shall include a solid acoustic buffer. In all cases, such facilities shall be effectively screened from public view. To the extent possible, idling of delivery trucks shall not be allowed in areas adjacent to residential lots . Signs shall be installed advising tenants not to allow idling of delivery trucks in areas adjacent to residential lots . Areas for outdoor storage , trash collection and loading shall be incorporated into the primary building design and construction and shall be of materials of comparable quality and appearance as that of the primary building . Outdoor storage , display, sales or rental areas shall be adjacent to the primary building . Outdoor storage , display, sales or rental areas shall be designed to minimize visual clutter. Visual and acoustic impacts of these functions shall be mitigated to the greatest extent possible. When the loading or trash collection area is adjacent to a residential district, deliveries and collections shall not occur between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(F)  Economic Impact Study   
(1)  For all new retail establishments that are one hundred thousand (100,000) gross square feet and larger, the city shall commission a report on the predicted economic impact of that business from an economist qualified by the city pursuant to Subsection 14-8.8(F)(4). The report shall be available prior to the first public hearing required for the project. The applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of the study prior to the hearing. 
(2)  The report shall include the following: 
(a)  net impact on gross receipts tax collections, including taxes from the proposed construction activity as well as the proposed business ; 
(b)  cost and burden on government for services for the business and for the employees ; 
(c)  impact on jobs, including the number and types of jobs, wages paid, benefits paid and changes in the number of union jobs, and the company's history of labor and employment practices; 
(d)  impact on the choice of goods and services for consumers; 
(e)  impact on the costs of goods and services for consumers and potential changes on discretionary spending available to consumers; 
(f)  physical impact on city infrastructure compared to impact fees collected; 
(g)  retention of revenue in the local economy; and 
(h)  opportunities for local suppliers. 
(3)  The results of the economic impact study may be used to require the applicants to address or offset negative economic impacts, if any, as a part of the approval process. 
(4)  The city shall, through the request for qualifications process, develop and maintain a list of economists who are qualified to do economic impact studies pursuant to this Section 14-8.8. 
14-8.9 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  10) 
(A)  Purpose   
The purpose of this Section 14-8.9 is to regulate outdoor lighting in order to reduce light pollution , reduce or prevent glare, reduce or prevent light trespass , conserve energy, promote a sense of safety and security and ensure aesthetically appropriate outdoor lighting in keeping with the character of Santa Fe. 
(B)  Applicability and General Provisions   
(1)  All new outdoor luminaires installed on private or city property shall comply with this Section 14-8.9. 
(2)  All outdoor luminaires existing and legally installed and operative before the effective date of this Section 14-8.9 are exempt from these requirements. 
(3)  If a nonconforming luminaire is replaced, the replacement luminaire shall meet the requirements of this Section 14-8.9. Modifications to nonconforming luminaires in the historic districts shall also comply with Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts). 
(4)  Agencies of the county , state and federal governments are encouraged to comply with the provisions of this Section 14-8.9. 
(5)  This Section 14-8.9 applies to street lighting as well as other types of lighting. 
(C)  Submittals   
(1)  Applications for construction permits or applications for review by the historic districts review board that include the installation or replacement of outdoor lighting fixtures for new construction, additions or remodeling shall contain the following information: 
(a)  plans indicating the location, type and height of both building and ground mounted luminaires ; 
(b)  a description of the luminaires , including lamps, poles or other supports, and shielding devices, that may be provided as catalogue cuts from the manufacturer; and 
(c)  photometric data, such as that furnished by the manufacturer, showing the angle of light emission 
(2)  Applications for single- family residential or other projects where no lamp exceeds one hundred sixty watts are not required to comply with Subsection 14-8.9(C)(1). 
(D)  General Standards   
(1)  The following type of lamps are allowed and shall be shielded as provided in the table. 
Table 14-8.9-1: Lamp Types and Required Shielding 
TABLE 14-8.9-1: Lamp Types and Required Shielding Lamp Type Required Shielding Low pressure sodium Yes High pressure sodium Yes Metal halide Yes Mercury vapor * Fluourescent, quartz-halogen and incandescent over 160 watts (per luminaire) Yes Incandescent 160 watts or less (per luminaire) No Glass tubes filled with neon**, argon, or krypton No Any light 50 watts or less (per luminaire) No Other sources*** Yes NOTES: 
* Mercury vapor may be permitted only for the purpose of lighting landscaping and shall be limited to 100 watts per luminaire. 
** Neon is further restricted in historic districts per Section 14-8.10(H)(10). 
*** May be approved by the land use director outside the historic districts or may be approved by the HDRB within H Districts.  
(2)  Illumination levels and uniformity shall be in accordance with current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) as available from the land use director . Recommended standards of IESNA shall not be exceeded. 
(3)  All outdoor luminaires shall be designed, installed, located and maintained such that nuisance glare onto adjacent properties or streets shall be minimized to the greatest extent practicable. Disabling glare onto adjacent properties or streets is not allowed. 
(4)  Except for certain structures in the historic districts or landmark structures , which are regulated by Section 14-8.10(H), accent lighting shall be directed onto the building or object and not toward the sky or onto adjacent properties . Direct light emissions must not be visible above the roof line or beyond the building edge. 
(E)  Maximum Illumination Standards   
(1)  Illumination levels shall not exceed the standards in Table 14-8.9-2. 
Table 14-8.9-2 Average Maintained Horizontal Footcandles at Grade 
Average Maintained Horizontal Footcandles at Grade Area Commercial Residential Sidewalks 1.0 0.2 Pedestrian Area 2.0 0.5 Parking Lots 1.0 - Building Entrances 5.0 - Building Grounds 1.0 - Public Spaces 3.0 - The maximum illumination at any point shall not exceed the allowed average by more than 1.5 Footcandles.  
(2)  In all cases, the average maintained footcandles at residential property lines shall be zero. 
(3)  Higher levels of illumination may be appropriate for specific or unusual applications. Requests for higher allowed levels may be considered for individual projects or locations. An applicant for illumination levels higher than those in Table 14-8.9-2 must justify the request in writing to the land use director , who shall have sole authority to grant or deny the request. Additional standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) shall be the preferred justification for consideration. 
(F)  Maintenance   
The property owner or tenant is responsible for properly maintaining illumination levels and required shielding. 
(G)  Further Restrictions   
The city reserves the right to further restrict outdoor lighting, including restrictions on pole height and level of illumination, when it is deemed to be in the best public interest in keeping with the stated purpose of this Section 14-8.9. 
14-8.10 - SIGNS 
(Ord. No. 2001-38  2) 
(A)  Purpose; Applicability   
(Ord. No. 2008-56  1; Ord. No. 2009-29  1) 
(1)  Purpose 
Section 14-8.10 is intended to establish a comprehensive and balanced system of sign control that accommodates the need for a well-maintained, safe and attractive environment within the city , and the need for effective communications including business identification. It is the intent of this section to promote the health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the city by regulating signs that are intended to provide reasonable communication to the public to achieve the following specific purposes: 
(a)  To eliminate potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians using the public streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way; 
(b)  To safeguard and enhance private investment and property values; 
(c)  To control public nuisances; 
(d)  To protect government investments in public buildings , streets, sidewalks, traffic control and utility devices, parks, and open spaces ; 
(e)  To preserve and improve the appearance of the city through adherence to reasonable aesthetic principles, in order to create an environment that is attractive to residents and to nonresidents who come to live, visit, work, or trade; 
(f)  To eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays; and 
(g)  To encourage signs which by their design are integrated with and harmonious to the surrounding environment and the buildings and sites they occupy. 
(2)  Applicability 
(a)  No signs intended to be read from off the premises shall be erected or constructed without a building permit , except as otherwise provided in this section. Except as set forth in paragraph (b) below, all signs in all zoning districts shall conform to the requirements set forth in this section. 
(b)  Section 14-8.10 shall not apply to city banners erected by the city or its designee for the purpose of commemorating the four hundred year anniversary of the founding of La Villa Real de la Santa Fe de San Francisco de Asis. The governing body shall adopt a resolution regarding the banners providing for such specifics as dates, location, number, design approval process, installation and maintenance. 
(B)  General Provisions   
(1)  Sign Illumination 
Sign illumination shall be either indirect with the source of light concealed from direct view or shall be through translucent light diffusing materials. There shall be no exposed electrical conduits. However, outside historic districts and except for landmarks structures , electronic messaging signs as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(C)(5)(b) and electri city activated gas tubing, including neon, is allowed. (Ord. No. 2009-29  2) 
(2)  Building Permits Required 
Building permits shall be secured for all signs, including signs in the historic districts, except where stated otherwise. (Ord. No. 2002-37  98) 
(3)  Setback Requirements Apply 
The setback requirement for each district shall apply to the placement of all signs. 
(4)  Maximum Number of Colors and Lettering Styles 
For any one sign, including frame and poles, there shall be no more than three colors and no more than two lettering styles. At least one of the colors shall match one of the predominant colors in the building . 
(5)  Sign Surface Area 
(a)  The net geometric area shall be the area enclosed by the sign, including all elements such as borders or frames, perforated or solid background; 
(b)  The area of double-faced signs shall be computed for one face only; 
(c)  The supports, uprights or structure on which any sign is supported shall not be included in determining the sign area unless such supports, uprights or structure area is designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the background of the display; and 
(d)  The area of artificial illumination on a wall of any structure is to be counted as part of the total allowable sign area. 
(6)  Sign Removal 
(a)  Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold shall be taken down and removed by the owner , agent or person having the beneficial use of the building , lot or structure upon which sign may be found; 
(b)  Whenever a sign is removed from a building or structure, the building or structure shall be cleaned, painted or otherwise altered, and all sign supports, brackets, mounts, utilities or other connecting devices shall be removed so that there is no visible trace of the removed sign or the supports, brackets, mounts, utilities or other connecting devices; and 
(c)  Upon failure to comply with the sign regulations as set forth in this section, the city zoning administrator's office is authorized to cause immediate removal of such sign , as follows: 
(i)  For temporary or portable signs on the public right-of-way, verbal notification of the owner shall be given requesting removal within forty-eight hours. If after this time, the sign is not removed, then the city shall remove the sign at the owner's expense; 
(ii)  For noncomplying temporary or portable signs on private property , written notification of the owner shall be given requesting compliance or removal within forty-eight hours. If after this time the sign is not removed, then the city shall remove the sign at the owner's expense in an amount to be determined by the zoning administrator; 
(iii)  For noncomplying temporary or portable signs creating a threat to health, safety, and welfare, in a visibility triangle, on a sidewalk or for other reasons, the city shall immediately remove the sign at the owner's expense. Once the sign is removed, the city shall notify the owner ; 
(iv)  For noncomplying temporary or portable signs for which no permit is required as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(F), the city shall immediately remove the sign at the owner's expense. Once the sign is removed, the city shall notify the owner ; and 
(v)  For noncomplying permanent signs , the regular procedure for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be followed. 
(7)  Reserved 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  40) 
(8)  Fines for Violations (Ord. No. 2007-17  2; Ord. No. 2011-25  2; Ord. No. 2012-31  1) 
(a)  Except as set forth in paragraph (b) below, the following are mandatory minimum fines to be imposed by the municipal court for violation of Section 14-8.10 SFCC 1987 upon issuance of a citation by the land use department. The effective date of this paragraph (8) is July 25, 2011. 
First violation $100 
Second violation $200 
Third and subsequent violations $300 
(b)  The following are mandatory minimum fines to be imposed by the municipal court upon the holder of a business license for violation of Subsection 14-8.10(H)(28)(f) or (29) upon issuance of a citation by the land use department. The fines shall be imposed for each day or part of a day that the violation exists. The effective date of this paragraph is October 30, 2012. 
First violation $250 
Second violation $500 
Third and subsequent violations $500 and up to ninety days in jail 
(C)  Prohibited Signs   
(1)  (Ord. No. 2009-21  1) No off-site advertising is allowed except as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(F)(1). The advertising on any sign shall pertain only to a business , industry, or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. For the purposes of determining the number, size, location, or types of signs allowed under these sign regulations, " premises " shall include contiguous lots that comprise a unified complex of buildings or uses, such as shopping centers; or common access through easements or rights-of-way , regardless of whether the lots are under common ownership. Where contiguous lots exist that do not comprise a unified complex, but where one or more of the lots does not have vehicular access to any street except via an access easement across a parcel which does have direct access to a street , the indirect-access lot (s) may place a separate freestanding sign on the direct-access lot in accordance with the restrictions of this chapter subject to the limitations below: 
(a)  No more than two freestanding signs shall be permitted on any lot , regardless of the number of individual lots served by common access; 
(b)  The right to individual signs shall be limited to a situation where one or more of the individual lots is two hundred (200) feet or more from the primary access road where the sign for such lot is to be located to such lot ; and 
(c)  The lot or lots in excess of two hundred (200) feet from a primary access road are comprised of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(d)  No lot or access easement shall be created for the sole or primary purpose of establishing an entitlement for a separate freestanding sign . 
(2)  No signs shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape; no sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(3)  No sign or other advertising regulated by this section or Section 14-8.7 of this chapter shall be erected at the intersection of any street in a manner which obstructs free and clear vision; at any location where by reason of position, shape or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign , signal or device; or which make use of the words "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any person to display on any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(5)  (Ord. No. 2009-29  3) No sign shall be erected or maintained which contains, includes, or is illuminated by any flashing light, electronic change in messages, electronic change in background colors, electronic change in light intensity , or electronic video display, except: 
(a)  Those giving public service traffic information such as lane closures, road closures, and detours; and 
(b)  Electronic messaging signs subject to the following: 
(i)  The number, size and location of the sign shall be consistent with all other requirements of Section 14-8.10. 
(ii)  The electronic display background color tones, lettering, logos, pictures, illustrations, symbols, and any other electronic graphic or video display shall not blink, flash, rotate, scroll, change in illumination intensity , or otherwise change in outward appearance, except when the electronic message or display is changed to another message or display. 
(iii)  The message or display shall be changed no more frequently than once per twenty-four hour period except for clocks and thermometers. This frequency may be exceeded by the public schools for emergency and special circumstances. 
(iv)  Electronic messaging signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of two thousand nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred nits (candelas per square meter) between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness. 
(v)  Electronic messaging signs shall have an automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise. 
(vi)  Audio speakers are not allowed with any electronic messaging sign . 
(vii)  Electronic messaging signs shall use energy efficient lighting such as, but not limited to, LED and compact fluorescents. 
(6)  No sign shall have movable parts; except that those signs or marquees having design and construction features for changing of legend or inscription may be approved. The message shall be changed no more frequently than once per twenty-four hour period. (Ord. No. 2009-29  4) 
(7)  No sign shall be erected or maintained on or over public property . However, wall signs may project over a front property line where the building wall is less than one (1) foot from the property line, providing that such a sign shall not impede or endanger pedestrian or vehicular traffic and sign projects no more than one (1) foot from the building wall. 
(D)  Signs Permitted in All Districts Without a Building Permit   
The following signs are permitted in any use districts without a permit , if the number or area of the signs does not exceed that which is allowed: 
(1)  Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises , the number of which shall not exceed three per premises and the area of each shall not exceed one (1) square foot. 
(2)  Professional name plates that shall not exceed three in number per premises and the area of each shall not exceed one (1) square foot. 
(3)  Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located, with a combined total surface area not exceeding four (4) square feet, and in addition, for each one hundred fifty (150) feet of lot line adjacent to a public street an additional four (4) square foot sign is permitted. If such signs are found to be in violation of this chapter, the city shall immediately remove the sign at the owner's expense. Larger signs are allowed as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(F), with a building permit . 
(4)  Signs for home occupation , the number of which shall not exceed one and the area of which shall not exceed one (1) square foot. 
(5)  Signs for private day-care facilities and kindergartens, the number of which shall not exceed one and the area of which shall not exceed one square foot. (Ord. No. 2013-16  52) 
(6)  Signs denoting the architect , engineer, or contractor placed on the premises where construction, repair, or renovation is in progress, with a combined total surface area not exceeding four square feet. A larger sign is allowed as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(F), with a building permit . (Ord. No. 2002-37  99) 
(7)  Signs for a temporary garage or yard sale that shall be located on the premises where the sale is conducted, the number of which shall not exceed one and the area of which shall not exceed two square feet. 
(E)  Permanent Signs: Specific Requirements According to Class of Sign   
(1)  Directional or Information Signs or Historic Markers 
No directional or information sign or historic marker shall exceed four (4) square feet. 
(2)  Building- and Wall-Mounted Signs 
For building - and wall-mounted signs where the sign bracing is above the level of the roof, the sign bracing shall be below parapet walls or screened. 
(3)  Canopy, Marquee, and Projecting Signs 
(a)  The area of a canopy or marquee sign shall be counted as a part of the total allowable sign area; 
(b)  All canopy , marquee and projecting signs shall be at least seven (7) feet above grade . However, when such signs are erected over a driveway, the minimum height above grade shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  Freestanding Signs 
(a)  Sign support structure for freestanding signs shall not exceed fifty percent of the allowable sign surface area for one sign ; 
(b)  The premises around the freestanding sign shall be maintained by the owner of the sign in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and shall be free and clear of obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds; and 
(c)  An area equal to the sign area shall be landscaped at the base of the sign . Landscaping shall be with five-gallon shrubs with a minimum mature height of thirty (30) inches with one shrub planted for every ten (10) square feet. 
(5)  Roof Signs 
(a)  All sign bracing for roof signs shall be behind or below the parapet walls or screened; and 
(b)  In no event shall a sign extend above the height limit established for the zoning district in which a sign is located. 
(6)  Wall Signs 
(a)  Shall not project more than one (1) foot from the wall on which they are displayed. Wall signs shall not project over public property except where the building wall is less than one (1) foot from the property line. In this case, the sign may project up to one (1) foot from the building wall, provided that it does not impede or endanger pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(b)  Shall, in no case, exceed twenty percent of the area of the wall on which they are displayed or eighty (80) square feet in sign area, whichever is less, even if the district permits a larger total sign area. 
(7)  Clocks and Thermometers (Ord. No. 2009-29  5) 
Clocks and thermometers, when constructed within or as a part of a sign or when displayed as a separate sign , shall, in addition to other regulations herein for signs , conform to the following special regulations and exceptions: 
(a)  The hands of the clock and the motive mechanism shall not be classed as moving parts; 
(b)  Illuminated numerals will not be classed as blinking or flashing lights; however, the electronic messaging sign requirements set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(C)(5) shall be met; 
(c)  Clocks and thermometers shall not exceed forty (40) inches in either vertical or horizontal dimension; and 
(d)  All clock signs shall keep accurate time and all thermometer signs shall accurately record the temperature. If these conditions are not complied with, the instruments shall be promptly repaired. 
(8)  Identification of Development 
One sign for the permanent identification of a development shall be permitted, provided, it is mounted on a permanent masonry structure and the sign does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. If a development has an additional entrance on another street, a second sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet is permitted. 
(F)  Temporary and Portable Signs   
(Ord. No. 2009-21  2) 
(1)  Temporary and portable signs are allowed off- premises only for the following: 
(a)  Advertising an event, function, or activity of a civic, political or religious nature; or 
(b)  Advertising the sale of holiday trees by an itinerant vendor upon permission of the property owner on whose property the sign is located. 
(2)  Building and building permits shall be required to authorize the erection and maintenance of such signs for a period not exceeding thirty days or the duration of the event plus one week, whichever is shorter. 
(3)  No portable or temporary sign shall exceed four (4) feet in any one of its dimensions except as otherwise set forth in this section. 
(4)  Advertising for one-time special events or unusual advertising media meeting the definition of a sign shall be reviewed for size, design and other characteristics on a case by case basis by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of commercial or multi-family residential property shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(6)  Except as otherwise approved herein, no portable sign shall extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare, and shall not be placed to project over any wall opening. Cloth signs may extend over public property only by permission of the governing body and shall be subject to related laws and ordinances. Such signs when extended over a public street shall maintain a minimum clearance of twenty (20) feet from the surface of the roadway. 
(7)  For temporary political signs the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  No building permit is required; 
(b)  The owner of property on which the sign is erected must give written permission prior to erecting the sign ; 
(c)  The sign shall be removed within five days after the election; 
(d)  No sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; and 
(e)  The requirements for political signs apply to all districts including the historic districts. 
(8)  Pennants, tinsel, or fringe are not allowed. 
(9)  One sign for the temporary identification of a project during the active stages of construction or development , beginning with the demolition or grading permit shall be permitted. This sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(10)  One sign for the temporary identification of the architect , engineer, or contractor for a project is allowed not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(G)  General Requirements for Signs According to District   
(1)  In residential , RAC and AC districts not more than two signs are allowed per building , with combined surface area not exceeding twenty (20) square feet. In addition, an entrance sign is allowed as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(E). 
(2)  For C-1, C-4 and HZ districts not more than two signs are allowed per building , the combined surface area of which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. In addition, an entrance sign is allowed as set forth in Subsection 14-8.10(E). 
(3)  In RAC, AC, C-1, C-4 and HZ districts not more than two bulletin or notice boards are allowed with combined surface area not exceeding twenty (20) square feet and not exceeding ten (10) square feet for one such board; 
(4)  No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height in residential districts. No sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height in RAC, AC, C-1, C-4 and HZ districts. 
(5)  All signs in "H" districts shall be governed by "H" zone sign regulations. However, building permits are required for signs in the "H" districts unless otherwise provided. 
(6)  The BCD district shall be governed by "H" zone sign regulations for that part of the BCD district included in the "H" districts. 
(7)  For those portions of SC, C-2, I-1, I-2 and business and industrial park districts that are not located within the Cerrillos Road highway corridor protection district, and that portion of the BCD district not located within the "H" districts, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  For one business establishment on the premises , not more than three signs are allowed, no one of which shall exceed eighty (80) square feet and all three of which shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet; 
(b)  For two business establishments on the premises , no more than four signs total are allowed, no one of which shall exceed eighty (80) square feet in area and all of which, for any one business establishment, shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet; 
(c)  For three or more business establishments on the premises , one sign for the purpose of general identification of the entire premises , not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet is allowed. In addition, one sign is allowed with one (1) square foot of surface area for each one (1) lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed eighty (80) square feet per business establishment; 
(d)  No such sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height; 
(e)  For SC and business and industrial park districts, in addition to one identification sign not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet, one sign for each full line department store, junior department store and supermarket with one (1) square foot of surface area for each one (1) lineal foot of building frontage is permitted, providing it does not exceed eighty (80) square feet; 
(f)  Only one freestanding sign is allowed per premises in the SC, C-2, I-1, I-2 and business and industrial park districts; and 
(g)  For buildings with two front facades an additional sign is allowed. The maximum sign size for one facade is one hundred percent of the allowed sign size and for the second facade the maximum sign size is fifty percent of the allowed sign size. 
(8)  For C-2, SC, and I properties located within the Cerrillos Road highway corridor protection district, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  For one business establishment on a legal lot of record , not more than three signs are allowed, no one of which shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area in corridor zone one, sixty (60) square feet in corridor zone two, seventy (70) square feet in corridor zone three, and eighty (80) square feet in corridor zone four. The total allowable sign area for all three signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet; 
(b)  For two business establishments on a legal lot of record , no more than four signs are allowed, no one of which shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area in corridor zone one, sixty (60) square feet in corridor zone two, seventy (70) square feet in corridor zone three, and eighty (80) square feet in corridor zone four. The total allowable sign area for any one business establishment shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet; 
(c)  For three or more business establishments on a legal lot of record , one sign is allowed for the purpose of general identification of the entire premises not to exceed ninety (90) square feet in area in corridor zone one, one hundred ten (110) square feet in corridor zone two, one hundred thirty (130) square feet in corridor zone three, and one hundred fifty (150) square feet in corridor zone four. In addition, one wall mounted sign per business establishment is allowed having one (1) square foot of surface area for each one (1) lineal foot of building or lease space frontage, but in no case exceeding eighty (80) square feet per business establishment; 
(d)  All free-standing signs along Cerrillos Road shall meet the building setback requirements set forth in Section 14-5.5(B)(4)(a). However, in the case of properties flanked on one or both sides by existing buildings that encroach into the required setback distance, the freestanding sign setback may be reduced to correspond to either the average of the adjacent building setbacks , or to the average of an adjacent building setback and the required building setback . Only one freestanding sign , meeting the area requirements in subsections (a) through (c) above, is allowed per legal lot of record ; (Ord. No. 2013-16  53) 
(e)  No freestanding sign shall exceed fourteen (14) feet in height in corridor zone one, sixteen (16) feet in corridor zone two, eighteen (18) feet in corridor zone three, and twenty (20) feet in corridor zone four. No wall mounted sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, or the height of the wall on which it is mounted, whichever is less; 
(f)  Roof top, marquee type, and projecting signs mounted perpendicular to a wall plane, are prohibited; and 
(g)  Signs existing prior to the adoption of the Cerrillos Road highway corridor protection district ordinance shall have five years from the effective date of the Cerrillos Road highway corridor protection district ordinance to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(9)  Freestanding, monument style signage in MU districts shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and shall be limited to one sign per street frontage of development . (Ord. No. 2005-11  9) 
(H)  Special Sign Regulations in the H Districts   
(1)  Purpose 
(a)  The purpose of the sign regulations in this section is to establish and carry into effect regulatory procedures governing signs in historic districts of the city . These regulations pertain to permits, colors, texture and finish, materials and design, location and size. They are set forth to preserve the special qualities inherent in the city that attract tourists and residents alike and that are the basis of the city's economic stability and growth. Signs excessive in size, illumination and of commonplace design will defeat the purpose of the preservation of characteristic areas in this, the oldest capitol in the United States. 
(b)  In addition to the prohibition contained in this section, approval of the display of a sign in the historic district shall be granted by the division only when the signs and the plans conform to the unique and distinctive character of the city , do not injuriously affect the same and do not impair the value to the community of those buildings having architectural worth. 
(2)  Applicability 
Signs in the following areas and districts shall comply with the additional sign regulations of this Subsection 14-8.10(H), in addition to the general sign regulations of Section 14-8.10 above: 
(a)  All signs in the historic districts; 
(b)  All signs in RC districts; 
(c)  All signs in the RAC district; and 
(d)  All signs in the AC district. 
(3)  Number of Signs 
The total number of signs allowed is as follows: 
(a)  For up to two business establishments on one premises , no more than three signs per business , the total area of which for any one business shall meet the size limitations for specific types of signs as set forth in this section, or eighty-five (85) square feet, whichever is less, exclusive of freestanding signs ; and 
(b)  For three or more business establishments on one premises , no more than two signs per business , the total area of which for any one business shall meet the size limitations for specific types of signs as set forth in this section or eighty-five (85) square feet, whichever is less, exclusive of freestanding signs . 
(4)  Prohibited Locations 
(a)  No permanent signs shall be placed on a balcony, gallery, shed, roof, door or window or placed so as to disfigure or conceal any architectural features or details of any building , or painted on walls. No sign shall be displayed from any fence or wall or open lot unless it is deemed necessary to the conduct of a business by the division, in which event a waiver of regulations can be allowed. 
(b)  Occupants may place notices of articles or services for sale, necessary to the conduct of their business , behind the glass of windows or doors; provided, that the signs are not more than one-third of the glass area on which they are exhibited or ten (10) square feet, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Obstructing Ingress and Egress 
No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(6)  Signs Not to Constitute Traffic Hazard 
No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this section shall be erected at the intersection of any street so as to obstruct free and clear vision; at any location where by reason of the position, shape or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign , signal or device; or which makes use of the words "stop", " drive-in ", "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(7)  Goose Neck Reflectors 
Goose neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on projecting signs ; provided, that the reflectors are provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination on the area of the sign to prevent glare on the street or adjacent property . 
(8)  Spotlights and Floodlights Prohibited 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain any sign that extends over public property that is wholly or partially illuminated by floodlights or spotlights. 
(9)  Advertising Permitted 
No sign of any character shall be displayed in the historic district unless it advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the premises and the advertising of products shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the area of the sign . 
(10)  Illumination Restrictions (Ord. No. 2009-29  6) 
(a)  No signs shall be permitted that are animated by any means, including flashing, scintillating, blinking, or traveling lights or any other means not providing constant illumination. 
(b)  Illumination for each side of a projecting sign , if lighted by goose neck lights, shall be evenly distributed. 
(c)  Wall signs to be illuminated shall be so constructed as to have all illumination from behind each letter. No visible bulbs, neon tubing or other lighting shall be allowed. 
(d)  Electric signs may be placed inside windows and glass doors; provided, that their proportions are not in excess of the window area so allowed under Subsection (4) above. 
(e)  No electric outdoor lights placed in trees, shrubs, or other types of vegetation shall be allowed when publicly visible except during the traditional holidays. 
(11)  Color and Design 
The effort of design of signs in the historic district is to keep a moderate, attractive and compatible styling so as not to cause erratic or disturbing distractions from the architectural beauties of the city ; therefore, color and design are left to the discretion of the applicant . 
(12)  Signs; Awnings, Flags, Banners 
Awnings shall be of cloth or of other material acceptable to the division. There shall be no advertising on awnings . Flags, banners, awnings , and such trappings shall not be permitted as advertising within the H-district. However, the name of a business may appear along the lower edge or fringe of the awning . In such cases, the awning shall count as one sign as allowed under Subsection 14-8.10(H)(3). The color of the awning shall be compatible with Santa Fe architectural style and shall not be obtrusive. (Ord. No. 2002-37  100) 
(13)  Sign Plans for New Construction of Buildings 
Applicants submitting plans for new construction of buildings containing three or more businesses on the premises shall in addition to other information, submit coordinated plan for signs . The plan shall be drawn to scale showing the proposed locations, sizes, and types of signs for the businesses . All signs shall comply with the standards set forth in this section. 
(14)  Street Clocks 
Street clocks shall be in harmony with the old Santa Fe style or recent Santa Fe style or both. 
(15)  Conflicts with Zoning Regulations 
In any case where there is a conflict between the specific provisions of this Subsection 14-8.10(H) and the general sign requirements and restrictions of the remainder of this Section 14-8.10, this section shall prevail and shall be controlling for all purposes. 
(16)  Inspection of Signs 
The division shall inspect, as it deems necessary, each sign regulated by this section to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure or in need of repair. 
(17)  Procedure When Unsafe or Unlawful Signs Found 
If the division finds that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure; is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, it shall give written notice to the permittee. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure to comply with the standards of these sections within ten days after such notice, the sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply by the division at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property on which it is located. The division shall refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The division may cause any sign or other advertising structure that is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(18)  Exempted Signs 
The provisions and regulations of this Subsection 14-8.10(H) shall not apply to the following signs ; provided, that the signs meet the provisions of Subsection 14-8.10(H)(3): 
(a)  Real estate signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area that advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which such signs are located; 
(b)  One professional name plate not exceeding one (1) square foot in area; 
(c)  One bulletin board not over eight (8) feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when the same is located on the premises of such institutions; 
(d)  Signs denoting the architect , engineer or contractor when placed on work under construction and not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area; 
(e)  An occupational sign denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a commercial building , public institution building or dwelling house and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area; 
(f)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials ; and 
(g)  Traffic or other municipal signs , legal notices, railroad crossing signs , danger signs and such temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the governing body ; and 
(h)  Signs denoting whether a business is open or closed and traffic signs for private businesses , none of which exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(19)  Permits Required 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect , repair, alter, relocate or maintain within the historic district of the city any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this section without first obtaining an erection permit from the inspections and enforcement office and making payment of the fee required. All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the electrical code and the permit fees required thereunder. 
(b)  The text of advertising matter on signs that already conform to this section may be changed without any permit , provided all changes also conform. 
(20)  Permit Application; Contents 
Application for permits shall be made on blanks provided by the division and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant ; 
(b)  Location of the building , structure or lot to which or on which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(c)  Position of the sign or other advertising structure on a building or in relation to nearby buildings or structures; 
(d)  One scaled drawing with full description of material, texture and finish to be used; 
(e)  Name of person erecting structure; 
(f)  Written consent of the owner of the building , the structure, or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected; 
(g)  Any electrical permit required and issued for such sign ; and 
(h)  Such other information as the division shall require to show full compliance with the provisions of this section and all other laws and ordinances of the city . 
(21)  Permit Application; Approval; Period of Validity 
It is the duty of the division upon the filing of an application for a permit , to examine plans, specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure ; and if it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of the provisions of this section and all other laws and ordinances of the city , the division shall then recommend approval. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within six months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(22)  Certain Signs to Be Approved by Electrical Inspector 
The application for a permit for erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if they comply with the electrical code of the city , and he shall approve such permit if the plans and specifications comply with the code or disapprove the application if noncompliance with the code is found. 
(23)  Sandwich Signs; Prohibition 
Sandwich signs as defined in this section are prohibited. 
(24)  Freestanding Signs 
(a)  When Permitted 
Freestanding signs shall be permitted at the discretion of the division where a business establishment is set back from a street alignment of building faades more than two (2) feet. A business establishment thus set back, in addition to the signs permitted on the building itself, may maintain a freestanding sign of not more than sixteen (16) square feet in area, and the sign shall relate to the conduct of the business within. If a building is on at least one acre of property and has an unencumbered front setback of at least fifty (50) feet, a two-faced freestanding sign with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet area on each face, with sign dimensions no greater than ten (10) feet in length and five (5) feet in height, and with the top of the sign not more than fourteen (14) feet from the ground will be permitted; provided, that it relates to the business conducted on the premises . Lighting on freestanding signs shall conform with this section. 
(b)  Location 
(i)  It is unlawful to erect any freestanding sign whose total height is greater than fourteen (14) feet above the level of the street on which the sign faces or above the adjoining ground level if the ground level is above the street level. 
(ii)  Freestanding signs shall have an open space not less than ten (10) feet between the base line of the sign and the ground level, unless the freestanding sign is placed on the ground and does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area nor six (6) feet in any dimension. 
(iii)  The setback of freestanding signs from the city right-of-way is regulated by the underlying zoning. 
(c)  Characters, Letters 
All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed on any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(d)  Construction, Condition of Premises 
(i)  All freestanding signs shall be securely built, constructed and erected on posts sunk at least three (3) feet below the natural surface of the ground. 
(ii)  All wood posts shall be treated to protect them from moisture by creosoting or other approved methods when they enter into the ground. 
(iii)  Premises shall be kept free of weeds and be maintained by the owner in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. 
(25)  Hanging Signs 
(a)  General Limitations 
All hanging signs shall be at least six (6) feet eight (8) inches above the sidewalk or ground level, and shall be located within the central one-third of the faade length so as not to obstruct neighboring signs . 
(b)  Area Limitations 
Hanging signs shall be limited in area as follows: 
(i)  A maximum of twelve (12) square feet, except in the AC and RAC districts where the maximum limit is six (6) square feet; 
(ii)  The maximum size of letters shall be eight (8) inches in height; 
(iii)  There shall be no restriction on the number of letters, words or lines of any sign as long as the overall area of the sign is within the maximum allowed square feet; and 
(iv)  Maximum thickness of six (6) inches. 
(c)  Supports and Attachments 
All hanging signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building by not less than two metal chains, metal brackets or wrought iron brackets firmly secured in the roof support beams by metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws. No excess chain shall be allowed. In no case shall any hanging sign be attached with wire, string, rope, wood, or secured by nails. 
(26)  Wall Signs 
(a)  Area Limitations 
(i)  A wall sign is subject to the following limitations: 
A.  The maximum allowable size is fifteen percent of the faade on which the sign is to be placed. In no case shall the sign area exceed twenty (20) square feet except in the AC and RAC districts where the maximum allowable size is six (6) square feet; 
B.  Maximum size of letters shall be twenty (20) inches in height, except in the AC and RAC districts where the maximum size shall be eight (8) inches in height; 
C.  There shall be no restriction on the number of letters, words or lines of any sign as long as its overall area is within the maximum allowable square feet; and 
D.  No sign shall be permitted fifteen (15) feet or more above street grade measured in front of the faade where the sign is to appear. 
(ii)  Where two or more businesses are conducted on the premises of a single ownership, having a front footage of twenty-five (25) feet or less, the allowable sign area shall be increased by fifty percent. Where buildings have frontage on more than one public way and entrances thereon, the maximum footage shall govern signs at each entrance, and it shall be construed to mean on any given public way. 
(b)  Projection Wall; Height from Ground 
No wall sign shall project more than three inches beyond the building line. However, if the sign is attached to the wall at a height of not less than six (6) feet eight inches measured from the sidewalk or ground to the bottom of the sign , it may project a maximum of ten (10) inches, except in AC and RAC districts where the maximum projection is three (3) inches. 
(c)  Supports and Attachments 
All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than three-eighths (3/8) inch in diameter embedded in the wall at least five (5) inches; provided, that such signs may rest in or be bolted to strong heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six (6) feet apart, each of which shall be securely fixed to the wall as herein provided. In no case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails. 
(27)  Projecting Signs 
(a)  General Limitations 
No projecting sign shall angle in "Y", "L" or "V" fashion over the sidewalk or ground. No projecting sign may rise above the level of the roof line, fire wall or first story, whichever is construed by the historic districts review board as a roof line. All projecting signs shall be at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk or ground level, and shall be located within the central one-third of the faade length so as not to obstruct neighboring signs. A total of two signs may be allowed to each store, shop or bona fide place of business if one is projecting and the other considered a wall sign; in which case, the wall sign shall be reduced in allowable size by one-half the area consumed by a projecting sign. No projecting sign shall have letters exceeding eight (8) inches in height. 
(b)  Area Limitations 
Projecting signs shall be limited in areas as follows: 
(i)  A maximum of four (4) feet projection from the wall of the building , except for marquees that may project eight (8) feet; 
(ii)  A maximum of sixteen (16) square feet, except in an AC or RAC district where the maximum sign space is six (6) square feet, and except for marquees where the maximum sign space is one hundred fifteen (115) square feet per face of the marquee ; 
(iii)  A maximum thickness of not over twelve (12) inches except for marquees to which this section does not apply; 
(iv)  Projecting signs erected over public driveways or alleys shall be placed not less than fifteen (15) feet above the level of same; and 
(v)  Marquees are allowed only for theaters showing motion pictures, or dramatic, musical, or live performances and having permanent seating except in an AC or RAC district where marquees are prohibited. 
(c)  Construction 
Projecting signs exceeding ten (10) square feet in area or fifty pounds in weight shall not be attached to nor supported by frame buildings or the wooden framework of a building . Such signs shall be attached to masonry walls as stated in this section. The framework of any projecting sign shall be of adequate strength so as to have no need for guy wires or wire reinforcement. 
(d)  Illumination 
Every projecting sign larger than ten (10) square feet in area shall be illuminated between sunset and daybreak on each side, by at least 5 watts per square foot of sign surface. The illumination shall be restricted as provided by this section. 
(28)  Temporary Signs (Ord. No. 2007-17  3) 
(a)  Duration of Permit; Advertising 
(i)  Except as set forth in paragraph (e) below, permits for temporary signs shall authorize the erection of such signs and their maintenance for a period not exceeding thirty days, in the discretion of the historical style committee. 
(ii)  The advertising contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to the business , industry, or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. This provision shall not apply to signs of a civic, political, or religious nature. 
(b)  Construction Requirements 
Except as set forth in paragraph (e) below, no temporary sign shall exceed four (4) feet in one of its dimensions or fifty (50) square feet in area. Every temporary sign weighing in excess of fifty pounds shall be approved by the inspections and enforcement office as conforming to the safety requirements of the Building Code. 
(c)  Prohibited Locations 
No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare nor shall it be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
(d)  Anchors and Supports 
Every temporary sign shall be attached to the wall with wire or steel cables; no strings, ropes, or wood slats for anchorage or support purposes shall be permitted.(Ord. No. 2001-38  1) 
(e)  Price Reduction Signs (Ord. No. 2007-17  3; Ord. No. 2008-28  1; Ord. No. 2011-25  3) 
(i)  Signs expressing a price reduction stated in terms of either a percentage reduction or a dollar amount reduction are prohibited unless the following conditions are met: 
A.  A sign permit shall be obtained from the city. Each permit shall allow a business to place a sign for a permit period of up to one week. A business may obtain one additional permit within a calendar year. A minimum of twelve weeks must pass between the commencements of any two permit periods. 
B.  A sign shall not exceed twelve (12) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. 
C.  A sign must bear an official city of Santa Fe sticker, tag, or other device at all times during the permit period indicating the approved dates of the permit period. 
D.  A sign shall be removed by the permit holder immediately after the permit period. 
(ii)  The city may remove a sign if the above conditions are not met. 
(f)  Distress Merchandise Sale Signs 
(Ord. No. 2012-31  2) 
(i)  A sign advertising a distress merchandise sale is prohibited unless the following conditions are met: 
A.  A sign permit shall be obtained from the city . Each permit shall allow a business to place a sign for a permit period corresponding to the licensed duration of the distress merchandise sale. 
B.  A sign shall not exceed twelve (12) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. 
C.  A sign must bear an official city of Santa Fe sticker, tag, or other device at all times during the permit period indicating the approved dates of the permit period. 
D.  A sign shall be removed by the permit holder immediately after the permit period. 
(ii)  The city may remove a sign if the above conditions are not met. 
(29)  Price Reduction Signs (Ord. No. 2007-17  4; Ord. No. 2008-28  2; Ord. No. 2011-25  4) 
(a)  A sign located inside or outside a structure within an historic district that is readable by the general public from the public sidewalk or street, shall not list an express price reduction stated in terms of either a percentage reduction or a dollar amount reduction except as permitted in 14-8.10(H)(28)(e). 
(b)  A sign located inside a structure within an historic district that is not readable by the general public from the public sidewalk or street, may list an express price reduction stated in terms of either a percentage reduction or a dollar amount reduction. 
14-8.11 - SANTA FE HOMES PROGRAM (SFHP) 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  11) 
(A)  Authority   
The SFHP is enacted pursuant to the authority set forth in Section 26-1.2 SFCC 1987 (Santa Fe Homes Program). 
(B)  Adoption of SFHP   
The governing body has adopted the SFHP as set forth in Section 26-1 SFCC 1987. 
(C)  Responsibilities   
The land use director shall: 
(1)  administer and enforce all planning and land use ordinances that apply to development requests that are subject to this Section 14-8.11; 
(2)  require, as part of the development review process, that the applicant prepare and submit a SFHP proposal to the office of affordable housing to assure compliance with the SFHP Ordinance; 
(3)  administer provisions for development incentives in the development review process as set forth in this Section 14-8.11; 
(4)  record the SFHP agreements with the respective subdivision plat or development plan at the county clerk's office; and 
(5)  where applicable, invoke sanctions for noncompliance with SFHP agreements at the request of the city manager. 
(D)  Applicability   
(Ord. No. 2014-10  1) 
(1)  Except as set forth in this Subsection 14-8.11(D), the SFHP shall apply to any application for development , including annexation, rezoning, subdivision plat , increase in density , development plan, extension of or connection to city utilities for land outside the city limits, and construction permits that propose two or more dwelling units or buildings or portions of buildings that may be used for both nonresidential and residential purposes and manufactured home lots . SFHP applies to the residential portion of the development . 
(a)  The SFHP applies to new construction , to the conversion of existing rental units to ownership units and the conversion of commercial uses to residential uses. 
(b)  The SFHP does not apply to a family transfer as set forth in Section 14-3.7(F)(2) or a division of land into two lots as set forth in Section 14-3.7(D) (Summary Procedure). 
(c)  The applicant is responsible for determining the applicability of SFHP to the proposed development and complying with the requirements of SFHP . 
(2)  The SFHP applies to dwelling units in vacation time share projects. 
(3)  The SFHP does not apply to: 
(a)  a development or portion of a development that is subject to a formal written and binding agreement entered into prior to August 15, 2005 with the city or Santa Fe County in which the signatories agreed to provide affordable housing or payment in lieu thereof; or 
(b)  dwelling unit or manufactured home lots for an elementary, middle or high school; college or university ; hospital ; or similar institution to be used exclusively by its employees or enrolled students and their families. If the dwelling units or manufactured homes are no longer exclusively used by its employees or enrolled students and their families, the SFHP shall apply at the time the units are converted. 
(4)  Petitioners for annexation and the office of affordable housing shall negotiate all terms for providing affordable housing on site, including the distribution of development types and the number of SFHP units required or alternate means of compliance. The number of SFHP units required or alternate means of compliance may be in excess of that required by SFHP . These terms shall be included in the annexation agreement. To the extent practicable, all other SFHP requirements apply to annexations. In no case shall the agreement provide for less affordable housing or a lesser in-lieu contribution than required by SFHP . As the property is developed, a separate SFHP agreement in compliance with the annexation agreement shall be recorded with each subdivision plat or development plan. 
(5)  All provisions of the prior ordinance, titled Housing Opportunity Program (HOP), remain in effect with respect to any agreements executed by the city and others which were required by HOP or incorporated HOP provisions by reference. However, the office of affordable housing is responsible for administering such agreements according to the administrative procedures for the SFHP ordinance until such time as all obligations under the agreements have been satisfied except for sale prices or rental rates. Sale prices and rental rates shall be based on the prior HOP administrative procedures and annually updated by staff. 
(E)  Presubmittal Conference, SFHP Proposals and Agreements   
Presubmittal conferences, SFHP proposals and SFHP agreements are required as set forth in Section 26-1 SFCC 1987. 
(F)  Santa Fe Homes Program Requirements   
(Ord. No. 2012-11  25; Ord No. 2014-10  2) 
(1)  Effective June 7, 2014, and thereafter, twenty percent of the total number of dwelling units or manufactured home lots in an SFHP development shall be SFHP units and meet all requirements of Section 26-1 SFCC 1987. A modification to a SFHP agreement or HOP agreement that was entered into prior to June 8, 2011 shall be made to reflect the twenty percent requirement; and if applicable, an annexation agreement, subdivision plat or development plan shall be administratively amended to reflect the reduction and redistribution of SFHP or HOP lots and the amended annexation agreement, subdivision plat or development plan shall be recorded or filed, as applicable, by the owner or developer. 
(2)  Fifteen percent of the total number of dwelling units or manufactured home lots offered for rent in an SFHP development shall be SFHP units and meet all requirements of Section 26-1 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  However, the governing body may approve alternative means of compliance as provided in Section 26-1.33 SFCC 1987 (SFHP - Alternate Means of Compliance). 
(G)  Development Incentives   
(1)  Density Bonus 
(a)  A developer who is subject to and complying with SFHP is entitled to an additional density bonus of fifteen percent over the density allowed by the zoning district. 
(b)  A density bonus is the right to build the described percentage of residential units, in addition to those that are otherwise allowed by the zoning district, in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
(i)  base units allowed means the total number of units that would otherwise be allowed by the zoning district. 
(ii)  in calculating any bonus units, the base units allowed in the development shall be multiplied by fifteen percent. If the result is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded down if less than 0.5, and rounded up if 0.5 or more. 
(c)  A density bonus does not require an amendment to the general plan or approval by the governing body unless appealed pursuant to Section 14-3.17 (Appeals). 
(d)  Except where the planning commission is authorized to grant a variance or waiver as set forth in Chapter 14, a density increase shall not negate, supersede or limit other Santa Fe City Code provisions that limit the number of units that may be built on the site. 
(2)  Fee Waivers 
Fees for SFHP developments subject to and complying with the SFHP requirements shall be reduced as follows: 
(a)  development review and construction permit fees shall be reduced proportionately to the number of SFHP units certified by the office of affordable housing; and 
(b)  impact fees as set forth in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees) and utility expansion charges as set forth in Chapters 22 (Sewers) and 25 (Water) SFCC 1987 shall be reduced at the time of construction permit application for SFHP units. 
(H)  Enforcement   
Enforcement of SFHP shall be as provided by Sections 14-11.5 and 26-1.19 SFCC 1987. 
(I)  Appeals   
An applicant aggrieved by a final action of the land use director regarding the SFHP provisions may file an appeal pursuant to Section 14-3.17. 
14-8.12 - RELOCATION OF GUNNISON'S PRAIRIE DOGS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  11) 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
It is the purpose and intent of the Gunnison's prairie dog relocation regulations to protect the diminishing populations of Gunnison's prairie dogs by ensuring their safe and humane relocation prior to the development of property within the city to appropriate and protected habitat areas as designated by the city . 
(B)  Applicability   
Except for single- lot , single- family residential development , compliance with these regulations is required for any public or private proposed development or phase of development approval, prior to grading or any other disturbance of property where Gunnison's prairie dogs are located; provided that for family transfers and all dwelling units that meet the criteria for affordable homes or affordable rental units for income ranges 1, 2 or 3 pursuant to SFCC 26-1.16 and 1.24, the property owner or developer is not responsible for relocation expenses, costs or fees that amount to more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) per acre. This amount shall be subject to periodic review at the discretion of the city manager and may be amended to reflect increased costs due to inflation or other circumstances. 
(C)  Exemptions   
(1)  An exemption from these regulations may be granted by the land use director under the following circumstances: 
(a)  there is no city -approved property available for a proposed relocation of Gunnison's prairie dogs; 
(b)  there is no city -certified relocator available within a reasonable time as determined by the city for a proposed relocation; or 
(c)  a city -certified relocator determines that the timing of the proposed project is such that the start of construction operations, including grading or other disturbance of property where Gunnison's prairie dogs are located, would have to be delayed more than sixty days. 
(2)  The land use director may require written verification or other proof of such circumstances prior to granting an exemption from these regulations. 
(D)  Appeals   
An appeal of the granting or denying of an exemption to the Gunnison's prairie dog relocation regulations shall be pursuant to Section 14-3.17 (Appeals). 
(E)  Violations and Penalties   
Violations of a provision of this Section 14-8.12 shall be punishable in accordance with Article 14-11 (Enforcement). 
(F)  City-Approved Lands   
The city shall approve relocation sites that are: 
(1)  private lands protected as wildlife habitat by a conservation easement held in a land trust or other conservation organization or protected by organizational by-laws or other legal vehicles; 
(2)  public lands protected for the purpose of indefinite, long-term prairie dog habitation; 
(3)  private or public lands that meet best management practices criteria for suitability. 
(G)  Certified Trappers/Relocators   
(1)  The city shall certify those Gunnison's prairie dog trappers/relocators that may be hired by the owners or developers of private property . To be certified, a person must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  training by a qualified and experienced trapper/relocator in: 
(i)  two trapping methods, being flushing and live trapping; and 
(ii)  two methods of relocation, being use of existing holes and augured holes; 
(b)  participation and attendance at a day of orientation to include prairie dog facts and proper techniques for trapping and relocating; and 
(c)  fifteen days of on-the-job training in both trapping and relocating. 
(2)  The trainer shall provide written verification that the person has met the requirements of Subsection 14-8.12(G)(1). 
(3)  At a minimum, a qualified and experienced trainer must have had the training described in Subsection 14-8.12(G)(1). 
(4)  Certification is a privilege and shall not be construed as a property right. The city manager may withdraw certification for failure to comply with the Santa Fe City Code. 
(H)  General Requirements   
(1)  Intent 
Unless an exemption has been granted, it is prohibited to intentionally destroy or otherwise harm the Gunnison's prairie dog on any lands within Santa Fe at any time in relation to a development . 
(2)  Procedures and Submittals 
(a)  Pre-application inspection 
As a pre- application requirement, the land use director shall inspect the development site for prior grading and the existence of Gunnison's prairie dogs. If Gunnison's prairie dogs are found on the property , then the owner or developer shall contact a certified trapper/relocator who shall develop a relocation schedule and plan. 
(b)  Submittals 
The owner or developer shall submit a relocation schedule and plan for review and approval as part of the development submittal that addresses the requirements provided in this Subsection 14-8.12(H) before development takes place. Approval of the relocation plan is required before a grading permit or any other construction permit is issued. 
(c)  Preferred Relocation Times 
The preferred relocation times are June 15 through September 15. The Gunnison's prairie dog may also be relocated in April, but may not be relocated or otherwise disturbed between May 1 and June 15, which is its breeding season, unless exempted pursuant to Section 14-8.12(C). Owners and developers of property shall make every effort to coordinate their development stages and operations with this schedule. 
(d)  Relocation Services 
Only a certified prairie dog trapper/relocator may perform the relocation services. 
(e)  Relocation Costs 
The property owner or developer is responsible for all relocation expenses, costs and fees related to the relocation of Gunnison's prairie dogs. 
(f)  Written Notice 
Upon completion of the prairie dog relocation, the owner or developer shall submit written notice to the city from the certified trapper/relocator hired for the relocation work that the relocation has occurred. 
(I)  Additional Requirements   
If a development does not occur within one year of the plat or development plan approval or the issuance of a building or grading permit and reestablishment of the Gunnison's prairie dog colony occurs, the applicant must again comply with the provisions of this Section 14-8.12. 
14-8.13 - DEVELOPMENT WATER BUDGETS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  11) 
(A)  Summary   
Section 14-8.13 establishes: 
(1)  Procedures for the calculation of water budgets for development projects proposing new city water system demand that must be offset; and 
(2)  Thresholds that determine which city water budget program applies to a particular development project. The Water Conservation Credit Program, Section 25-11 SFCC 1987, administers water conservation credits created through conservation contracts or retrofit rebates at existing developed property within the city's water service area which credits may be used to offset new system demands of small development projects. The Water Rights Transfer Program, Section 25-12 SFCC 1987, administers water rights transfers required to offset new system demands of larger development projects. 
(B)  Development Water Budget   
(1)  The development water budget shall be reviewed and approved by the Engineering Section of the Water Division and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  A description of all proposed and existing structures on the subject parcel of land together with a complete description of all proposed and existing water fixtures and other water using devices and equipment to be installed or constructed on the subject parcel (not including water to be used during and for construction); 
(b)  A description of all proposed water uses proposed for the subject parcel of land, separating such uses by indoor and outdoor categories and including the total area of proposed and existing landscaping ; and 
(c)  A quantification in gallons and acre-feet of the total proposed water usage on the subject parcel of land on an annual basis. In the case of phased development , the quantification shall also include the proposed water usage by each phase of development . 
(2)  Applicants may choose to: 
(a)  Allow the Water Division to calculate a development water budget based on standard formulas using historical water use data for similar type of development ; or 
(b)  Develop a detailed alternative development water budget for the development project supported by reliable data that demonstrates that the anticipated annual water use will be less than if based on the Water Division's standard formulas. 
(3)  When a proposed new structure or use replaces an existing structure or use, the development water budget for the proposed new structure or use may be reduced by an amount equal to the average annual consumption in the twenty-four months that the highest water use was active during the preceding ten years or by the amount of water previously offset if the previously offset amount is higher. Consumption shall be determined through city utility billing system records. (Ord. No. 2012-23  1) (Pursuant to Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2012-23, this ordinance shall be reviewed one year from the date of adoption.) 
(4)  A development water budget may also be reduced by an amount equal to a specific approved annual water allocation made by the governing body for the development project as set forth in Section 25-9.6 SFCC 1987. 
(5)  The city shall allow reduction in the consumptive water rights required to be transferred in this subsection by the amount of consumptive water rights required for any Santa Fe Homes Program unit, a Housing Opportunity Program unit as per a valid Housing Opportunity Program Agreement or any dwelling unit meeting the definition of a low-priced dwelling unit as set forth in Section 26-2 SFCC 1987. The reduction is contingent upon the applicant entering into an agreement or other approved document with the city regarding the low-priced dwelling units . The document shall be recorded with the county clerk. 
(6)  A development water budget may be for a single phase of a multi-phase development project. 
(C)  Applicability of Development Water Budgets   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  41) 
A development water budget shall be submitted with the following land use applications : 
(1)  Final subdivision plats except: 
(a)  Plats for the purpose of creating tracts of land according to an approved master plan where additional subdivision of land or a more detailed development plan within the various tracts is still necessary before permitting of dwelling units and other buildings according to that master plan; and 
(b)  Plats where the proposed development is included in and consistent with an already approved development water budget and has complied with the water rights transfer program set forth in Section 25-12 SFCC 1987 or the water conservation credit program set forth in Section 25-11 SFCC 1987; 
(2)  Development plans, except preliminary development plans; 
(3)  Development plans for each phase of a phased development , but each phase shall be subject to Section 25-12 SFCC 1987; 
(4)  Reserved 
(5)  Construction permits (whether or not a meter for service has been previously installed) except the following: 
(a)  Where covered by and consistent with an already approved development water budget that has complied with the water rights transfer program set forth in Section 25-12 SFCC 1987 or water conservation credit program set forth in Section 25-11 SFCC 1987; 
(b)  Replacement of thirty-three percent or less of an existing building ; 
(c)  Remodels; 
(d)  Additions: 
(i)  Where there are no new fixture installations; 
(ii)  Where there are up to three new water fixtures provided that the increased building area does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet; and 
(e)  Shell only permits which will later require permits for tenant improvements at which time the development water budget is required; 
(6)  Secondary plumbing permits (plumbing permits independent of a building permit ) resulting in an increase of water use, unless multiple installations in either commercial or multi- family residential uses, except the following: 
(a)  A spa not exceeding five hundred gallons; 
(b)  An oversized tub not exceeding one hundred gallons; 
(c)  A swamp cooler; 
(d)  A recirculating fountain not exceeding one thousand gallons of containment area; and 
(e)  A garden pond not exceeding two thousand gallons; 
(7)  Changes in permitted land use resulting in an increase in water use; 
(8)  Projects located outside the city limits, prior to application for an agreement to construct and dedicate water lines; and 
(9)  City of Santa Fe, Santa Fe County, New Mexico, Federal, and any other governmental, or quasi-governmental development not subject to the city's development review or building permit processes which will require water service from the city's water system. 
(D)  Monitoring, Violations, Penalties, Remedies, and Disclosure   
The following shall apply to alternative development water budgets, as set forth in Subsection 14-8.13(B)(2)(b) and to water conservation contracts as set forth in the water conservation credit program, Section 25-11.3(C)(1): 
(1)  Beginning the first year that a customer's water service is subject to usage restrictions from an alternative development water budget or a contract for water conservation the Water Division shall monitor water customer's water usage on an annual basis. 
(2)  If a water customer exceeds water usage allowable under the customer's alternative development water budget or conservation contract in any annual period measured from the commencement of the restriction, the Water Division shall monitor the customer's water usage on a monthly basis and compare current monthly use to the previous year's use in the same month to determine whether the customer has returned to compliance. The Water Division shall, at the same time, notify the customer that the alternative development water budget or conservation contract has been exceeded, that the customer's usage will be monitored monthly to determine whether the customer has reduced water usage to the amount permitted under the alternative development water budget or the conservation contract, and the consequences that will ensue if the customer does not return to compliance. Water customers shall be charged a fifty percent surcharge over the base rate of water on the excess water delivered over annual budgeted or contracted amount for that year. 
(3)  If, after four months of monitoring, the customer is in compliance with the alternative development water budget or conservation contract, the customer shall be so informed and shall then be monitored on an annual basis. 
(4)  If, after four months of monitoring, the customer's water usage still exceeds the alternative development water budget or conservation contract by ten percent or more on a monthly pro-rata basis, the Water Division shall immediately notify the customer that the customer has exceeded the alternative development water budget or conservation contract. The Water Division shall recalculate the alternative development water budget or the conservation contract for the customer based on actual consumption over the period of noncompliance and shall notify the customer of the additional water rights, water credits or conservation credits needed to meet the new budget or contract. If the customer does not transfer sufficient water rights, water credits or conservation credits to the city within ninety days to make up the difference, the Water Division shall transfer sufficient water conservation credits to the customer to offset the net difference and shall include in the customer's next billing the current cost of those water conservation credits. In addition, the city shall bill the customer the fifty percent surcharge for the water delivered during this second year over the budgeted or contracted amount. A customer may, at any time, transfer additional water rights, water credits or conservation credits to the city to increase the customer's alternative development water budget or conservation contract restriction in order to forestall the imposition of further surcharges for excess water usage. 
(5)  Customers that fail to provide sufficient water rights, water credits or conservation credits or to pay the cost of the water conservation credits and the imposed surcharges shall have water service disconnected in accordance with Rule No. 9, Exhibit A of Chapter 25 SFCC 1987. 
(6)  Representatives of a development project that have adopted an alternative development water budget and property owners that have agreed to a conservation contract shall provide disclosure statements to prospective buyers which shall be included on all recorded plats and development plans. The statements shall include the amount of water to which each lot , unit or other portion of the project is limited under the alternative development water budget or conservation contract and shall include a description of the penalties set forth in this paragraph. 
(E)  Dedication of Water to Development   
(Ord. No. 2016-39  7) 
(1)  A building permit application shall not be approved until the applicant has dedicated water to meet the approved development water budget for the development project plus a 9.8% contingency that covers water utility delivery requirements, as documented by the Water Division dedication form and complied with the conditions thereof. This contingency water is comprised of water used for community health and safety purposes, such as firefighting and fire hydrant testing, water used in production for flushing of water distribution and sewer lines, and also results from meter errors, line leaks, and losses from water main breaks. 
(2)  Based on the approved water budget for a development project, the applicant shall obtain water through either the water rights transfer program (Section 25-12 SFCC 1987) or the water conservation credits program (Section 25-11 SFCC 1987) to meet the development water budget according to the following criteria: 
(a)  Applications for residential uses which have a development water budget equal to or greater than ten acre-feet per year shall obtain water through the water rights transfer program; 
(b)  Applications for residential uses which have a development water budget less than ten acre-feet per year, designated as small development projects, shall obtain water through the water rights transfer program or the water conservation credit program or through a combination of both; 
(c)  Applications for non-residential uses which have a development water budget equal to or greater than five acre-feet per year shall obtain water through the water rights transfer program; 
(d)  Applications for non-residential uses which have a development water budget less than five acre-feet per year, designated as small development projects, shall obtain water though the water rights transfer program or the water conservation credit program or through a combination of both; 
(e)  Applications with both residential and non-residential uses each in substantial amounts which have a development water budget equal to or greater than seven and one-half acre-feet per year shall obtain water through the water rights transfer program; 
(f)  Applications with both residential and non-residential uses each in substantial amounts which have a development water budget less than seven and one-half acre-feet per year shall either obtain water through the water rights transfer program or the water conservation credit program or through a combination of both; and 
(g)  Applications for qualifying projects within the Midtown LINC Overlay District as defined in Subsection 14-5.5(D)(4)(b) shall obtain water though the water rights transfer program or the water conservation credit program or through a combination of both. Water for qualifying projects obtained through the water conservation credit program shall be paid for at the rate of $12,000 per acre-foot. 
(F)  Variances   
Variances to the requirements set forth in Section 14-8.13 shall be heard by the governing body according to the procedures set forth in Section 14-3.16. 
(G)  Appeals   
Appeals of decisions of the city staff regarding Section 14-8.13 shall be heard as set forth in Section 14-3.17. 
14-8.14 - IMPACT FEES 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  11) 
(A)  Short Title and Applicability   
(1)  This Section 14-8.14 may be known as the "Impact Fee Ordinance". 
(2)  The provisions of this Section 14-8.14 apply to all of the territory within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the city . 
(B)  Intent   
To respond to the increasing demand for capital improvements that are related to the actual impact of new development , the governing body deems essential the imposition of impact fees on new development within Santa Fe. It is the intent of the governing body to: 
(1)  promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of Santa Fe and accommodate orderly growth and development ; 
(2)  provide for the imposition and collection of an impact fee upon new development within Santa Fe to serve the demand for capital facilities and public improvements; and 
(3)  ensure that new development contributes its proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide public facilities and infrastructure that has a rational nexus to the proposed development . 
(C)  Fee Assessment and Collection   
(Ord. No. 2014-28  1) 
(1)  The assessment for impact fees occurs on the date a plat or development plan receives final approval, from the city or the state construction industries division or, in the absence of a plat or plan, the date of the development permit application . Impact fees collected within four years of the date of assessment shall be based on the impact fee schedule in effect at the time of assessment. After the expiration of the four-year period, the new development shall be subject to the fee schedule in effect at the time of application for a construction permit . No action on the part of the city is required for assessment to occur. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a construction permit to present evidence of the date of plat or development plan approval in order for the fees to be based on the previous impact fee schedule. After the impact fee has been paid, no refunds will be provided based on the differences in the fee schedules. An applicant must pay all fees according to one fee schedule only and may not mix the various fees from the schedules. 
(2)  The collection of impact fees shall occur at the time of issuance of a construction permit according to the fee schedule in effect for the development . 
(D)  Exemptions, Waivers and Reimbursements   
(Ord. No. 2016-39  8) 
(1)  Certain types of permits for new construction shall be exempt from the terms of this Section 14-8.14. An exemption shall be claimed at the time of construction permit application . The land use director shall determine the validity of a claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth in this Subsection 14-8.14(D). The following are exempt from the provisions of this Section 14-8.14: (Ord. No. 2014-28  7) 
(a)  alterations of, or additions to, existing residential uses where no additional dwelling units are created; 
(b)  replacement of a destroyed, partially destroyed or moved residential building or structure with a new building or structure of the same use and the same size and with the same number of dwelling units ; 
(c)  replacement of destroyed, partially destroyed or moved non-residential building or structure with a new building or structure of the same gross floor area and use; 
(d)  construction permits for new residential units that are part of a master plan, development plan or subdivision plat where land is dedicated to the city to provide park land, as provided in Section 14-8.15 (Dedication and Development of Land for Parks, Open Space, Trails and Recreation Facilities), are exempt from park impact fees; 
(e)  parking garages or parking lots ; and 
(f)  construction permits for qualifying projects within the Midtown LINC Overlay District as defined in Subsection 14-5.5(D)(4)(b). 
(2)  Application for waivers of impact fees shall be made at the time of application for a construction permit. Applications shall be reviewed by the office of affordable housing. Impact fees shall be waived for: 
(a)  Santa Fe homes or Santa Fe rental units as defined in Article 26-1 SFCC 1987; 
(b)  housing opportunity program home or housing opportunity program rental units subject to a valid housing opportunity program agreement; or 
(c)  a low-priced dwelling unit as defined in Article 26-2 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  The impact fee calculation for an approved waiver shall be tracked by the land use director for accounting purposes. 
(4)  When a dwelling unit for which impact fees have been paid is later deemed by the city to qualify for the waiver described in Section 14-8.14(D)(2), it is entitled to a full reimbursement of the impact fees paid. 
(5)  To promote the economic development of Santa Fe or the public health, safety and general welfare of its residents, the governing body may agree to pay some or all of the impact fees imposed on a proposed new development or redevelopment from funds of the city other than impact fees from other developments. 
(6)  Governmental entities shall pay all impact fees imposed under this Section 14-8.14. 
(E)  Fee Determination   
(Ord. No. 2011-37; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-16  54; Ord. No. 2014-8; Ord. No. 2014-28) 
(1)  A person who applies for a construction permit , except those exempted or preparing an independent fee calculation study, shall pay impact fees in accordance with the following fee schedule. If a credit is due pursuant to Section 14-8.14(I), the amount of the credit shall be deducted from the amount of the fee to be paid. 
(2)  Beginning February 27, 2014 and ending February 26, 2016, construction permits for residential developments shall be charged fifty percent (50%) of the scheduled values in the Fee Schedule in Subsection 14-8.14(E)(3). Beginning February 27, 2016, such residential developments shall be charged one hundred percent (100%) of the scheduled values in the Fee Schedule. 
(3)  The fee schedule in this Subsection 14-8.14(E)(3) shall be used and its fees assessed on plats and development plans that receive final approval from the city or the state construction industries division, except where the permit is issued for a subdivision or for a development plan that is still subject to a prior fee schedule available and on file in the Land Use Department. 
FEE SCHEDULE 
Land Use Type Unit Roads Parks Fire Police Total Single-Family Detached/Heated Living Area 1,500 sq. ft. or less Dwelling $1,894 $967 $154 $64 $3,079 1,501-2,000 sq. ft. Dwelling $2,064 $1,010 $161 $68 $3,303 2,001-2,500 sq. ft. Dwelling $2,141 $1,108 $176 $74 $3,499 2,501-3,000 sq. ft. Dwelling $2,245 $1,163 $186 $78 $3,672 3,001 sq. ft. or more Dwelling $2,377 $1,238 $197 $83 $3,895 Accessory Dwelling Dwelling $947 $483 $77 $32 $1,539 Multi-Family Dwelling $1,299 $945 $150 $63 $2,457 Nonresidential G.F.A. Retail/Commercial 1,000 sq. ft. $4,006 $0 $269 $113 $4,388 Office 1,000 sq. ft. $2,402 $0 $126 $53 $2,581 Industrial 1,000 sq. ft. $1,856 $0 $55 $23 $1,934 Warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. $968 $0 $24 $10 $1,002 Mini-Warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. $375 $0 $22 $9 $406 Public/Institutional 1,000 sq. ft. $1,460 $0 $113 $48 $1,621  
(4)  The land use director shall determine the fee to be collected as a condition of construction permit approval based on the applicable fee schedule in Subsection 14-8.14(E)(3) above and the provisions of this Subsection 14-8.14(E)(4), or on the basis of an independent fee calculation study pursuant to Subsection 14-8.14(F). 
(a)  The determination of the appropriate land use category shall be based on the following. 
(i)  Single-Family Detached means a single-family dwelling , which may consist of a manufactured home or mobile home . 
(ii)  Multi-Family means a multiple-family dwelling . 
(iii)  Retail/Commercial means an establishment engaged in the selling or rental of goods, services, lodging or entertainment to the general public. Such uses include, but are not limited to, shopping center or mall, alcoholic beverage sales activities , antique shop , bed and breakfast inn , boarding house , commercial recreational use or structure , drive-in , equipment rental or leasing , filling station , flea market , florist , garden center , gift shop , grocery store , hotel , laundromat , motel , nightclub , personal service establishment , pet service establishment , pharmacy , repair garage , residential suite hotel or motel , or retail establishment . 
(iv)  Office means a building not located in a shopping center and exclusively containing establishments providing executive, management, administrative or professional services, and which may include ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, or child care facilities. Such uses include, but are not limited to, real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, secretarial, data processing, telephone answering, telephone marketing, music, radio and television recording and broadcasting studios; professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; interior decorating consulting services; medical and dental offices and clinics, including veterinarian clinics; and business offices of private companies, utility companies, trade associations, unions and nonprofit organizations. Specific examples include business services (excluding equipment rental and leasing), arts and crafts studio , clinic , funeral home , veterinary establishment and vocational school . 
(v)  Industrial/Manufacturing means an establishment primarily engaged in the fabrication, assembly or processing of goods. Typical uses include manufacturing plants, welding shops, wholesale bakeries, commercial laundries, commercial greenhouses, food and drug manufacturing, dry cleaning plants, and bottling works. Specific uses include light assembly and manufacturing and manufacturing . 
(vi)  Warehouse means an establishment primarily engaged in the display, storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment. Such uses include, but are not limited to, wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving and storage firms, trucking and shipping operations, and major mail processing centers. Specific uses include commercial stable , junkyard , outdoor storage , salvage yard , warehouse and wholesale operations . 
(vii)  Mini-Warehouse means mini-storage units . 
(viii)  Public/Institutional means a governmental, quasi-public or institutional use, or a non-profit recreational use, not located in a shopping center. Such uses include, but are not limited to, elementary, secondary or higher educational establishments, day care centers, hospitals, mental institutions, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, fire stations, city halls, courthouses, post offices, jails, libraries, museums, places of religious worship, military bases, airports, bus stations, fraternal lodges, and parks and recreational buildings. Specific examples include child day-care facility , club , college or university , community residential corrections program , continuing care community , electric facilities , extended care facility , group residential care facility , hospital , human services establishment , institutional building , museum , personal care facility for the elderly , private club or lodge , public utility , recreational facility , religious assembly , sheltered care facility and transportation terminal . 
(b)  If the type of new development for which a construction permit is requested is not specified on the fee schedule, the land use director shall determine the fee on the basis of the fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the fee schedule. 
(c)  The impact fees for development of land outside of buildings that increases the demand for capital facilities is determined by application of the fee for the corresponding type of building . In particular, the building square footage for a retail/commercial use shall include indoor or outdoor sales areas or inventory storage areas, growing area for a garden center/nursery, and any drive-through kiosk and associated queuing lane with or without a roof. If the land use director determines that development of land outside of buildings is intended for seasonal usage that reduces the increased demand for capital facilities, the land use director may reduce impact fees charged for the development of land outside of buildings by up to 75% of the original assessment. 
(d)  Impact fees shall be assessed and collected based on the primary use of the building as determined by the land use director . Uses that are distinct and separate from the primary use, which are not merely ancillary to the primary use and are one thousand (1,000) square feet or greater, will be charged the impact fee category based on the distinct and separate use. 
(e)  Where a permit is to be issued for a building "shell" and land use director is unable to determine the intended use of the building , the land use director shall assess and collect impact fees according to the zoning district in which the building is to be located as follows: 
(i)  C-2 and all SC zones - "Retail/Commercial"; 
(ii)  HZ zone - "Office"; 
(iii)  C-1 and C-4 - "Office"; and 
(iv)  I-1 and I-2 - "Industrial/Manufacturing". 
(f)  If there is an increase in the amount of the impact fee calculation once a tenant improvement permit is submitted, the difference from what was paid at the time of the shell permit and the tenant improvement fee calculation shall be paid prior to issuance of the construction permit . If the fee schedule determination for the square footage of the use identified in the tenant improvement construction permit results in a net decrease from what was paid at the time of the shell permit , there shall be no refund of impact fees previously paid. 
(g)  Live/work developments containing dwelling units in combination with nonresidential floor area in a common building shall pay impact fees for each dwelling unit according to the residential fee rate for "Multi-Family" and for the gross floor area intended for nonresidential use according to the " Office " fee rate. If the initial Live/Work construction permit application is for a shell construction permit , the land use director shall collect impact fees at the "Office" fee rate. If dwelling units are added as a use within the building after the building has been charged impact fees at a nonresidential fee rate, and there is no increase in gross floor area , the land use director shall collect only the required park impact fees for the dwelling units at the fee rate for "Multi-Family" at the time of the dwelling unit permit application . 
(h)  If a construction permit application changes or intensifies the use of an existing building , increases the gross floor area of an existing building , or replaces an existing building with a new building and new use, the fee shall be based on the net increase in the fee for the new use or increase as compared to what the current fee would be for the previous use or floor area. If the proposed change results in a net decrease in the fee there shall be no refund of impact fees previously paid. 
(i)  "G.F.A." in the fee schedule refers to gross floor area . 
(F)  Independent Fee Calculation   
(Ord. No. 2014-28  3) 
(1)  The land use director may require an independent fee calculation for any proposed development interpreted by the land use director as not one of those types listed on the fee schedule or as one that is not comparable to any land use on the fee schedule. 
(2)  The preparation and cost of the independent fee calculation study is the sole responsibility of the applicant . 
(3)  The independent fee calculation study shall be based on the same service standards and facility costs used in the impact fee capital improvements plan and shall document the methodologies and assumptions used. The independent fee calculation shall be based on the expected long-term occupancy of the building or development , based on physical characteristics, and not on the characteristics of the proposed initial owner or occupant of the building or development . 
(4)  An independent fee calculation study submitted by an applicant to calculate a road impact fee shall address all three factors relevant to the generation of service units, namely, trip generation rates, primary trip factors and average trip lengths. 
(5)  After review, the land use director shall approve or reject the conclusions of the independent fee calculation study. 
(G)  Use of Fees   
(1)  An "impact fee fund" that is distinct from the general fund of the city is created, and the impact fees received shall be deposited in the following interest-bearing accounts of the impact fee fund: 
(a)  fire impact fee account; 
(b)  police impact fee account; 
(c)  parks impact fee account; and 
(d)  roads impact fee account. 
(2)  The impact fee accounts shall contain only those impact fees collected pursuant to this Section 14-8.14 for the type of facilities reflected in the title of the account, plus accrued interest. 
(3)  The money in each impact fee account shall be used only for the following: 
(a)  to acquire or construct capital improvements or facility expansions of the type reflected in the title of the account and identified in the capital improvements plan ; 
(b)  to pay debt service on the portion of any current or future general obligation bond or revenue bond used to finance capital improvements or facility expansions of the type reflected in the title of the account and identified in the capital improvements plan ; 
(c)  planning, surveying and engineering fees paid to an independent qualified professional who is not an employee of the city or county for services provided for and directly related to the construction of capital improvements or facility expansions ; 
(d)  fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified professional, who is not an employee of the city , for the preparation or updating of a capital improvements plan ; 
(e)  up to three percent of total impact fees collected for administrative costs for city personnel, for professional services related to impact fee assignment/distribution or for reporting to the capital improvements advisory board; 
(f)  refunds as provided in Subsection 14-8.14(H); and 
(g)  credits as provided in Subsection 14-8.14(I). 
(H)  Refunds   
(1)  Upon the request of an owner of the property for which an impact fee has been paid, any money in the impact fee fund paid for that property that has not been spent within seven years after the date on which the fee was paid shall be returned to the current owner of record as listed with the county assessor with interest since the date of payment. 
(a)  Money in each impact fee account shall be considered to be spent in the order collected on a first in/first out basis. 
(b)  Interest shall be calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate set forth in Section 56-8-3 NMSA 1978 (Interest Rate; No Written Contract). 
(c)  Requests shall be filed with the city within thirty days of the eligibility for the refund. 
(d)  Response to a request for a refund, including the amount of the refund and the procedure for applying for and receiving the refund, shall be sent or served in writing to the current owner of the property within thirty days of the date the refund was requested. 
(e)  All refunds shall be made to the current owner of the property at the time the refund is paid. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 14-8.14(H)(1)(a) through (e), if the impact fees were paid by a government entity, notice shall be given to and the refund shall be made to the government entity. 
(2)  If an applicant has paid an impact fee required by this Section 14-8.14 and the construction permit later expires without the possibility of further extension, and the development activity for which the impact fee was imposed did not occur and no impact has resulted, the applicant who paid the fee is entitled to a refund of ninety-seven percent of the fee paid, without interest. To be eligible to receive such refund, the applicant who paid the fee must submit an application for the refund within thirty days after the expiration of the permit or extension for which the fee was paid. 
(I)  Credits   
(1)  Credit against impact fees shall be provided for contributions made by developers toward the cost of capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan and eligible for funding with impact fees pursuant to the provisions of this Section 14-8.14. 
(a)  Credits for eligible improvements are effective when the payment has been made, the land has been dedicated in fee simple to the city or the improvements have been completed and have been accepted by the city . 
(b)  No credit shall be applied to the road impact fee for improvements to the major roadway system that primarily serve traffic generated by the development project, such as acceleration/deceleration lanes into and out of the project. 
(c)  No credit shall be applied to the road impact fee for installation of a traffic signal or intersection improvement at the intersection of a public street and a private road or driveway. 
(2)  To receive credit for eligible improvements, the developer shall submit complete engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates to the land use director . The land use director shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information submitted, or where such information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable to the land use director . (Ord. No. 2014-28  7) 
(3)  The planning commission or governing body may approve a credit for eligible improvements as a condition of approval for a plat , development plan or other similar application . 
(4)  To qualify for an impact fee credit, the developer shall enter into an impact fee credit agreement with the city prior to plat or plan recordation. The approved impact fee credit shall be identified on the plat to be used at the time of construction permit in the fee calculation. The impact fee credit agreement shall specify the following: 
(a)  the amount of the credit; 
(b)  how the credit will be allocated within the development project; and 
(c)  how the developer will be reimbursed for the cost of in-kind contributions that exceed the amount of impact fees due from the development project. 
(5)  If the new development for which credits have been issued is sold to different owners , the credits usable by each new owner shall be calculated in terms of each owner's percentage share of the impact fees against which the credits were issued that would otherwise be due from the entire new development . 
(6)  The right to claim credits shall run with the land and may be claimed only by owners of property within the new development for which the land was dedicated or the improvement was made. Credits issued for a particular new development shall not be transferable to another development . 
(7)  Credits provided pursuant to this Section 14-8.14 shall be valid for ten years from the effective date of the impact fee credit agreement. 
(8)  In the absence of an impact fee credit agreement specifically providing otherwise, no reimbursement shall be made to a developer for the amount of credit due in excess of impact fees otherwise due from the development . 
(J)  Miscellaneous Provisions   
(1)  Nothing in this Section 14-8.14 shall restrict the city from requiring the construction of reasonable project improvements required to serve the new development project, whether or not the improvements are of a type for which credits are available under Subsection 14-8.14(I). 
(2)  The land use director shall maintain accurate records of the impact fees paid, including the name of the person paying the fees, the project for which the fees were paid, the date of payment of each fee, the amounts received in payment for each fee, the amount of any credits provided against the fees or refunds paid and any other information the city deems appropriate or necessary for the accurate accounting of the fees. Records shall be available for review by the public during normal business hours and with reasonable advance notice. (Ord. No. 2014-28  7) 
(3)  If an impact fee has been calculated and paid based on a mistake or misrepresentation, it shall be recalculated and paid as follows: 
(a)  the amount overpaid by an applicant shall be refunded by the land use director to the applicant within thirty days after the approval of the recalculated amount; (Ord. No. 2014-28  7) 
(b)  the amount underpaid by the applicant shall be paid to the land use director within thirty days after the acceptance of the recalculated amount; and (Ord. No. 2014-28  7) 
(c)  in the case of an underpayment or nonpayment of impact fees, the city shall not issue any additional permits or approvals for the project for which the impact fee was previously underpaid until such underpayment is corrected and, if amounts owed to the city are not paid within the thirty-day period, the city may also issue a stop work order or rescind any permits issued in reliance on the previous payment of the impact fee. 
(4)  A determination made by the land use director may be appealed to the city manager within thirty days from the date of the determination. The city manager's decision is final. (Ord. No. 2014-28  7; Ord. No. 2014-31  42) 
(5)  Furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this Section 14-8.14, including the furnishing of false information regarding the expected size, use or impacts from a proposed new development , is a violation of this Section 14-8.14. The city may issue a stop work order or rescind any permits issued in reliance on the previous payment of such impact fee. (Ord. No. 2014-28  4) 
(K)  Annual Report and Periodic Updates   
The capital improvements advisory committee (CIAC) shall make an annual report to the governing body on impact fee revenues collected during the previous year, current impact fee fund amounts, capital improvements plan projects under construction that are using impact fee revenues, the effects of impact fees on new housing prices and new affordable housing as well as any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact fee. The land use assumptions and capital improvements plan on which the impact fees imposed by this Section 14-8.14 are based shall be updated at least every five years. The five-year period begins on the day the capital improvements plan is adopted. The city shall review its current land use assumptions and update the capital improvements plan in accordance with Sections 5-8-1 to 5-8-42 NMSA 1978 (Development Fees Act). 
14-8.15 - DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND FOR PARKS, OPEN SPACE, TRAILS AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  11) 
(A)  Purpose   
(1)  The governing body deems it in the best interest of the city and its citizens that adequate provision be made for parks, open space , trails and recreation facilities , and for city maintenance of those parks, open space , trails and recreation facilities . 
(2)  These regulations provide standards for the dedication of land or easements to the city to assist in implementing the city's parks, open space , trails and recreation master plan. 
(3)  These regulations provide standards based on the average number of persons per housing unit according to Census 2000, which is two persons per unit for Santa Fe. 
(4)  Land dedicated for neighborhood parks shall be based on a rate of three acres per one thousand persons, or per five hundred housing units. 
(5)  Land dedicated for regional parks, community parks, open space and trails shall be based upon a rate of twelve acres per one thousand persons, or per five hundred housing units. 
(6)  For usable park land, park dedication should result in a park area of no less than one acre. 
(7)  Land or easements dedicated for public, nonmotorized trails may be used to satisfy the requirement for dedication of regional parks under Subsection 14-8.15(A)(5) and to establish an interconnected regional transportation system. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  Except as limited in Subsection 14-8.15(B)(3), this Section 14-8.15 applies to applications for subdivision or development approvals that create new residential lots or dwelling units submitted after the effective date of this Section 14-8.15. 
(2)  Developments that are part of an annexation plat , master plan or similar document that dedicated park land in compliance with this Section 14-8.15 are not required to comply at time of individual subdivision or plan approval. 
(3)  Public, nonmotorized trail dedication requirements set forth in Subsection 14-8.15(D) shall apply only to all subdivision plats and development plans. 
(C)  Land Dedication Requirements; Park Development Requirement   
(1)  A master plan, development plan or subdivision proposing one hundred sixty-seven or more single- family residential lots shall dedicate park land to the city according to the requirements set out in Subsection 14-8.15(C)(3). 
(2)  For any other development proposing dwelling units , the city shall require land to be dedicated for either neighborhood parks or regional parks or both, unless the amount of land or type of land is not suitable for public parks, open space or recreation facilities . Where the city determines that no land is to be dedicated for parks, then park impact fees shall be collected according to Section 14-8.14. (Ord. No. 2014-28  5) 
(3)  Where land is to be dedicated to the city for parks, open space and recreation facilities , the amount of land dedicated shall be calculated as follows, in accordance with Subsections 14-8.15(A)(4) and (5): 
(a)  neighborhood parks - six one-thousandths acres per new housing unit; and 
(b)  regional and community parks, open space and trails - twenty-four one-thousandths acres per new housing unit; 
(4)  The city shall determine the suitability and location of land to be dedicated as set forth in the parks, open space , trails and recreation master plan, as well as the type, size and dimensions of land dedicated. 
(5)  Land dedicated shall be suitable for public use, including community, neighborhood, special use and pocket parks; open space ; recreation facilities for passive and active recreation and sports, playgrounds and trails. 
(6)  Land to be dedicated shall be specified at the time of final subdivision plat or final development plan approval and it shall be clearly written on the plat or plan the specific category of park impact fees to be waived when the construction permit is issued. 
(7)  The developer shall be responsible for the development of all neighborhood and regional park land dedicated to the city . The park land shall be developed in accordance with the city's minimum landscaping and equipment standards, including playground, ball courts, sports fields, paved trails, benches and picnic tables, for each type of park created. 
(D)  Public Trail Dedication Requirements   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  43) 
(1)  Dedications to the city for public trails are required wherever an adopted plan shows a public trail within or along the property line of a parcel to which this Section 14-8.15 applies. 
(a)  Public trails shown on an adopted plan include those indicated on the General Plan , the Parks, Open Space, Trails and Recreation Master Plan, the Metropolitan Bicycle Master Plan; trails shown on master plans and development plans adopted for specific areas of the city , and other plans duly adopted by the city . 
(b)  Determination of whether the dedication is by easement or by dedication of fee simple land is made by the city at the time of dedication. 
(c)  Dedication may be required to provide access from new developments to existing or proposed parks, trails, public open spaces and roads. 
(d)  The city may, at its discretion, also require trail dedication where it can be demonstrated that public trail use has occurred continuously for a period of ten years or more, as demonstrated by city staff through aerial photography, which may be supplemented by written testimony from affected parties. 
(2)  Staff shall determine the width of the required dedication based on the type of trail, existing topography and current city standards. The alignment of the trail may be modified by staff from that shown in an adopted plan to accommodate preservation of natural resources, address drainage and topography, improve public access or accommodate design goals of the property owner , as long as the connections between public rights-of-ways , open space or parks shown on the adopted plan are accomplished. 
(3)  The dedication for the trail shall be shown on the subdivision plat or final development plan. If the area dedicated for a trail is in partial fulfillment toward the regional park land dedication requirements, the city at its discretion may prorate the fee that would ordinarily be required. 
(4)  The developer is responsible for the design and construction of the trail in accordance with the city's non-motorized multiuse trail standards or other applicable standards for specialized trails, as determined by the Public Works Director. Inspection and acceptance by the city is required for all public trail improvements. 
(5)  The city is responsible for maintenance of public trails located on land dedicated to the city . Trails within dedicated easements may be maintained by the city , the property owner or owners' association as determined at the time of dedication. 
14-8.16 - SCHOOL REQUIREMENTS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  11) 
(A)  Purpose   
The governing body deems it in the best interest of the city and its citizens to assist the Santa Fe Public School District in planning for adequate school facilities and operations in response to residential development . 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  This Section 14-8.16 applies to applications for development approvals or construction permits that create six or more new residential lots or dwelling units submitted after June 11, 2008. If an application is for a project which was included within a previous application for which notice and school district comment was submitted to the city , resubmittal of the previous documents shall be adequate provided that the project has not materially changed and that the school district's comments are not more than two years old. 
(2)  Nonresidential developments are encouraged to provide notice to the school district as set forth in this section. 
(C)  Notice Requirement   
Prior to submittal of an application , the applicant shall provide written notice of the proposed application to the Santa Fe Public School District. The notice shall include: 
(1)  The proposed number, size and price of dwelling unit ; 
(2)  Description of the project's target market; 
(3)  Proposed timeline for build out of the project; and 
(4)  Such other information as the school district determines is necessary to evaluate the potential impact of the proposed development on the school district. 
(D)  School District Response   
The applicant shall include in the application to the city a written response from the Santa Fe Public School District acknowledging receipt of the notice of the proposed project as well as written comment from the school district as to potential impacts of the proposed project on its facilities and operations. Such written comment shall be included in the materials reviewed by any land use board or the governing-body . If the school district fails to provide written comments to the applicant within thirty days of receipt of the notice set forth in Subsection 14-8.16(C) above, the applicant may submit the application to the city without the school district's comment. 
Article 14-9 - INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN, IMPROVEMENT AND DEDICATION STANDARDS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  12) 

14-9.1 - GENERAL PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 
(A)  Purpose   
The provisions of this article are intended to: 
(1)  ensure that improvements to city infrastructure that are necessary to directly serve specific new development projects are coordinated with the occurrence of that development ; 
(2)  ensure that infrastructure is constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 14; 
(3)  ensure that infrastructure is constructed in a manner that is consistent with applicable provisions of adopted policies, including the general plan ; and 
(4)  coordinate the provision of infrastructure that directly serves specific new development projects with the provision of facilities needed to remedy existing deficiencies and with the provision of facilities that are subject to impact fees as provided in Section 14-8.14. 
(B)  Applicability   
All developments approved pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 14 must dedicate land and easements and must construct, or provide funding for the city to construct, the public and quasi-public infrastructure improvements required by Chapter 14 to address effects on existing and new infrastructure that serves the new development , including: 
(1)  fire hydrants, fire lanes, emergency access roads and access gates as required by Chapter 12 SFCC 1987 (Fire Prevention and Protection); 
(2)  streets , curbs, gutters, sidewalks, signing, striping, traffic control devices and street lighting consistent with the standards in this article and Chapter 23 SFCC 1987 (Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places); 
(3)  grading and retaining walls within the right-of-way and adjacent to the right-of-way ; 
(4)  fences, walls and landscaping required for screening facilities from public view as required by Articles 14-7 (Building Envelope and Open Space Standards and Measurements) and 14-8 (Development and Design Standards); 
(5)  solid waste enclosures required by Section 21-4 SFCC 1987 (Refuse Collection); 
(6)  landscaping , irrigation and other improvements to common open space required by Articles 14-7 and 14-8; 
(7)  drainage or other facilities necessary to comply with Sections 14-8.2 (Terrain and Stormwater Management) and 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations) and Chapter 13 SFCC 1987 (Stormwater Utility); 
(8)  connections to and extensions of sewer mains as provided in Chapter 22 SFCC 1987 (Sewers); 
(9)  connections to and extensions of water mains as provided in Chapter 25 SFCC 1987 (Water); 
(10)  parks, trails and other facilities required by Section 14-8.15 (Dedication and Development of Land for Parks, Open Space, Trails and Recreational Facilities); 
(11)  other required utilities, including natural gas and electricity; and 
(12)  other improvements determined to be necessary in accordance with written policies of the land use director . 
14-9.2 - STREET IMPROVEMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
(A)  Street Network   
(1)  The arrangement, character, extent, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the general plan and shall be considered in their relationship to existing and planned streets , to topographic conditions and to public convenience and safety. 
(2)  Major streets shall be constructed, extended and widened in accordance with the general plan and the metropolitan transportation plan. 
(3)  Local streets shall be constructed, extended and widened in accordance with the general plan and to accommodate the orderly development of the types and intensities of development shown on the future land use map. 
(4)  The arrangement of streets in a development shall: 
(a)  provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or 
(b)  conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other conditions make continuance of or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(5)  All new streets shall be public, except as otherwise provided in Subsection 14-9.2(C)(8), or when the Planning Commission determines that there would be no public purpose served or significant benefit provided to abutting properties by provision of a public rather than a private street . (Ord. No. 2014-31  44) 
(B)  Street Types-Design Criteria   
(1)  New public and private streets shall be constructed according to projected average daily traffic as shown in the street types-design criteria chart and Illustration 14-9.2-1, Street Types Design Criteria. The design criteria are intended to recognize that streets : 
(a)  function as a critical urban design component of the neighborhoods they serve; 
(b)  together with sidewalks and trails, must safely meet the transportation needs of all users, including pedestrians of all ability levels, bicyclists, motorists and transit users; 
(c)  provide needed parking in many neighborhoods; 
(d)  serve as corridors for utilities and storm drainage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  27; Ord. No. 2014-31  45) 
Table 14-9.2-1: Design Criteria for Street Types 
(Ord. No. 2013-16  59) 
TABLE 14-9.2-1: Design Criteria for Street Types
See also Chapter 12 Fire Prevention and Protection - International Fire Code Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads (as amended) for mandatory standards for roadway width, steepness, dead end/turnarounds, number of access points and fire lane signage Criteria Major Arterial (6-Lane) Major Arterial (4-Lane) Secondary Arterial Collector Collector Mixed-Use Subcollector Lane Lot Access Driveway Note 1 No Parking With Parking Average Daily Traffic Up to 
60,000 Up to 
40,000 5,000- 
15,000 1,000- 
5,000 1,000- 
5,000 300- 
1,000 300- 
1,000 0-300 Minimum Dwelling Unit Access 30-100 30-100 0-30 (0-8) Minimum Right-of-way Width 120 98 70 52 50 42 50 or 56 38 or 42 NA Slope/Grading Easement (conditional upon staff review) 0-30 0-30 0-30 0-30 0-30 0-30 0-30 0-30 NR Number of Auto Lanes 6-7 
Note 2 4-5 
Note 2 2-3 
Note 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 Width of Driving Lanes 11 11 11 10 10 9 10 9 10 Median/Turn Lane Width 18 18 14 NR NR NR NR NR NR Minimum Bikeway Width 5 5 5 4 NR NR NR NR NR On-Street Parking Width NA NA NA NA 6 
Note 3 NA 6 
Note 4 NA NA Curb & Gutter 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 NR Minimum Sidewalk Setback 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 0 or 5 
Note 1 NR Minimum Sidewalk Width 6 6 5 5 7 5 5 5 NR Notes: 
NA - Not Applicable 
NR - Not Required 
1. Refer to Subsection 14-9.2(C)(8) for additional standards for lanes and lot access driveways. Lot access driveway standard applicable to access from street to not more than eight single family lots . 
2. Includes Median/Turn Lane 
3. Parking required on both sides of street , except no parking on that side of a street adjoining the plaza. 
4. Parking may be on one side or both sides of the street ; parking lane should not be continuous.( ) 
All measurements in feet, unless otherwise noted.  
Illustration 14-9.2-1: Street Types Design


(2)  The collector mixed use street type is to be constructed in conjunction with the development of neighborhood centers and is designed to function like many of the streets near the plaza. 
(3)  To better achieve the intent of this Section 14-9.2, a land use board , or, in the case of city street projects, the governing body , may consider and approve innovative street designs that are not included among the street types and street sections shown or described in this Section 14-9.2 that provide adequate pedestrian and bicycle facilities, as well as necessary transit facilities. 
(4)  New development on an existing public street that does not meet the width or other applicable standards in Table 14-9.2-1 and that cannot be improved to meet those standards may exceed the average daily traffic or dwelling unit access standards in Table 14-9.2-1 without a variance. 
(C)  Street Design Engineering Standards   
(1)  Public and private streets and lot access driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; Chapter 12 SFCC (Fire Prevention and Protection) and any engineering standards adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Where no specific standard has been adopted, streets shall be designed in accordance with applicable standards adopted by national engineering organizations such as the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(3)  Where no specific standard has been adopted, construction must comply with the current edition of the "New Mexico Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
(4)  A private street built and subsequently proposed to be dedicated to the city must meet all applicable public street standards set forth in this Section 14-9.2. 
(5)  The city shall not maintain private streets . 
(6)  Following are specific construction and engineering standards: 
(a)  each street shall terminate in a cul-de-sac or other approved turnaround, except where the planning commission or summary committee requires a street to be stubbed out at a property boundary in anticipation of future extension; 
(b)  property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of ten feet, or a greater radius when necessary to allow the construction of a curb having a desirable radius. Sidewalks may not be curtailed at street corners to less than normal width. The planning commission may allow comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners; 
(c)  new streets shall be dedicated and improved to the full width for which they are planned, except where a land use board or the governing body determines that an interim width or level of improvements provides safe and adequate service as part of an enforceable plan for the phased completion of the improvements; 
(d)  when a tract to be developed borders an existing street having a right-of-way width insufficient to conform to the minimum width standards required by these regulations, the necessary additional right-of-way shall be platted and dedicated in such a way to make the resulting street conform; 
(e)  street names shall not duplicate or be so similar as to be confusing with existing street names. Where a proposed street is to be a continuation of an existing named street , the proposed street shall have the name of the existing street . Street names must be approved by the planning commission; 
(f)  curbs at intersections shall be designed with a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet. The planning commission may approve a smaller radius; 
(g)  in areas zoned for residential development , planting strips are required between the edge of pavement and the edge of the required sidewalks. Planting strips must have a width of not less than five (5) feet; 
(h)  the planning commission may approve street access to adjoining property , requiring proposed streets to be extended by dedication to the boundary of that property . Such streets shall be improved in the same manner as prescribed for other streets in the development ; and 
(i)  street grades shall not exceed the following, with allowances for vertical curves: 
(i)  major and secondary arterial streets or highways, six percent; 
(ii)  collector and subcollector streets , ten percent; 
(iii)  lanes, fifteen percent except when a lesser grade is required by the fire marshal pursuant to fire apparatus access road standards; and 
(iv)  no street grade shall be less than one half of one percent. 
(7)  All new streets must be paved; provided, however, that the planning commission may approve gravel surfaces for roadways classified as private lanes or shared private driveways if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that: 
(a)  vegetation or topographical maps or other evidence shows that dust from the roadways will not be a problem for residents living next to the roadway; 
(b)  the gravel lane is an important consideration in the area's streetscape or in the overall project design; and 
(c)  the gravel lane will not cause erosion or sediment problems or those problems will be eliminated by the use of accepted engineering methods. 
(8)  Specific construction and engineering standards, lot access driveways and streets classified as lanes and certain subcollectors: (Ord. No. 2013-16  56) 
(a)  streets classified as "lanes" shall be laid out so that use by through traffic is minimized; 
(b)  lot access driveways shall be private. Streets classified as "lanes" or "subcollectors" may be constructed as private streets ; 
(c)  lot access driveways and private streets classified as "lanes" or "subcollectors" may be approved for access to newly created lots where the planning commission or summary committee determines that no public street is needed to provide access to the property being subdivided or to surrounding properties , based on existing and planned future uses of the properties . 
(d)  a roadway classified as a lane must meet the following standards: 
(i)  paved lanes; and 
(ii)  unpaved lanes that are approved for construction with gravel surfacing as provided in Subsection (B)(7) above 
A.  twenty-two (22) feet driving surface width; 
B.  eight (8) feet shoulder and drainage on each side; 
C.  six (6) inch crushed gravel base course surfacing material; and 
D.  thirty-eight (38) feet total right of way or access easement. 
(e)  A lot access driveway that is required to provide emergency vehicle access pursuant to Chapter XII SFCC (Fire Prevention and Protection) must meet the standards of that chapter. Otherwise, a lot access driveway must have an all-weather driving surface at least ten (10) feet in width, must be no steeper than fifteen percent grade, or as required by the fire marshal and must accommodate drainage and utility facilities and easements. 
(D)  Access and Traffic Calming   
(1)  Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street , a land use board may require marginal access for collector or local streets , reverse frontage with screen planting or walls contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(2)  Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way , a land use board may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side or on either side of such right-of-way , at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land for park or recreational purposes when such purposes are appropriate in the relevant area. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(3)  At least one through street that traverses the entire developed area shall be provided for each one thousand (1,000) feet of developed area. (Ord. No. 2012-11  26) 
(4)  At least two connections to the existing road network points shall be provided for every ten acres of development . (Ord. No. 2012-11  26) 
(5)  Where a trail network exists or is planned, access to the trail network must be provided every five hundred (500) feet, where feasible. (Ord. No. 2012-11  26) 
(6)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets are prohibited unless the city controls the reserve strip under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(7)  Traffic calming measures are allowed in new developments and specific measures may be required by the planning commission to ensure traffic safety in new neighborhoods. 
(8)  Cul-de-sacs and other dead-end streets , both public and private, may be constructed only if topography, lot configuration, previous development patterns or other natural or built features prevent continuation of the street . 
(E)  Sidewalks   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  57) 
(1)  If a subdivision plat or development plan approval is required, curb, gutter and sidewalk locations shall be dedicated when the subdivision plat or development plan is recorded and constructed in accordance with applicable standards as part of the subdivision or development plan infrastructure . 
(2)  If a subdivision plat or development plan is not required, curbs, gutter and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with applicable standards and dedicated to the city prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for: 
(a)  construction of a new principal building ; 
(b)  all additions over five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area ; 
(c)  remodeling or renovations over five (500) hundred square feet gross floor area for multiple- family residential and nonresidential permits ; and 
(3)  sidewalk construction is not required to exceed twenty percent of the value of the other construction covered by the permit for additions and remodeling. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be located in a city right-of-way or, if adequate right-of-way is not available, sidewalks shall be located in a public access easement dedicated to the city on an approved plat . The sidewalk shall be consistent with the street standards of Subsection 14-9.2(C) and located along each street frontage immediately adjacent to the development . 
(5)  New sidewalks, drive pads and curb ramps required pursuant to Subsection 14-9.2(E)(1) or (2) must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and with New Mexico department of transportation pedestrian access details (NMDOTPAD) and must be constructed of concrete, meeting standards approved by the city or alternative materials approved by the land use director . New sidewalks constructed pursuant to Subsection 14-9.2(E)(1) must be free of any structures , signs , landscaping , above ground utility elements or other items that prevent free passage along the sidewalk. New sidewalks constructed pursuant to Subsection 14-9.2(E)(2) must be free of any structures , signs , landscaping , above ground utility elements or other items that result from the new construction and that prevent free passage along the sidewalk. 
(6)  Replacement of existing sidewalks is not required if they are in good condition and substantially in compliance with ADAAG. Existing sidewalks shall be free of any structures , signs , landscaping , above ground utility elements or other items that prevent free passage along the sidewalk. However, in the situations described in Subsection 14-9.2 (E)(1) and (E)(2), the land use director may allow the sidewalk barrier to remain or approve an alternate sidewalk alignment creating free passage if the removal of the sidewalk barrier is deemed not feasible. 
(7)  A new sidewalk that connects to an existing sidewalk shall be the wider of: 
(a)  the width of the existing sidewalk; 
(b)  the required minimum width set forth in Table 14-9.2-1; 
(c)  the NMDOTPAD as may be amended by the city ; or 
(d)  the minimum width required by ADAAG. 
(8)  A curb/access ramp meeting NMDOTPAD and city standards shall be constructed where two paved streets with curb, gutter and sidewalk intersect. 
(9)  Drive pads shall comply with NMDOTPAD and any city street standard details. 
(10)  If there is no curb or gutter, an alternative pedestrian route may be approved as part of a subdivision plat or development plan. The alternative pedestrian route shall comply with ADAAG. Consideration shall be given to future maintenance, the surrounding uses, density and the location and type of the street . 
(11)  Colored concrete shall be required in the city's historic districts according to the color palette approved by the historic districts review board available from the city historic preservation division. Alternative materials may also be required by the historic districts review board. In addition, the city reserves the right to specify sidewalk color or alternative materials in other sections of the city as may be appropriate. 
(12)  Construction of sidewalks shall comply with Section 23-3 SFCC 1987 (Construction and Maintenance of Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks). 
(F)  Pedestrian Crosswalks   
Pedestrian crosswalks shall be included in the design of each signalized intersection and at any other street crossing locations required by the land use director and they must meet engineering standards adopted by the city . Crosswalks must connect sidewalks and must have sidewalk wheelchair ramps on each side of the street . Crosswalks shall be installed at the time of intersection construction. 
(G)  Curbs and Gutters   
(1)  All new streets must have curbs and gutters that meet city standards, except for roadways classified as lanes or shared private driveways if the planning commission finds, based on substantial evidence, that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  absence of curbs and gutters will not contribute to the deterioration of the pavement edge, particularly on streets where on- street parking is allowed; 
(b)  curbs and gutters are not necessary to channel stormwater, as shown by a site-specific drainage and stormwater control plan analysis or other means; and 
(c)  curbs and gutters are not necessary to confine driveway access to specific locations and to maintain the appearance of the streetscape . 
(2)  Colored concrete is required in the historic districts according to the color palette approved by the historic districts review board available from the city historic preservation division. 
(H)  Maintenance of Public Parkways   
Maintenance of the public parkway, generally comprised of the sidewalk setback and the sidewalk itself, is the responsibility of the person owning or in charge or control of the lot or property contiguous to the parkway, exclusive of controlled access arterials. Maintenance shall be to eliminate public nuisances and ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety and visibility, and shall include the eradication of weeds and the trimming of trees and shrubs. Maintenance shall comply with Sections 10.3 SFCC 1987 (Weeds) and 23-3 SFCC 1987 (Construction and Maintenance of Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks). 
(I)  Alleys   
Alleys shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  the right-of-way width of an alley shall not be less than twenty (20) feet; 
(2)  alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment are not allowed and, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to allow safe vehicular movement; and 
(3)  dead-end alleys are not allowed. 
(J)  Easements   
(1)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities if the planning commission or the city engineer finds that they are necessary for adequate and necessary utility service to the subdivision or surrounding areas. Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide and may be located over a lot line so that there is a five (5) foot easement on each lot ; and 
(2)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway , channel or stream, the owner shall provide a stormwater drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse, drainageway , channel or stream and of such width and construction the planning commission finds is adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required by the planning commission in connection with the drainage easement or right-of-way . 
(3)  Easements required by this Section 14-9.2 shall not interfere with other easements or uses of the property on which the easement exists. 
(K)  Utilities, Storm Drainage and Street Improvements   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  58) 
Utilities, storm drainage facilities and street improvements shall be provided as follows. 
(1)  Standards and Specifications: 
(a)  connection to city water service except as provided in Section 25-1.10 SFCC 1987 (Regulations for the Drilling of New Domestic Water Wells); 
(b)  connection to city sewer services except as provided in Section 22- 3.1 SFCC 1987 (Sewers - Connection to the Public System); 
(c)  approval of storm sewer system and other drainage improvement plans by the city engineer ; 
(d)  approval of grading and centerline gradients by the city engineer ; 
(e)  approval of major and secondary arterial street cross-section by the city engineer ; provided, however, that the cost of improvement to the developer shall not exceed that which is required for improving a collector street . 
(f)  installation of street name signs of a material and design approved by the governing body at all street intersections; 
(g)  approval of complete street lighting facilities by the city engineer ; and 
(h)  landscaping as required by Section 14-8.4 (Landscape and Site Design). 
(2)  Design Details, Construction Standards and Specifications 
Design details, construction standards and specifications for utilities and storm drainage shall conform to standard details and specifications adopted by the governing body . 
(L)  Landscaping   
Landscaping plans shall be submitted for all roadway medians and all parkway strips. Landscaping plans shall include proposed location, size and type of vegetation or xeriscaping, including street trees , shrubs, ground cover or other proposed ground treatment in conformance with the city's landscaping regulations. Location of proposed landscaping shall meet sight distance and other safety criteria as determined by the land use director . Landscaping plans shall show any irrigation system necessary to maintain the roadway landscaping . The final approved landscaping plans shall be implemented at the developer's cost as part of road construction and all materials shall be maintained and guaranteed by the developer for a minimum of one year or until established. Landscaping plans should comply with Resolution 2010-66, Landscape Design Guidelines for Medians and Planting Strips, as amended. 
(M)  Bikeways   
Bikeways shall: 
(1)  be provided on each side of the street on collectors except collector mixed-use, secondary arterials and major arterials, unless a street is approved as a one way in which case a bikeway shall be placed to the right of the driving lane; 
(2)  be located between the driving lane and the curb and gutter or between the driving lane and right turn lane; 
(3)  be separated from the driving lane by a solid white stripe or other appropriate pavement marking or traffic separation device approved by the city ; and 
(4)  have a pavement width that conforms to the criteria set out in the street types-design criteria chart. 
14-9.3 - BLOCK AND LOT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
(A)  Blocks   
(1)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(a)  provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(b)  zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(c)  need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; 
(d)  opportunities and limitations of topography; and 
(e)  special design standards and guidelines, including the standards provided in Section 14-5.5 (Highway Corridor Protection Districts) and applicable policies of the general plan . 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow for two rows of lots , except that a single row of lots is allowed where such lots abut an arterial street , limited access highway, drainage course, railroad right-of-way , a single row of lots in an abutting subdivision or a different zoning district; to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or location; or in similar situations. 
(3)  Where restrictions on access to an adjoining road are required for all or part of the block, those restrictions shall be noted on the plat . 
(4)  A landscaping easement or screen wall shall be provided where appropriate. 
(5)  Pedestrian crosswalks shall not be permitted, except where the planning commission finds that they are essential to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation and other public facilities and, if required, their location and width shall be as the planning commission requires to serve these purposes. 
(B)  Lots   
(1)  Depth, width, area and shape of sites or lots shall be adequate, as determined by the planning commission, to allow development in accordance with the applicable standards of Chapter 14, including the provisions of this article for the district in which the subdivision is located. 
(2)  Each lot shall be provided with access by means of a public street , private street or private driveway in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 14-9.2(B) ( Street Types - Design Criteria). 
(3)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street right-of-way lines and radial to curved street right-of-way lines. 
(4)  Through lots are prohibited, except as provided in Subsection 14-9.3(A)(2). 
14-9.4 - UTILITY AND STORM DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
[RESERVED] 
14-9.5 - INFRASTRUCTURE DEDICATION, COMPLETION AND GUARANTEES 
(A)  Dedication of Rights of Way and Easements   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  60) 
(1)  On-site and off-site rights of way and easements required for public and quasi-public infrastructure shall be dedicated before or concurrently with recording a subdivision plat or filing a development plan or issuance of a construction permit for any development for which no development plan or subdivision plat is required. 
(2)  All quasi-public infrastructure and land designated for ownership in undivided interest, such as private roads and drainage facilities and common open space , must be dedicated to and perpetually maintained by an owners' association or similar legal entity. An article of incorporation and bylaws for the owners' association along with a declaration of restrictions and covenants must be submitted for review and approval by the city attorney. 
(B)  Infrastructure Completion or Agreement to Construct Improvements Required 
The public or quasi-public infrastructure required for any development shall be completed by the developer in accordance with plans approved by the city prior to commencing other aspects of the development , or the developer must enter into an agreement with the city to construct improvements as described in Subsection 14-9.5(C). The infrastructure must be completed or the agreement to construct improvements must be executed prior to the earliest of the following: 
(1)  recording the plat for development that requires a subdivision plat other than a plat for a family transfer subdivision, a summary procedure lot split or a resubdivision ; 
(2)  recording or filing in city archives an approved development plan; 
(3)  issuance of a construction permit for any construction other than the infrastructure , for development for which a plat for an inheritance or family transfer subdivision, a summary procedure lot split or a resubdivision is required; and 
(4)  issuance of a construction permit for any construction other than the infrastructure , for development for which no subdivision plat or development plan is required. 
(C)  Agreement to Construct Improvements, Financial Guarantee   
(1)  The agreement to construct improvements must be executed by the developer according to infrastructure completion policies approved by the land use director . 
(2)  The agreement to construct improvements establishes the sequence of permitting, construction, completion and acceptance of infrastructure relative to the permitting, construction, completion and occupancy of buildings and other development activities, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 14 and applicable provisions of other chapters of the Santa Fe City Code and consistent with city infrastructure completion policies, including requirements for: 
(a)  partial completion of infrastructure prior to issuance of a construction permit for a building ; and 
(b)  substantial completion of the infrastructure prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy . 
(3)  The agreement to construct improvements shall include a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the land use director for the construction cost of the infrastructure as estimated according to Subsection 14-9.5(G). If the financial guarantee uses an out-of-state financial institution, an additional contingency fee is required to reflect potential costs of possible out-of-state legal action. 
(4)  All required improvements shall be completed within two years after construction begins, unless a longer time period is approved by a land use board or by the land use director for a project that is to be constructed in phases. 
(5)  The developer may request a reduction in the amount of the financial guarantee when specific improvements are completed. To qualify for a financial guarantee reduction: 
(a)  the improvements must be completed according to approved plans and inspected by the land use director ; and 
(b)  a written request for the reduction must be made using Form AIA G702 or approved equivalent format and certified by the architect or professional engineer of record. 
(D)  Completion and Warranty Period Financial Guarantee   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  61) 
(1)  All infrastructure improvements shall be completed in accordance with the requirements of city regulations and approvals, and the land use director must inspect and accept all work. 
(2)  The developer shall warranty the infrastructure improvements for a period of at least one year after acceptance and must repair or replace defects at no cost to the city during the warranty period. The land use director may extend the warranty period when necessary to insure that actual or potential defects are corrected. 
(3)  During the warranty period, the developer shall maintain on file with the city a construction financial guarantee in an amount equal to ten percent of the cost estimate in Subsection 14-9.5(G) and it shall remain in effect until the required infrastructure has passed a final warranty inspection by the land use director . If there is no agreement to construct improvements, a separate financial guarantee for the warranty period consistent with city infrastructure completion policies shall be provided. 
(E)  Use of Funds by City   
If the required improvements are not completed in accordance with the agreement to construct improvements or the required repairs are not completed satisfactorily within the warranty period, the city may use the financial guarantee funds in any manner and in any combination it deems necessary to complete or repair the required improvements. This provision does not relieve the applicant of the obligation to complete the improvements or repairs according to the schedule in the agreement, using other funds. 
(F)  Refund   
If all conditions of this Section 14-9.5 have been met, including acceptance of improvements, and the warranty period has passed, the city shall refund all money not called for within thirty days of a written request from the applicant . 
(G)  Construction Cost Estimate   
A construction cost estimate, prepared by a professional engineer or other qualified person approved by the land use director shall be provided for all public or quasi-public improvements that are required as a condition of approval or that will be maintained by the city , unless such improvements are built out prior to plat recordation. Required improvements include those described in Section 14-9.2 (Street Improvement and Design Standards) and as listed in the city infrastructure completion policies. The construction cost estimate is the basis for the financial guarantees required by Subsections 14-9.5(C) and (D). The estimate and guarantees must include a ten percent contingency; provided that a five percent contingency is acceptable for nonprofit housing and economic development organizations approved by the community services department. 
14-9.6 - STANDARDS FOR INHERITANCE OR FAMILY TRANSFER SUBDIVISIONS 
(A)  Installation of Improvements   
Any improvements required to be constructed on inheritance or family transfer subdivisions are only required to be completed at the time a construction permit is issued on any lot contained in the subdivision, and not at the time of plat approval or recordation. A financial guarantee is not required at the time of plat recordation. 
(B)  Density and District Regulations   
Inheritance and family transfer subdivisions are required to meet the standards for use, density , building placement, height, open space , parking and other items set forth in the district regulations. Densities for newly annexed areas must conform to the density range provisions set forth in the general plan . 
Article 14-10 - NONCONFORMITIES 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  13) 

14-10.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
(A)  Purpose and Intent   
It is the intent of this article to allow legal nonconforming uses to continue until they are ceased and to allow legal nonconforming structures to be maintained until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Nonconforming uses are deemed incompatible with permitted uses. It is further the intent of this article to limit nonconforming structures so they are not allowed to be enlarged, expanded, extended or reconstructed after major damage or used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, unless otherwise allowed by Chapter 14. 
(B)  Construction in Progress   
Nothing in Chapter 14 requires a change in the plans, construction or designated use of a structure on which actual construction is in compliance with all permits and was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of Chapter 14 rendering the structure or designated use nonconforming . 
(C)  Determination of Nonconformity Status   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  62; Ord. No. 2014-31  46) 
The land use director determines the status of a nonconforming lot , nonconforming use , nonconforming structure or nonconforming sign . For purposes of this Article 14-10, each sign is treated as a separate structure , including those attached to or painted on buildings . 
(D)  Change of Tenancy or Ownership   
(Ord. No. 2014-31  47) 
Change in tenancy or ownership of a legal nonconforming lot or a lot containing a legal nonconforming structure or legal nonconforming use without change in the use or structure , does not affect the status of that lot , structure or use. 
14-10.2 - LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES 
(Ord. No. 2018-26  1) 
A legal nonconforming use may be continued subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  No Increase in Nonconformity   
A legal nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, intensified, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or structure than was occupied at the time the use became nonconforming and a structure containing a legal nonconforming use shall be subject to the provisions of Section 14-10.3 unless the legal nonconforming use of the structure is terminated. 
(B)  No Relocation on Parcel   
A legal nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the land occupied by that use at the time the use became nonconforming . 
(C)  Termination of Nonconforming Use   
(Ord. No. 2012-33  1) 
(1)  Except as provided for in Subsection 14-10.2(C)(2), a legal nonconforming use of land or use of a structure that ceases for any reason for a period of more than three hundred sixty-five days or is replaced by a permitted use, may not be resumed and any subsequent use of the land or structure shall conform to Chapter 14. 
(2)  A legal nonconforming use of land or use of a structure owned by a federal, state, or local governmental entity and used by that entity for governmental purposes, that ceases may resume. Such resumed uses may not be significantly enlarged or intensified, except that in zoning districts where a special use permit is required, a special use permit must be approved before the use is significantly enlarged or intensified. 
(D)  No Additional Structures   
Additional structures shall not be erected in connection with a legal nonconforming use of land or structure ; and 
(E)  Change of Use   
A legal nonconforming use may, as a special use permit , be changed to another legal nonconforming use if the board of adjustment finds that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing legal nonconforming use and the new use does not increase the level of nonconformity. In allowing such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purposes of Chapter 14. 
(F)  Exception for Single-Family Dwellings   
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections 14-10.2(A), (B), (C) and (D), a single-family dwelling that is a legal nonconforming use and associated accessory uses may be expanded if: 
(1)  The nonconforming dwelling and associated accessory uses are the only uses on a legal lot of record . 
(2)  The combined gross floor area of the dwelling and accessory uses after expansion does not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
(3)  The expansion will not cause or increase the degree or extent of nonconformity with applicable development standards such as lot coverage, setbacks or height. 
(4)  This Subsection 14-10.2(F) shall not permit the creation of a new principal or accessory dwelling unit . 
14-10.3 - LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 
(Ord. No. 2018-26  2 
Legal nonconforming structures may be maintained subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  No Increase in Nonconformity   
A legal nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases the degree or extent of its nonconformity. This Section 14-10.3 is not intended to prohibit additions or alterations that do not increase the nonconformity. 
(B)  Reduction in Nonconformity   
A legal nonconforming structure that is modified in such a way as to eliminate or to reduce the degree or extent of nonconformity, including the demolition or removal of a nonconforming feature for any reason, shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with Chapter 14. 
(C)  Substantial Destruction of Legal Nonconforming Structure   
If a legal nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the existing building structure and shell (exterior skin and framing, excluding window assemblies and exterior wall and roof coverings ), it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 14 and if any structure containing a legal nonconforming use is similarly destroyed, the legal nonconforming use shall not be resumed. 
(D)  Relocation of Legal Nonconforming Structure   
If a legal nonconforming structure is moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(E)  Repairs and Alterations   
(1)  Ordinary repairs and maintenance are allowed, including replacement of exterior wall and roof coverings . 
(2)  Repair, maintenance or replacement of interior nonstructural elements , fixtures, wiring or plumbing, is allowed. 
(3)  Alterations to the legally nonconforming portions of the building structure are not allowed except to bring the structure into conformance with the provisions of Chapter 14. 
(4)  Nothing in Section 14-10 prevents alteration or repairs necessary to ensure the safety of a structure that has been declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting public safety, on order of such official. 
(F)  Exception for Single-Family Dwellings   
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections 14-10.3(A), (B), (C), (D) and (E), a single-family dwelling that is a legal nonconforming structure and associated accessory structures may be expanded as provided in Subsection 14-10.2(F). 
14-10.4 - LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 
(A)  Use of Legal Nonconforming Lot   
(Ord. No. 2013-16  63; Ord. No. 2014-31  48) 
Within a district in which single-family dwellings are allowed, and notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of Chapter 14, a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings may be erected on a single legal lot of record that is nonconforming with regard to minimum lot area or dimensions, maximum density , or the dwelling unit access standards in Table 14-9.2-1; provided that the lot does not adjoin a commonly owned lot , except as provided in Subsections 14-10.4(B) and (C). Dimensions of required yards and other requirements that do not involve area or dimensions of the lot , density or access standards shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
(B)  Adjoining Lots   
Within the R-5, R-6, R-7, R-7(I), R-8 and R-9 districts, two adjoining commonly owned legal nonconforming lots may each be developed in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection 14-10.4(B) if each of the lots has a minimum lot area of four thousand (4,000) square feet and has a width, depth and frontage equal to at least eighty percent of the minimum dimensions required by Chapter 14. Development of one or more adjoining, commonly owned legal nonconforming lots requires a conditional use permit , based on a finding that the development is consistent with the overall lot patterns and development characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood regardless of the area or width of the legal nonconforming lot . 
(C)  Combination of Lots   
Contiguous commonly owned lots may be combined in order to meet the standards of Sections 14-10.4(A) and (B). The boundaries between adjoining commonly owned lots may be adjusted in order to meet the standards of those sections; provided that no lot with an area of less than one thousand nine hundred square feet may be expanded to create an individually developable lot . 
14-10.5 - LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
Legal nonconforming structures in special flood hazard areas may be replaced as set forth in Section 14-8.3(G). 
14-10.6 - NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS 
(Ord. No. 2012-21  4) 
(A)  Applicability   
This Section 14-10.6 applies to a condominium (including constructed condominium units and unconstructed condominium units in the form of reserved development rights) if the condominium declarations were recorded prior to May 30, 2012, and: 
(1)  The condominium does not meet the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14; and 
(2)  The condominium did not meet the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14 when the most recent condominium declarations were recorded. 
(B)  Density Exception for Constructed Condominium Units   
Constructed condominium units described in Subsection 14-10.6(A) are legal nonconforming uses and structures with regard to the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14. A constructed condominium unit described in Subsection 14-10.6(A) that is destroyed by any means may be reconstructed if the reconstructed unit complies with all other applicable provisions of Chapter 14. 
(C)  Unconstructed Condominium Units   
Unconstructed condominium units described in Subsection 14-10.6(A), that are in the form of reserved development rights in excess of the zoning density requirements of Chapter 14, are not legal and may not be developed. 
(D)  Condominium Units Owned by the Original Declarant   
A condominium described in Subsection 14-10.6(A), where all condominium units are owned as of May 30, 2012 by the original declarant, or by an entity controlled by the original declarant, are not legal and are nonconforming uses and structures 
(E)  Condominium Units Constructed without Required Permits   
Condominium units described in Subsection 14-10.6(A), that were constructed without required construction permits are not legal and are nonconforming uses and structures . Such condominium units must be issued all required construction permits and a certificate of occupancy to become subject to the provisions of Subsection 14-10.6(B). 
(F)  Applicability of Other Regulations   
The density exception provided in Subsection 14-10.6(B) is not intended to provide an exception to the other provisions of Article 14-10 regarding nonconforming uses and structures . 
Article 14-11 - ENFORCEMENT 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  14) 

14-11.1 - COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; QUESTIONS 
(A)  Compliance   
All persons shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 14 and any regulations, orders or conditions of approval issued pursuant to Chapter 14. 
(B)  Questions   
Questions of administration and enforcement shall be presented first to the land use director . Questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only by reference from the land use director . 
14-11.2 - ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
One or more administrative officials designated by the city manager shall enforce Chapter 14. The enforcement officer may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city manager directs. 
14-11.3 - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
(A)  Complaints of Violations   
A person may file a written complaint alleging a violation of Chapter 14. The complaint shall state fully the causes and basis of the complaint and shall be filed with the enforcement officer. The enforcement officer shall record the complaint properly, investigate promptly and take action as provided in this chapter. 
(B)  Notice of Violations   
If, in response to a complaint or upon the enforcement officer's own initiative, the enforcement officer finds that any of the provisions of Chapter 14 have been violated, the enforcement officer shall issue a written notice of violation that: 
(1)  describes the specific violation; 
(2)  orders the action necessary to correct the violation; 
(3)  establishes a specific and reasonable period for the correction of the violation; 
(4)  states that failure to comply with the notice may result in one or more of the sanctions provided in Section 14-11.4 below; and 
(5)  is posted on the property in a conspicuous place, delivered in person to the property owner and/or tenant if applicable, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last-known address of the property owner and/or to the tenant, if applicable. 
(6)  The enforcement officer may issue a citation or proceed with any other lawful remedy in addition to or in lieu of a written notice of violation. 
14-11.4 - REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 
(A)  Remedies   
(1)  If a structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered , repaired, converted or maintained; or a structure or property is used in violation of Chapter 14; or if any other violation of this chapter occurs, the governing body , city attorney, enforcement officer or other proper city official may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation or to mandate compliance. 
(2)  The land use director may: 
(a)  withhold or revoke construction permits ; 
(b)  withhold or revoke certificates of occupancy ; 
(c)  withhold the recording of plats or development plans; 
(d)  order discontinuance of illegal use of land or structures ; 
(e)  order discontinuance of any illegal work being done; 
(f)  order removal of illegal structures or alterations ; and 
(g)  order that any land or structure modified in violation of this Chapter be restored to compliance. 
(3)  The land use director may use one or more of the remedies and penalties provided in this Article 14-11 without limiting the authority of the land use director or other officials to take other enforcement actions provided in this Code, including the suspension or revocation of a permit by the building official pursuant to Chapter 7 Building and Housing. 
(B)  Fines, Imprisonment   
Violations of Chapter 14 or of terms of approvals made pursuant to this chapter may be punished as provided in Article 1-3 (General Penalty) of the Santa Fe City Code. 
(C)  Civil Penalties   
In addition to other penalties or remedies, a penalty fee may be assessed for construction without proper permit approvals in accordance with a schedule adopted by resolution of the governing body . 
(D)  Revocation of Approvals   
Land use and development approvals such as special use permits , development plan approvals, variances, design approvals by the HDRB or BCDDRC and construction permits may be revoked by whichever body or official approved them, upon determining that there exists a substantial, continuing or recurring violation of any of the conditions of approval or other provisions of this Code and that revocation is an appropriate remedy given the nature of the violation. 
(1)  The procedure to revoke an approval shall be similar to the procedure for its issuance. 
(a)  For an approval that was granted by a land use board or the governing body , a public hearing shall be required at the same body to consider revocation. The land use director shall provide public notice of the revocation hearing by publication of the meeting agenda and/or a public hearing notice and by posting the property as required for the approval hearing. The land use director shall also provide notice fifteen days prior to the hearing by certified mail with return receipt requested to the permittee and to any person who has filed a written complaint concerning the violation. 
(b)  The land use director or other administrative official may revoke an approval that he or she has granted upon written notice delivered to the permittee by hand, by posting a notice on the property where the violation occurs, or by certified mail with return receipt requested. 
(2)  Vacation of recorded subdivision plats shall be as provided in Section 3-20-12 NMSA 1978. Revocation of approved amendments to the general plan future land use map or the official zoning map shall be as provided for city -initiated amendments to those maps. (Ord. No. 2014-31  49) 
14-11.5 - ENFORCEMENT OF SANTA FE HOMES PROGRAM OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS 
If, after having been given notice as set forth in Section 26-1.19 SFCC 1987 (Enforcement of SFHP), a property owner subject to a SFHP agreement fails to comply with Section 14-8.11 (Santa Fe Homes Program) or Article 26-1 (Santa Fe Homes Program), the office of affordable housing may request that the city manager authorize the city attorney's office to pursue enforcement of specific performance requirements in accordance with the SFHP agreement. (Ord. No. 2013-16  64) 
Article 14-12 - DEFINITIONS 
(Ord. No. 2011-37  15) 
14-12.1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in Chapter 14: 

ACCENT LIGHTING 
Any directional lighting that emphasizes a particular object or draws attention to a particular area. 
ACCESSORY 
As applied to a use or structure , means customarily subordinate or incidental to and on the same lot of such use or structure or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 
A dwelling unit that qualifies as an accessory use and structure . See Section 14-6.3(D)(1) (Standards for Specific Accessory Uses). 
ACTIVE WATER HARVESTING 
Containing precipitation or run-off in a storage tank or other device and distributing that water with a mechanical system by means of gravity or a pump. 
ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION 
Placing construction materials in permanent position and fastening in a permanent manner; provided that where demolition or removal of an existing structure has been substantially begun preparatory to new construction, such demolition or removal is actual construction as long as the work is diligently carried on until completion of the new construction involved. 
ADOBE 
Sun-dried block or coursing of dirt, clay, asphalt-impregnated earth or other natural earth materials. 
ADULT ARCADE 
A place open to the public in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices, including computer imaging, are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified anatomical areas . 
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE 
A commercial establishment that as its principal business offers for sale or rent for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(A)  books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas ; or 
(B)  instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities . 
ADULT CABARET 
A nightclub , bar, restaurant or similar establishment whose primary activities regularly feature and include: 
(A)  persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(B)  live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities ; or 
(C)  films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, computer-generated images or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities . 
ADULT ESCORT AGENCY 
A person that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
ADULT MOTEL 
A hotel , motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(A)  offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(B)  offers a sleeping room for rent for a period less than ten hours; or 
(C)  allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period less than ten hours. 
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER 
A commercial establishment that for any form of consideration, is substantially devoted to showing films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, computer-generated images or similar photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas . The term does not include theaters that primarily feature films rated NC-17, R, PG, PG-13 and films other than unrated or X-rated films. 
ADULT NEWSRACK 
A coin-operated machine or device that dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas . 
ADULT PERFORMANCES AND ENCOUNTERS (LIVE) 
A business that offers as the primary purpose: 
(A)  physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas ; or 
(B)  activities by one or more persons, either male or female, when at least one of the persons is engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas ; provided that the term does not apply to artist models who pose in art classes for adult students or other settings solely for the purpose of assisting a sculptor, a painter or other artist in rendering an artist rendition or presentation of the model. 
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE 
A structure , part of a structure or a device attached to, painted on or otherwise represented on a building , fence or other structure , upon which is displayed or included any letter, work, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, decoration, direction, advertisement or other attention-getting device, including a sign . Advertising structure does not include a similar structure located within a building except illuminated signs within show windows. 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Distilled or rectified spirits, potable alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin and aromatic bitters bearing federal internal revenue strip stamps or any similar alcoholic beverage, including blended or fermented beverages, dilutions or mixtures of one or more of the foregoing containing more than one-half percent alcohol, but excluding medicinal bitters. (Ord. No. 2013-1  3) 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE DISPLAY AREA 
The portion of an alcoholic beverage licensee's premises in which all alcoholic beverages on display for sale are contained. (Ord. No. 2013-1  3) 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSEE 
The holder of any license or permit authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages issued under the provisions of the New Mexico Liquor Control Act, but does not mean the holder of a server permit. (Ord. No. 2013-1  3) 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES ACTIVITIES 
The retail sale of alcoholic beverages for offsite consumption. (Ord. No. 2013-1  3) 
ALTERATION 
A change of the architectural features of a structure , including the erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of the structure or any of its parts. Additions are considered alterations . 
ANIMAL PRODUCTION 
An area which is used for the raising of animals except as limited in Section 14-6.2(H) (Agricultural Uses). 
ANTENNA 
An exterior transmitting or receiving device that may be mounted on a structure and that is used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
ANTIQUE SHOP 
A retail establishment that offers for sale, within a building , articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishings and decorations that have value and significance as a result of age, design or sentiment. 
APPELLANT 
A person filing an appeal. 
APPLICANT 
A person who has submitted an application . As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), the applicant for a building permit for which an impact fee is due. 
APPLICATION 
A request for a permit or other approval within the jurisdiction of the land use director , a land use board or the governing body that is required pursuant to Chapter 14, and includes the fees, forms, plans and associated documents. 
AQUACULTURE 
The cultivation of aquatic animals in a recirculating environment to produce whole fish that are distributed to retailers, restaurants and consumers. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
AQUAPONICS 
The cultivation of fish and plants together in a constructed, recirculating system utilizing natural bacterial cycles to convert fish wastes to plant nutrients, for distribution to retailers, restaurants and consumers. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL FEATURES 
Nonportable cultural remains , including storage pits, firepits, burials, worksites, middens, architectural remains and undisturbed layers of deposited materials. 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE 
A concentration of cultural remains inferred to be the locations of specific human activities of the past. 
ARCHITECT 
A person who is licensed by the state to practice architecture. (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
ARCHIVAL RESEARCH 
Research in primary documents that is likely to yield information concerning the human occupation of a site, including deed, census, cartographic and judicial records. 
AREA MEDIAN INCOME 
The median income for the Santa Fe metropolitan statistical area as adjusted for various household sizes and published and revised periodically by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
ARTIFACT 
Portable material remains that exhibit evidence of human use or alteration . 
ARTS AND CRAFTS STUDIO 
A building that contains artist or craft studio space or schools in which works of art or craft are produced that may be sold on or off the premises . 
ASSESSMENT 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means the determination of the amount of an impact fee. 
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC 
The total volume of traffic during the time period from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. in whole days, greater than one day and less than one year, divided by the number of days in that time period. 
AWNING 
A roof-like covering projecting from the wall of a building and that is typically made of metal, plastic, canvas or other textile. 
BACK-HAUL NETWORK 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications Facilities), means the lines that connect a provider's towers /cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices or long distance providers or the public switched telephone network. 
BAR DITCH 
A continuous shallow ditch parallel to a roadway that collects and distributes surface run-off from the roadway and adjacent terrain. 
BASAL AREA 
The cross section area of the stem or stems of a plant or of all plants in a stand expressed as square feet per acre. Bushes and shrubs, including pion and juniper, are generally measured at or less than one inch above soil level. All other trees generally are measured at 4.5 feet above ground inclusive of bark. Measurements are taken from the uphill side of the slope . For the purposes of explanation only, 60 basal area is approximately equal to evergreen trees, each six (6) feet tall, planted on twelve (12) foot centers over one acre. 
BASE FLOOD 
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) 
The elevation shown on the FIRM and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year-also called the base flood . (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
BASELINE FLOOR AREA RATIO 
As used in the BCD, means the maximum permitted floor area ratio subject to the townscape standards where applicable, not taking into account allowable land-use intensity credits. 
BED AND BREAKFAST INN 
A dwelling unit that contains no more than twelve guest rooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. 
BEDROCK 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  50) 
BIO-FILTRATION 
A process by which waterborne pollutants are absorbed, captured or broken down by soil or are absorbed by plant materials. 
BLOCKFACE 
All the parcels on one side of a city block. Each block is separated by an intersecting street . 
BOARDING HOUSE 
An owner -occupied dwelling unit where lodging for periods of thirty days or longer, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. 
BRUSH LAYERING 
An erosion control method that places branches perpendicular to a contour on excavated terraces to build living structures , which terraces are then backfilled with soil, covering the branches except for the tips. 
BRUSH MATTRESS 
An erosion control method where woven pads of live branches are staked to slopes to build living structures for coverage. 
BUILDABLE AREA 
That portion of a lot upon which buildings may be placed in compliance with required yards , lot coverage restrictions and other applicable provisions of Chapter 14. 
BUILDABLE SITE 
As used in Section 14-5.6 Escarpment Overlay District and Section 14-8.2 Terrain and Stormwater Management, means a contiguous area of land located within a single lot on which a building with a footprint equal to not less than forty percent of the minimum required net lot area, or two thousand (2,000) square feet, whichever is less, can be developed in compliance with all requirements of those sections, all requirements of the underlying zone and all applicable development standards. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
BUILDING 
A structure or parts of a structure covered and connected by a permanent roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure. 
BUILDING FRONTAGE 
The horizontal distance across the front of a building . 
BUILDING OFFICIAL 
The director of the inspections and enforcement division or other person designated by the land use director . 
BUILDING STRUCTURE 
The load-bearing portions of a building , including decking and sheathing for floors, walls and roofs. 
BUSINESS 
An activity involving wholesale or retail sales or rental of any article, substance or commodity, including building materials and vehicles, and the provision of all commercial services, including financial institutions and personal commercial services. Where the term business is used to describe a type of land use or structure , it includes such use by any organization or individual, whether or not the use is conducted for profit. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
BUSINESS SERVICES 
A business primarily engaged in rendering services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment service, management and consulting services, protective services and equipment rental and leasing. 
CALIPER 
The diameter of the trunk of a tree as measured six (6) inches above ground level, up to and including four (4) inch diameter, and twelve (12) inches above ground for larger sizes. 
CABLE ACT 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  50) 
CABLE SERVICE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications), means cable service as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 532, et seq., as now and hereafter amended. 
CAMPGROUND 
A plot of ground upon which one or more sites for camping are located, established or maintained for occupancy by a tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, cabin, lean-to or similar structure established, maintained and operated for the general public as temporary living quarters. 
CANOPY 
An overhanging shelter or shade. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means any of the following facilities that have a life expectancy of ten or more years and are owned and operated by or on behalf of the city : 
(A)  roadway facilities located within the service area, including roads, bridges, bike and pedestrian trails, bus bays, rights of way , landscaping and any local components of state and federal highways; 
(B)  traffic signals located within the service area at the intersection of two city -maintained arterial streets ; 
(C)  neighborhood or pocket parks and related areas and facilities, referred to in Chapter 14 as "neighborhood parks" and community and regional parks, open space and trails and related facilities, referred to in Chapter 14 as "regional parks"; 
(D)  buildings for fire and rescue and essential equipment costing ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more and having a life expectancy of ten years or more; or 
(E)  buildings for police and essential equipment costing ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more and having a life expectancy of ten years or more. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means a plan that identifies capital improvements or facility expansions for which impact fees may be imposed. Capital Improvements or facility expansions needed to serve projected development in the service area based on the approved land use assumptions are identified in the capital improvement plan for water, wastewater, roads, parks, fire and police development impact fees, April 2003 or similar subsequent report approved by the governing body . 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
A written document issued by the land use director certifying that a structure or use of land has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all applicable city codes and ordinances. 
CHANNEL 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means a portion of a drainageway that has a naturally or artificially developed bed or banks to confine and conduct a continuous or periodic flow of water. 
CHECK DAM 
A small dam built within a drainage channel to decrease flow velocity and reduce erosion by reducing the channel gradient, minimize scour and promote deposition of sediment. 
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY 
A building , including an occupied residence, and its premises , that is used by the facility's operator to care for children on an all- or part-day basis. 
CISTERN 
An artificial, closed reservoir for storing water, often underground. 
CITY 
The City of Santa Fe. 
CITY ENGINEER 
A designated employee of the city who is both a professional engineer and a state -certified floodplain manager. 
CLINIC 
A medical, dental or other health care establishment with fewer than five beds or their equivalent where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by two or more health care practitioners sharing one office, and where patients are not lodged overnight. 
CLUB 
A nonprofit organization and its premises , including a lodge, that caters exclusively to members and their guests for social, intellectual, political, recreational, athletic or other common purposes. 
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 
A development in which dwelling units are grouped together and where common open space is provided. 
CLUSTERED SUBDIVISION 
A form of development for a single- family subdivision that allows a reduction in lot area, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted by the zoning district, and the undeveloped land resulting from the lot reduction is devoted to open space . 
CO-LOCATION 
The mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower or tower alternative . (Ord. No. 2014-31  52) 
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY 
An educational institution accredited at the college level by an agency or association recognized by the U.S. secretary of education and legally authorized to offer at least a one-year program of study creditable towards a post-secondary degree. 
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT 
For the purpose of the annual water budget in Section 14-8.13, means one or more buildings constructed for nonresidential use. Commercial development includes hotels , motels , offices, stores and other retail establishments and industrial, manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities. 
COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE OR STRUCTURE 
A facility for commercial recreational purposes such as a theater, bowling alley, pool room, driving range, miniature golf, health club, sports field or amusement park. 
COMMERCIAL STABLE 
A facility for the business of boarding horses or renting horses to the public. 
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURE 
A structure that is put to a commercial use as provided in Article 14-6 (Permitted Uses and Use Regulations). 
COMMON OPEN SPACE 
The outdoor area accessible to all residents within a development , which may be owned in undivided interest by all the residents of the development , and it may remain in its natural state or may be landscaped or improved for passive or active recreational activities. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
COMPACT CAR 
A motor vehicle that is one hundred eighty-one (181) inches or less in length, measured from front to rear bumper. 
COMPANY 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means electric service provider or its contractors or other persons constructing electric facilities and distribution facilities. 
COMPOSTING 
A process of accelerated biodegradation and stabilization of organic material under controlled conditions yielding a product which can safely be used as fertilizer. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
COMPOUND 
Three or more attached or detached dwelling units on one lot and located in the RC-5, RC-8, RAC, AC or BCD districts. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL CORRECTIONS PROGRAM 
A community residential program for persons currently in the custody of, or recently released by, correctional authorities which is designed to offer an alternative to imprisonment and/or to facilitate ex-offender reintegration into community life. 
CONDUCTOR 
As used on Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means a substance or body, usually in the form of a wire, cable or busbar, that allows a current of electricity to pass continuously along it. 
CONSTRUCTED RAIN GARDEN 
A shallow water retention pond built to store water and provide bio-filtration , where the soil is amended to a minimum depth of eighteen inches with one part organic matter to two parts soil and planted with grasses, shrubs or trees. 
CONSTRUCTED WETLAND 
An artificial wetland designed and planted to store water and filter, process, absorb or breakdown waste products or pollutants. 
CONTIGUOUS LOTS 
Two or more lots with one or more common boundaries. 
CONTINUING CARE COMMUNITY 
A residential community that provides a variety of living accommodations and differing levels of health care services to elderly or persons with disabilities as follows: 
(A)  a continuing care community shall include: 
(1)  congregate housing in which residents live in rooms without individual kitchen facilities and in which at least the following services are provided: common meal preparation, common dining, recreation and social areas, room cleaning, laundry and transportation; and 
(2)  a full nursing care unit with beds; 
(B)  a continuing health care community may include: 
(1)  independent dwelling units for the elderly or persons with disabilities who are not in need of the level of care or services provided in congregate housing or an extended care facility, but who desire to live in a community where such services are available; and 
(2)  an extended care facility; and 
(C)  a hospital is not a continuing care community. 
CONTOUR LINE 
A line adjoining points of equal elevation on a topographic map. 
CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE 
A structure , located in a historic district, approximately fifty years old or older that helps to establish and maintain the character of that historic district. Although a contributing structure is not unique in itself, it adds to the historic associations or historic architectural design qualities that are significant for a district. The contributing structure may have had minor alterations , but its integrity remains. 
COOL SEASON TURF 
Grasses that require large volumes or frequent applications of water, including Kentucky bluegrasses, perennial rye grasses, fine fescues and tall fescues. 
COUNTY 
The county of Santa Fe. 
CROP PRODUCTION 
An area used for the raising or harvesting of agricultural crops intended to provide food or fiber. 
CULTURAL REMAINS 
The remains of prior human occupation or activity over seventy-five years of age, whether portable or nonportable, including historic and prehistoric artifacts , architectural features, human skeletal remains, animal skeletal remains found in an archaeological context, rock carvings and culturally altered landscapes . 
CULTURALLY ALTERED LANDSCAPE 
A landscape modified by human activity, including roadways, agricultural fields, farming terraces and irrigation ditches or other water control devices. 
CUT 
The removal of earth material from the surface of the land. 
DECK 
A structure , without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building that has an average elevation of thirty inches or greater from finished grade. A deck may be constructed of any material. 
DENSITY 
The extent of development per unit of area. In residential areas or development projects, density is typically expressed in dwelling units per acre. 
DESIGN DEVELOPMENT DRAWINGS 
Preliminary submittals drawn to scale that fully delineate the architectural characteristics of a structure , but that are not detailed enough to be considered working or construction drawings. 
DESIGN OBJECTIVES 
As used for the BCD, means a desirable or optimum set of physical characteristics that distinguish each townscape subdistrict. Design objectives for each subdistrict form the basis for the development of townscape district standards governing the preservation or development , or both, within subdistricts. 
DETENTION 
The temporary storage of storm water to prevent excessive or excessively rapid runoff. 
DEVELOPMENT 
A manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including buildings or other structures , mining, dredging, filling , grading , paving, excavation or drilling operations, with the exception of routine maintenance and repair. 
DISPLAY LOT 
A lot used primarily for the purpose of retail sales. 
DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means the system of lines and poles, including the transformers and switches, and related appurtenances located thereon, that connects between transmission network and customer load that operates at electrical voltages of 40kV or below. 
DRAINAGE EASEMENT 
The total area of land dedicated or reserved by plat or otherwise acquired by the city , the county or the state primarily for the movement of storm water through a drainageway or land susceptible to flooding and for the maintenance of drainage structures . (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
DRAINAGEWAY 
A natural or artificial land surface depression, with or without perceptibly defined bed and banks, to which or through which surface runoff gravitates, collects, impounds or is channeled for disposition. 
DRIVE-IN 
An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service or packaging procedures encourages or allows customers to receive services, obtain or consume goods or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY 
A residential building containing two or more dwelling units on one lot , or two or more detached principal units on one lot . 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY 
One principal dwelling unit , occupied by one family , located on a lot without other principal uses or structures . Single- family dwelling includes a manufactured home but does not include a mobile home . 
DWELLING UNIT 
One or more rooms connected together constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment occupied by one family , for either owner occupancy, rental or lease and physically separated from any other dwelling unit that may be in the same structure , and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities; provided that the term does not include group housing, hotels or motels . 
EARTH COLOR or EARTH TONE 
Muted and flat colors found in the earth in the area of the development , consistent with a sample palette of earth tone colors maintained by the land use director , and which may include dull or matte off-white (yeso) but not bright white or chocolate brown. 
EARTH MATERIAL 
Rock, natural soil or fill and any combination of these. 
ECOLOGICAL RESOURCE RESTORATION: 
(A)  erosion prevention and control, including protection of natural drainage channels and compliance with an approved storm water drainage management plan; 
(B)  preservation of significant native trees and other native site vegetation, including protection of natural area buffer zones; 
(C)  conservation of water, including preservation of existing native vegetation, reduction in amounts or irrigated areas and similar considerations; 
(D)  stream corridor and wetland protection and buffering; 
(E)  site topography, including such characteristics as steepness of slopes , existing drainage features, rock outcroppings, river and stream terraces, valley walls, ridgelines and scenic topographic features; 
(F)  floodplains and flood ways ; 
(G)  wildlife movement corridors; and 
(H)  hydrology and groundwater flow. 
ELECTRIC FACILITIES 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities): 
(A)  40kV and above transmission lines; 
(B)  Switching stations; 
(C)  Substations; or 
(D)  The placement of 3 or more distribution poles and related lines. 
ELECTRIC PROJECT 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), the placement of 40kV and above transmission lines, switching stations, and substations; the upgrade, replacement , or relocation of any 40kV and above transmission lines, switching stations and substations; and the placement of more than 3 new distribution poles (not reviewed through the development review and building permit process). 
ELECTRIC STRUCTURE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), one or more poles connected to each other by braces, cross arms or grounding systems with insulators and other hardware and carrying device electric service. 
EMERGENCY 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means any repair, restoration or replacement of an electric facilities made necessary because of a sudden unexpected event which has created a condition which is an immediate and continuing threat to the safety of property or persons. 
EMERGENCY FACILITIES 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means electric facilities and distribution facilities used to provide service due to emergency conditions. 
EMPLOYEE 
As used in Section 14-6.3(C)(2) (Standards for Specific Accessory Uses), means a person who is a full- or part-time worker, partner or independent contractor of a home occupation and who visits the site of the home occupation on a regular basis. 
EQUIPMENT CABINET 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications), means a storage cabinet used exclusively for the protection of telecommunications equipment. 
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) 
As used in Section 14-8.14, means a service unit measure representing the impact of a typical single-family dwelling on the park system. A typical single-family dwelling represents, on average, one EDU. Other types of units each represent a fraction of an EDU, based on their relative average household sizes. 
ERECT 
To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and includes the painting of wall signs . 
EROSION 
The wearing away of ground surfaces as a result of the movement of wind, water and ice. 
EROSION CONTROL STRUCTURES 
Manmade improvements that are intended to limit or control erosion . 
EXCAVATION 
The mechanical removal of earth material. 
EXISTING CONDITIONS ASSESSMENT 
As used in Section 14-5.2, means written, graphic and photographic documentation of existing conditions in a historic compound as specified by city policy. 
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY 
A facility that provides health-related care and services on a regular basis to persons who do not require the degree of care and treatment that a hospital is designated to provide, but who, because of their mental or physical condition, require extended care and services that can be made available to them only through an institutional facility that provides at least two and three quarters hours of nursing care to each person daily. Extended care facility includes nursing homes and convalescent homes. 
EXTERIOR WALL AND ROOF COVERING 
The material or assembly of materials applied to the exterior surface of a wall or roof for weather resistance or appearance, but excluding structural elements of the wall or roof such as decking or sheathing. 
FAADE 
One whole exterior face or elevation of a structure from grade up to and including the top of the parapet. An individual faade is defined as including at least an eight-foot width that is offset from an adjacent plane by at least four feet. 
FACEMOUNT ANTENNA 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications), means a camouflaged antenna attached to and covering a small portion of the surface of a building , architecturally integrated into the supporting structure . 
FACILITY EXPANSION 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital improvement , in order that the existing facility may serve new development . The term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development . 
FAMILY: 
(A)  a natural person; 
(B)  two or more natural persons related by blood, marriage, legal guardianship or adoption, plus resident domestic servants; or 
(C)  a group of not more than five natural persons living together in a dwelling unit . 
FARM AREA 
The area of a lot designated for activities and uses defined as urban agriculture. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
FARM STAND 
A table, stall, tent or other non-permanent structure located on an urban farm and operated by a vendor with a city-issued business license to sell to the public agricultural products grown on the same property where the farm stand is located, not to exceed 48 square feet in size. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
FARM STRUCTURES 
Structures that may include, but are not limited to, sheds (tool and packing), compost bins, shade pavilions, farm stands , trellises or other vertical supports for growing crops, and structures used to extend the growing season such as greenhouses , hoop houses, cold frames, and similar structures. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
FILL 
The artificial deposition of earth material. 
FILLING STATION 
The buildings and premises where motor vehicle fuels, lubricating oils, grease, batteries, tires and incidental vehicular accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, or, in connection with a private operation where the general public is excluded from the use of the facilities, where vehicular lubrication, brake adjustment, washing and related services may be rendered. Filling station does not include facilities that provide major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics found in a repair garage or a body shop. 
FINAL ACTION 
The action taken that completes review of and decision on an application or appeal; see Section 14-3.17(A)(1). 
FINAL APPROVAL 
As used in Section 14-8.14, means the date that a plat or development plan is recorded with the county clerk. This date is to be used to determine the beginning of the assessment period for which a permit would be charged impact fees according to a given fee schedule. 
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE 
A fully funded account approved by the city and established with the City of Santa Fe or a financial institution in the state of New Mexico that may be drawn upon by the city to cover specific improvements or repairs and pursuant to Chapter 55 of NM Statutes 1978. 
FLEA MARKET 
An outdoor market conducted by an operator as a business where spaces are rented, leased or are otherwise available to individual vendors who offer goods for sale to the public. Fewer than five individual vendors located on a property do not constitute a flea market. Flea markets do not include carnivals or similar functions primarily offering services or recreation. 
FLOOD or FLOODING 
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(A)  the overflow of inland waters; or 
(B)  the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
FLOOD FRINGE 
The portion of the special flood hazard area that is outside of the floodway . (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
FLOOD HAZARD ZONE 
A special flood hazard area , inclusive of the floodway and the flood fringe , where applicable. (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) 
The official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (Ord. No. 2012-19  6) 
FLOODPLAIN 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2012-19  4) 
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 
The person designated by the land use director to administer the city 's flood regulations. The person shall be a state -certified floodplain manager as provided in Section 3-18-7 NMSA 1978. 
FLOODPLAIN INSURANCE STUDY 
The official report provided by the federal emergency management agency that contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood , as well as the flood boundary- floodway map and an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations , or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
FLOOD PROOFING 
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property , water and sanitary facilities or structures and their contents. 
FLOODWAY 
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that is reserved to discharge the one-percent chance event without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot in height. 
FLORIST 
A cultivator of or dealer in flowers or ornamental plants. 
FOOTPRINT 
The configuration of the area of ground covered by a structure , including all its parts. 
FOSTER HOME 
A dwelling unit maintained by a person licensed by the appropriate state agencies to have the control of a maximum of eight children, including foster, adopted and natural children, for periods exceeding twenty-four hours. 
FREEBOARD 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave actions, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
FRENCH DRAIN 
An artificial in-ground trench or other volume of rock or other material that distributes water for plant material use or infiltration. 
FUGITIVE WATER 
The pumping, flow, release, escape or leakage of water from a pipe, valve, faucet, connection, diversion, well or water supply, transport, storage, disposal or delivery system or facility onto adjacent property or the public or private right-of-way , an arroyo or other water course, whether natural or manmade, or onto a paved or non-planted landscape area. 
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE 
As used in Section 14-3.10 (Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas) means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as bridges and piers. 
FUNERAL HOME 
A building used for the preparation of the dead for burial and the display of the dead and ceremonies connected with the dead before burial or cremation. 
GABLED ROOF 
A type of pitched roof characterized by a vertical triangular portion at two opposite sides of the building and frequently characterized by dormers. The triangular portion extends from the level of the cornice or eaves to the ridge of the roof. See Illustration 14-5.2-7, "Examples of Roof Types". 
GARAGE 
A structure , or part of a structure used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. 
GENERAL PLAN 
The Santa Fe general plan adopted by Resolution No. 1999-45, as amended. 
GIFT SHOP 
A retail establishment , a majority of whose gross receipts are derived from the sale of items commonly referred to as gifts or souvenirs, including arts and crafts; toys; clothing, such as caps and t-shirts; house wares, such as novelty or souvenir mugs, glasses and plates; souvenir photographs; collectibles; natural or manmade artifacts ; leather goods; jewelry; home furnishings; imported gift items; candy; glassware; and toiletries. 
GLARE 
The brightness of a light source that causes eye discomfort, including: 
(A)  nuisance glare, which means light that creates an annoyance or aggravation, but does not create a potentially hazardous situation; and 
(B)  disabling glare, which means light that impairs visibility and creates a potentially hazardous situation for either pedestrians or motorists. 
GOVERNING BODY 
The city council and the mayor acting in their official capacities during a meeting of a quorum. 
GRADE 
The ground level of a specified area of land; the act of grading . (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
GRADING 
Any excavating or filling or combination of excavating and filling . 
GRAY WATER 
Untreated household wastewater that has not come into contact with toilet waste. Gray water includes used water from bathtubs, showers, bathroom wash basins, clothes washing machines and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. 
GREENHOUSE 
A structure whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants. 
GROCERY STORE, NEIGHBORHOOD 
A retail establishment , with or without a related dwelling unit , catering mainly to a local market area, primarily dispensing foods and beverages, but also dispensing certain incidental items not intended for human consumption, but not including the sale of motor vehicle fuels nor any sales or display outside of an enclosed building . 
GROSS DENSITY 
The housing density calculated by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the total area in residential development in accordance with Chapter 14. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA 
The total floor area, including basements, mezzanines, interior balconies and upper floors expressed in square feet, measured from the outside surface of the outside walls. 
GROUND LEVEL URBAN FARMS 
The use of a lot on the ground plan for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
GROUP HOME 
A dwelling unit licensed by the appropriate state agency where full-time shelter, rehabilitation, care and supervision are given on a non-institutional basis to children or adults who are neglected, abandoned, or who have physical, mental or developmental disabilities, mental illness, or substance or alcohol dependence. Live-in nursing care is not a primary part of the services provided. (Ord. No. 2012-11  29) 
GROUP RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY 
A non- family dwelling unit where care, supervision and services are provided to residents of any age who have difficulty caring for themselves, including the elderly, persons with disabilities and children living apart from families . This category includes facilities commonly known as group homes , community residential care, board and care or assisted living facilities, halfway houses and foster homes . This category does not include facilities that provide services to nonresident clients; that provide more than incidental or occasional nursing, medical or other therapeutic treatment, such as extended care facilities , hospitals or detoxification centers; or community residential corrections programs . 
GROUP RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, LIMITED 
A group residential care facility for eight or fewer resident clients who are not participants in a community residential correctional program . 
HEATED LIVING AREA 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees) and for the purpose of assessing and collecting impact fees for residential dwelling units , means all floor area enclosed, heated and intended for daily habitation, including kitchens, bedrooms, living or family rooms, dens, laundry rooms and associated interior stairs and closets. Unless heated and intended as living area, the term excludes garages , solariums and porches. Heated living area is measured from the outside surface of the outside walls enclosing the contiguous floor area. 
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE 
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure . 
HIPPED ROOF 
A type of pitched roof characterized by the intersection of four or more roof planes, the eave lines of which are not parallel. See Illustration 14-5.2-7, "Examples of Roof Types". 
HISTORIC COMPOUND 
An identifiable grouping of historic resources, including buildings , structures and landscaping elements, as described in Section 14-5.2(K)(2)(a). Historic compounds may be comprised of more than one lot . 
HISTORIC COMPOUND PLAN 
A comprehensive, long-term plan describing any planned modifications, including demolitions, additions or exterior rehabilitations, to existing structures or buildings , landscaping or new construction in the historic compound . 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE 
A structure that is fifty years old or older. 
HOME OCCUPATION 
An occupation or business activity that results in a product or service and that is conducted for gainful employment in a dwelling unit by a person residing in that dwelling unit. A home occupation is customarily incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit. 
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION 
A private nonprofit corporation of homeowners for the purpose of owning, operating and maintaining various common properties . 
HOSPITAL 
An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and includes, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
HOTEL 
A facility offering transient lodging and accommodations, with or without individual kitchens, to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities. 
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (HOP) 
The Housing Opportunity Program set forth in Article 26-1 (Santa Fe Homes Program). (Ord. No. 2012-11  30) 
HUMAN SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT 
A facility, which may or may not be a lodging facility, operated by a organization that provides aid to more than twenty-five persons in need of counseling, food, clothing, lodging, financial or legal assistance, out-patient health services, vocational and educational training and related services. Lodging may be provided on an emergency or transitional basis and consist of dormitory rooms or individual lodging units containing sleeping facilities with or without kitchen or living room facilities available for daily, weekly or monthly stays. 
HYDROPONICS 
The propagation of plants using a mechanical system designed to circulate a solution of minerals in water, for distribution to retailers, restaurants and consumers. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-28  6) 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE 
A built or paved area that will not absorb storm water; provided that impervious surface does not include graveled surfaces. 
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL 
Any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
INDIVIDUAL STORAGE AREAS WITHIN A COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING 
Mini-storage units that are not directly accessible from the outside of the building. 
INFILL 
The development of more intensive land uses on vacant or underutilized sites. 
INFILTRATION BASIN 
Storage of storm water or other runoff in a facility that empties solely by moving into the soil or through evaporation. 
INFILTRATION FIELD OR GALLERY 
A below grade water system that collects, infiltrates and distributes storm water or other run-off. 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
Facilities needed to sustain development activities, including water and sewer lines, electric, gas, telephone service, storm drainage systems and streets and roads. 
INSIDE TURNING RADIUS 
The radius of the curve made by the inside wheel of the vehicle. 
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING 
A building used for governmental, religious, educational, public health care and similar purposes, but does not include clinics and medical offices. 
INTENSITY 
The extent of development per unit of area; or the level of use as determined by the number of employees and customers and degree of impact on surrounding properties such as noise and traffic. 
INTERIOR NONSTRUCTURAL ELEMENTS 
Interior walls, doors, floor coverings and ceiling systems that are not part of the building structure . 
INTERVAL USE 
The use of a unit or units for which the exclusive right of use or occupancy circulates among various owners for a contractually limited period or periods of time. 
JOINT USE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), the use in common of a particular facility by two or more entities, such as the attachment of a telecommunications company's antenna or other telecommunications apparatus on the transmission structure of an electric utility. 
JUNKYARD 
Any area, lot , land, parcel , building or structure or part of these used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap; discarded goods, materials or machinery; two or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles; or other type of junk. A junkyard does not include such uses conducted entirely in an enclosed building . 
KENNEL 
A commercial establishment where animals are boarded, kept or maintained. 
LAMP 
The light-producing source installed in a luminaire . 
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means a description of the service area and projections of changes in land uses, densities , intensities and population in the service area over at least a five-year period. 
LAND USE BOARD 
A city board, commission, committee or authority that has jurisdiction over any matter arising under Chapter 14 or otherwise within the jurisdiction of the land use director , including the board of adjustment, the planning commission and summary committee, the historic districts review board and the archaeological review committee. 
LAND USE DIRECTOR 
The director of the land use department or the director's designee. 
LAND-USE INTENSITY CREDIT 
The granting of additional development capacity above the base line floor area ratio , expressed in gross floor areas . 
LANDMARK 
A site, building , structure or natural feature that has visual, historic or cultural significance and is listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National Register of Historic Places. 
LANDMARK STRUCTURE 
A structure outside a historic district that otherwise meets the definition of a significant structure . A structure may also be a landmark structure if it is listed on or is eligible to be listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National Register of Historic Places. 
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT 
A person who is licensed by the state to design, construct and install decorative and functional alterations and plantings of grounds, including natural and manmade irrigation and drainage facilities. 
LANDSCAPE DESIGN INTENT 
The project design approach, including the proposed treatment of existing vegetation, if applicable that is: 
(A)  primarily native landscape , which may incorporate non-native plant material; 
(B)  urban landscape , with street trees or other urban design elements; or 
(C)  a combination of Subsections A and B of this definition. 
LANDSCAPE TREATMENT 
The addition of a predominantly vegetative combination of trees, shrubs, ground cover, rocks, woodchips, gravel, fences, walls , earth berms, planters, water features, art objects and landscape furniture to accomplish functions such as screening, shade, special definition, buffers, erosion control and ornamental enhancement. 
LANDSCAPING 
The planting and maintaining of live plants and the use of some natural and manufactured materials, including walls , fences and earth berms. 
LAUNDROMAT 
An establishment providing washing and drying machines on the premises for rent to the general public. 
LEGAL LOT OF RECORD 
A lot that was created prior to the date of any applicable provision of law that required the lot to be approved as part of a subdivision, or that has been created as part of a subdivision created in accordance with all applicable laws or ordinances, or that has been created by a court order as provided in Section 14-3.7(A)(6), or for which a certificate of compliance has been issued pursuant to Section 14-3.7(A)(7)(b). The lot must be shown on a duly recorded plat or other written instrument that adequately describes the lot , that is recorded with the county clerk, and that documents compliance with this definition. (Ord. No. 2013-16  66) 
LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOT 
A legal lot of record that fails to conform to the standards of this Chapter for lots , such as the area, dimension or location or access requirements. 
LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE 
A structure or portion of a structure that was lawfully constructed but that fails to conform to the standards of Chapter 14 for structures , such as restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, required yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot as a consequence of annexation of the structure into the city or as a consequence of adoption of or amendments to Chapter 14. 
LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE 
A use that was lawfully established, but that fails to conform to the use regulations of this chapter as a consequence of annexation into the city or as a consequence of adoption of or amendments to Chapter 14. 
LICENSEE 
A person who has received written permission or a license to undertake an activity regulated by Chapter 14. 
LIGHT ASSEMBLY AND MANUFACTURING 
The manufacturing and assembly of small electronic or machine parts, consumer goods, food or food ingredients, dry goods and other goods and services that are produced or assembled inside a building . 
LIGHT POLLUTION 
The general sky glow caused by the scattering of artificial light in the atmosphere that results in decreased ability to see the natural night sky. 
LIGHT TRESPASS 
The light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the property on which the luminaire is installed. 
LINEAR FACILITIES 
The lines, cables, fibers or any other such carriers that are linear in nature and that are used for the transmission of water, gas, electricity, data, video images, voice images or other such services. 
LIVE CRIB WALLS 
A bioengineering method by which box-like structures of interlocking timbers backfilled with alternating layers of soil and branch cuttings are used to stabilize a slope , with roots of cuttings extending into the slope to provide structural support. 
LIVE STAKING 
A bioengineering method by which plant cuttings are inserted directly into a slope to provide initial slope protection and to strengthen the slope's resistance to erosion and undercutting. 
LOADING SPACE 
A distinct area logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries scaled to the size of the delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles. 
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET 
The space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. 
LOT 
A tract , plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land with clearly defined boundaries. 
LOT FRONTAGE 
The part of a lot abutting the street from which primary access to the lot is obtained. 
LOT ACCESS DRIVEWAY 
A driveway providing access from a lot to a street that the lot does not front on, other than any frontage provided by the driveway, such as occurs with flag lots and common access driveways. 
LOT, CORNER 
A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets or at the intersection of a common driveway or access road servicing more than one lot . A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost point of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot , or an extension of the lot where it has been rounded by a street radius, meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. See lots marked AE in the Lot Types diagram. 
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE 
A lot having its front and rear lot lines coincident with street right-of-way lines. 
LOT, INTERIOR 
A lot other than a corner lot , with only one frontage on a street other than an alley. See lots marked B in the Lot Types diagram. 
LOT, IRREGULAR 
A lot , other than a regular lot , not necessarily abutting a public street , that is located, shaped or oriented to adjacent lots in such a way that the usual required yards of this Chapter are impractical and may not be logically determined. See definition of "YARD, SPECIAL". 
LOT, REGULAR 
A lot abutting a public street that is so located, shaped or oriented to adjacent lots that the required yards of this Chapter may be applied. A regular lot has the location of its front, side and rear required yards determined by and related to adjacent yard patterns. 
LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE 
A lot that is at right angles, or approximately right angles, to the general pattern of lots in the area involved. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot or an interior lot , A-D and B-D in the Lot Types diagram, or even, in rare cases, a through lot , which is not illustrated. 
LOT SIZE 
A general term including the various dimensions of the lot such as area, width and depth; or the area of land included within the boundaries of a lot . (Ord. No. 2014-31  52) 
LOT, THROUGH 
A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley. Through lots with frontage on two streets may be referred to as " double frontage lots ". See lot marked C in the Lot Types diagram. 

LOWEST FLOOR 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is built in compliance with the applicable non-elevation design requirement of 44 CFR Section 60.3, the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
LUMINAIRE 
A complete lighting unit, including the lamps , together with the parts required to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
MAJOR ROADWAY SYSTEM 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means all major and minor arterials identified on the Santa Fe functional road classifications map within the urban area. 
MANUFACTURED HOME 
A structure transportable in one or more sections that is: 
(A)  built on a permanent chassis; 
(B)  designed for use with or without a permanent foundation; 
(C)  constructed to the standards of the United States department of housing and urban development, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, the Housing and Urban Development Zone Code 2 or the applicable building code, as of the date of the unit's construction; 
(D)  installed consistent with the Manufactured Housing Act and with the rules promulgated pursuant to that act relating to permanent foundations; and 
(E)  for the purposes of Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), connected to the required utilities. 
For floodplain management purposes, manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty consecutive days, but does not include those vehicles as manufactured homes for flood insurance purposes. 
MANUFACTURING 
The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors. 
MARQUEE 
An exterior roof-like projection over an entrance or window. 
MINI-STORAGE UNITS 
The separate storage spaces of varying sizes within one or more structures that are leased or rented on an individual basis. 
MIXED USE 
The development of a tract of land, building or structure in a compact urban form with two or more different uses, including residential , office, manufacturing, retail, public use, light industrial or entertainment. 
MOBILE HOME 
A structure that is: 
(A)  transportable in one or more sections; 
(B)  built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit , with or without a permanent foundation; and 
(C)  not constructed to the standards of the United States department of housing and urban development, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, the Housing and Urban Development Zone Code 2 and the Uniform Building Code. 
MOBILE HOME PARK 
A development in existence prior to December 10, 2012 (effective date of this Ordinance No. 2012-37) consisting of the premises where one or more mobile homes are parked for residential use or where spaces or lots are set aside or offered for sale or rent for use by mobile homes for residential use, including any land, building , structure or facility used by occupants of mobile homes on such premises , but does not include a single mobile home located on a lot in a residential district pursuant to a special use permit . Manufactured homes may be located within mobile home parks as provided in Section 14-7.2(I)(7). (Ord. No. 2012-37  6) 
MOBILE HOME SPACE 
A plot of land within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home or manufactured home . (Ord. No. 2012-37  6) 
MOBILE HOME STAND 
That portion of the mobile home space intended for occupancy by the mobile home or manufactured home proper, consisting of dimensions to be determined by the size of the unit to be accommodated. (Ord. No. 2012-37  6) 
MODULAR HOME 
A prefabricated structure built to all applicable building codes and used as a permanent building or dwelling unit that does not have permanent or temporary axles of its own and that is connected permanently to an on-site foundation made exclusively for that modular home or building . 
MOTEL 
An establishment providing transient lodging and accommodations, with or without kitchens, to the general public and containing six or more rooms with at least twenty-five percent of all rooms having direct access to the outside premises without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building . 
MOUNTAINOUS AND DIFFICULT TERRAIN 
Any parcel or portion of a parcel that lies in the area labeled as mountainous and difficult terrain on the official zoning map and where over twenty-five percent of the square footage of the parcel has an existing slope of over twenty percent. 
MULCH 
Any material applied to the surface of the soil to decrease moisture loss and control the growth of weeds; organic mulches include bark and wood chips, straw, grass, hay, compost and seed shells and inorganic mulches include rock and gravel. 
MUSEUM 
An institution devoted to the procurement, care, study and display to the public of objects that have lasting interest or value. (Ord. No. 2013-16  65) 
NATURAL SLOPE 
The elevation of the ground surface before any grading . 
NET LEASABLE AREA 
Present or potentially habitable space designed for owner or tenant occupancy and exclusive use. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION 
As used in Section 14-8.3 for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 1977-47. 
NEW DEVELOPMENT 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means the subdivision of land; reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration , relocation or enlargement of any structure ; or any use or extension of the use of land, any of which increases the number of service units. 
NIGHTCLUB 
An establishment that provides, in combination with service of alcoholic beverages, amplified live entertainment or amplified music for dancing after the hour of 10:00 p.m. 
NONCONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE 
A structure , located in an H district, that is less than fifty years old or that does not exhibit sufficient historic integrity to establish and maintain the character of the H District. 
NONRESIDENTIAL 
All uses not defined as residential . 
NOXIOUS WEED 
Any living stage, including seeds and reproductive parts, of any parasitic or other plant designated as a noxious weed by the New Mexico Department of Agriculture, including Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila), Russian olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia), tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima) and salt cedar (Tamarix spp.). 
OBJECT 
As used in Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts), means the term used to distinguish from structures those constructions that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale and simply constructed, for example, sculpture, monuments, boundary markers, statuary and fountains. 
OBSTRUCTION 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means any object, structure , embankment, excavation , channel or drainage way that may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either by itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the obstruction downstream to the danger and injury of life or property. 
OCCUPANCY 
The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used or the number of people who are allowed to live in a dwelling unit or to occupy an assembly area. Also, the act of occupying or commencing occupation of land or structures . 
OFFICE 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business , profession, service, industry or government. 
OFF-STREET PARKING 
The area of a lot used for required temporary vehicular parking. 
ONE PERCENT CHANCE EVENT 
A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A one percent chance event is the same as a base flood . 
OPEN SPACE 
An outdoor area that permanently provides light and air and that satisfies, in whole or in part, the community's visual, psychological and recreational needs. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
OPERATING LICENSE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(A)(5) (Short-Term Rental of Dwelling Units), means a business license valid for one year, that authorizes the maintenance and operation of a mobile home park . 
OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURE 
As used in Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts), means a canopy , awning or street clock. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE 
The keeping in an open area of any equipment, goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four hours. 
OWNER 
With regard to real property , a person who holds fee simple title to real property , or a person acting lawfully on behalf of the person who holds title. (Ord. No. 2013-16  66) 
OWNER-OCCUPANT or RESIDENT OWNER 
As used in Subsections 14-6.2(A)(5) (Short-Term Rental of Dwelling Units) and 14-6.3(D)(1) (Accessory Dwelling Units) means a natural person who holds fee simple title and resides on the property . (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
OWNERS' ASSOCIATION 
A private nonprofit corporation or similar legal entity of property or condominium owners for the purpose of owning, operating and maintaining various common infrastructure facilities and/or properties . (Ord. No. 2013-16  66) 
PARCEL 
A lot of record or tract of land. 
PARKWAY 
The part of the street right-of-way lying between the back of the curb and the outer edge of the right-of-way and typically including the sidewalk and planting strip . (Ord. No. 2013-16  65) 
PARTY 
As used in Section 14-3.17 (Appeals), means an applicant , an appellant or the land use director and all agents and representatives of that person . 
PASSIVE RECREATION 
Recreational activities that are not dependent on recreational apparatus such as swings, slides, goal posts or backstops and sports that do not comprise organized recreational activities such as baseball, volleyball, football or soccer. 
PASSIVE WATER HARVESTING 
The collection or storage of precipitation or runoff in surface or in-ground structures with no means of mechanical distribution. 
PERFORMANCE STANDARD 
A set of criteria or limits relating to elements that a particular use or process may not exceed. 
PERMEABLE PAVING 
Paving and subgrade that allow surface water to penetrate the paved surface and infiltrate the subsoil. 
PERMIT 
A document issued by the city that allows a person to begin an activity provided for in Chapter 14. 
PERSON 
Except where limited to natural persons by definition, context or intent, person includes natural persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies, associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies or other legal entities. 
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY 
A residential facility for twenty-six or more persons sixty years of age or older that provides living and sleeping facilities with common meal preparation, laundry services, room cleaning and assistance in daily living activities, and may provide other services such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments and counseling. A personal care facility for the elderly does not include independent kitchens or complete dwelling units and is not an extended care facility , hotel , motel or residential suite hotel or motel . 
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT 
A business primarily engaged in providing frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature, including beauty or barber shops, shoe repair shops and tailor shops. 
PHARMACY 
A place where drugs and other medicines are dispensed. 
PLACEMENT 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means installation of electric facilities , but which are not relocation or replacement as defined in Article 14-12, where similar facilities have not previously existed. 
PLANTING STRIP 
A linear landscaped area typically located within or adjoining a parkway . (Ord. No. 2013-16  66) 
PLAT 
The map, chart, survey, plan or replat certified by a professional land surveyor that contains a description of subdivided land with ties to permanent monuments. 
POLE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means steel, wood or other material placed in the ground to hold associated insulators, braces and other attachment hardware for electric service. 
PORCH 
A roofed space outside the main walls of a structure at street or first floor level, which has a depth of not less than four feet from the outside face. 
PORTAL 
A long porch or portico with roof, supported by vertical posts. 
POTABLE WATER 
Water that is suitable for consumption by humans. 
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E), any tower or antenna for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this section, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired and including towers and antennas given interim approvals during the pendency Section 14-6.2(E), and not found by the governing body to be contrary to the purposes of Section 14-6.2(E). 
PREMISES 
A lot or combination of contiguous lots developed or approved for development as a unified complex of structures or uses, such as a planned unit development or a commercial or industrial center with common parking or access easements, regardless of whether the lots are held in single ownership and the buildings , structures or other appurtenances on the lots . 
PRESERVATION 
The act or process of applying measures to maintain and sustain the existing form, integrity and material of a building , structure or district and the existing form of a site. 
PRESIDING OFFICER 
The person elected or appointed to direct the conduct of a public hearing. The presiding officer of a committee is the chairperson; the presiding officer of the governing body is the mayor or mayor pro tempore. 
PRIMARY FAADE 
One or more principal faces or elevations of a building with features that define the character of the building's architecture. 
PRINCIPAL 
Primary or predominant, as applied to a use or structure , as distinguished from secondary or accessory . 
PRIVATE CLUB or LODGE 
A facility for social, cultural or educational activities open only to bona fide members and guests of the private organization operating the club or lodge, except those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business . 
PRIVATE OPEN SPACE 
Open space adjoining each dwelling unit , designed to provide privacy and having one or more points of ingress to the residence. 
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER 
A person licensed by the state to practice engineering. 
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR 
A person licensed by the state to practice land surveying. 
PROJECT 
As used in Sections 14-3.11(C) (Architectural Design Review) and 14-8.7 (Architectural Design Review), means all new exterior construction, except for maintenance, minor repairs, restoration and temporary structures , submitted to the city under a single application . 
PROPERTY 
A parcel or parcels of land commonly owned and contiguous, excluding streets and rights of way . 
PUBLIC BENEFIT USE 
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, courtyards or other recreational areas and other public open spaces ; scenic and historic sites; and property used by a nonprofit or charitable organization. 
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS and QUASI PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
Certain improvements with a life expectancy of ten or more years ad that will be used by the public or used in common by owners of lots within a subdivision, or used in common by owners or tenants of a commercial or multiple-family residential development . Public and quasi-public improvements include infrastructure , emergency access and fire suppression, terrain management improvements including revegetation and site restoration, storm drainage facilities and landscaping of common areas as determined by the land use director in accordance with written policies. Infrastructure that will be dedicated to the city or another government agency, to a public utility company or to an owners association is also included. See Section 14-9.1(B). 
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
The total area of the land deeded, reserved by plat or otherwise acquired by the city , the county or the state primarily for the use of the public for the movement of people, goods and vehicles and for the installation and maintenance of public utilities or drainage ways . 
PUBLIC UTILITY 
An agency that, under public franchise or ownership or under a certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection or similar service. 
PUBLICLY VISIBLE 
The portion of a structure visible from a public street , way or other area to which the public has legal access; and provided that to be publicly visible, a structure need not be adjacent to a public street or way or area to which the public has legal access. 
PUMICE WICK 
An artificial in-ground trench or other volume of porous rock that stores water for plant material use. 
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means a professional engineer , professional land surveyor , financial analyst or planner who provides services within the scope of his license, education or experience. 
QUALIFYING OPEN SPACE 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  50) 
RAIN BARREL 
A small above-ground storage tank, typically twenty-five to two hundred gallons, that collects and stores roof runoff from canals, downspouts or other sources. 
RANCH STYLE ROOF 
A type of pitched roof with two sloping planes with a pitch less than a six (6) inch vertical rise in a twelve-inch horizontal run. 
RECONDUCTOR 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means to increase the capacity of a line by removing the existing conductor and replacing it with a larger size conductor that will be operated at the same voltage. 
RECONNAISSANCE 
A visual examination of land surfaces that are to be disturbed, and archival research of that property . 
RECONSTRUCT 
Substantially replace a structure or portion of a structure . 
RECREATION FACILITY 
A city -owned facility used for public recreation, including active or passive recreation and sports, playgrounds and trails. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE 
A vehicular-type portable structure without permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled or driven and that is primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping or travel use and includes travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. 
REFRAMING 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means work on a pole or electric structure that involves replacing structural members, improving clearances, and other maintenance, replacement or retrofits on existing poles or electric structures . 
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY 
A use located in a permanent building that provides regular organized religious worship and related incidental activities, except primary or secondary schools and day care facilities. 
RELOCATION 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means removal of existing electric facilities and reinstallation of those facilities or new similar facilities in a new location not more than fifty (50) feet distant from the original location. 
REMODELING 
A change, including a reconstruction, in an architectural feature of a structure ; provided that remodeling does not include the construction of additions. 
REPLACEMENT 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means removal of existing facilities and installation of new similar facilities in a location as close as practicable to the original location. 
REPAIR GARAGE 
The buildings and premises that are designed and intended for some or all of the purposes indicated under the definition of filling station and designed and intended to perform major mechanical repairs and body work; provided, that body work and painting must be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and self-propelled vehicles not in safe operating condition must be stored in fully enclosed buildings . 
RESIDENTIAL 
Term used to describe occupancy , structures or districts primarily intended for or restricted to development and use for dwelling units . It does not include hotels or motels . 
RESIDENTIAL SUITE HOTEL OR MOTEL 
An establishment with two or more guest rooms that offers transient lodging accommodations, including daily accommodations, to the general public whose guest rooms uniformly contain bathroom, sleeping and independent cooking or kitchen or living room facilities, but that does not maintain or operate an on-site bar or restaurant facilities open to the general public; provided that if the residential suite hotel or motel is used by a nonprofit organization that provides human services, lodging for the organization's clients may be provided on a transient or more than thirty-day basis. 
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY 
Those zones within Santa Fe that primarily permit accommodation of residential housing, including: RR, R-1 through R-6, R-7, R-8, R-9, R-10, R-12, R-21, R-29, R-7-I, RC-5, RC-8 and RAC districts and tracts of land designated by a PRC district master plan or other master plan for residential use. 
RESTORATION 
The replication or reconstruction of a building's original architectural features. 
RESUBDIVISION 
The adjustment of platted lot lines for the following purposes: 
(A)  increasing or reducing the size of contiguous lots , but not less than the minimum standard size required by the city , or changing the shape of contiguous lots , commonly known as a lot line adjustment; and 
(B)  combining contiguous lots , commonly known as a lot consolidation. 
    The resubdivision must result in the same or a fewer number of lots . 
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT 
A business engaged in selling goods to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods, including department stores; supermarkets; pharmacies; bakeries; meat markets; liquor stores; hardware, paint or wallpaper stores; camera shops; florist's shops; gift shops ; hobby shops; stationery shops; bookstores, apparel shops; shoe stores; variety stores; jewelry stores; stores for sales of gardening supplies and equipment; movie theaters; and bowling alleys. 
RETAIL STRUCTURE 
A structure housing one or more retail establishments . 
RETAIL TENANT 
For the purposes of determining the applicability of special requirements that apply to large-scale retail establishments with single retail tenants greater than seventy-five thousand gross square feet or, for the purposes of determining the applicability of the one hundred fifty thousand gross square foot floor area maximum, means a single retail establishment that shares checkstands, management, a controlling ownership interest and storage areas, for example, a plant nursery or a grocery store associated with a general merchandise store, such as a home improvement store. 
RETENTION 
The storage of storm water or other runoff in a facility that empties solely by infiltration or evaporation and does not have an engineered outlet structure . 
RIGHT-OF-WAY 
The total area of land deeded, dedicated by plat or otherwise acquired by a governmental unit or private organization primarily for the use of the public for the movement of people, goods and vehicles or by a public or private organization primarily for the installation and maintenance of utilities or by a railroad primarily for the laying of its tracks. 
ROADWAY FACILITIES 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on an officially adopted roadway plan of the city or county . For the purposes of Santa Fe's road impact fees, roadway facilities are limited to the major roadway system. 
ROOF LEVEL URBAN FARM 
The use of a roof for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNAS 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications), includes a telecommunications facility placed on a rooftop through gravity mounts or other surface attachments. 
ROOFTOP APPURTENANCE 
Skylights, air conditioning units, solar collectors, stairwells, vertical transportation or other roof-mounted mechanical, electrical or communications equipment. 
RUNOFF 
The water from natural precipitation that flows over the surface of the land and does not percolate into the soil. 
SALVAGE YARD 
An open use of land on which two or more inoperable vehicles are standing or on which salvaged auto parts, auto bodies, waste or scrap materials of any kind, including building materials, are processed, stored, displayed, sold, exchanged or handled. 
SCALE 
The relationship of the parts of a building , structure , block or district to each other, to the whole and to the human figure. 
SCREENING 
A visual barrier composed of suitable live plant material or other natural or artificial materials. 
SECTOR PLAN 
A plan for an area with multiple ownership, prepared with the participation of the residents and property owners , neighborhood associations if any are included in the area, the city and the county and including a plan for road improvements, land uses, land use intensities, schools and parks and drainage. When adopted by the governing body , a sector plan is incorporated into the general plan . 
SERVICE AREA 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means an area within the corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or the boundaries of the county to be served by the capital improvements or facility expansions specified in the capital improvements plan that is designated on the basis of sound planning and engineering standards. The service area for the city 's road, traffic signal, neighborhood park, regional park and fire and police impact fees is the area within the corporate boundaries of Santa Fe as well as unincorporated areas within the urban area as set forth in the general plan . 
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT 
A business , other than a home occupation , that is primarily engaged in providing services, including personal, business , repair and amusement services; health, legal, engineering and other professional services; educational; membership; and other miscellaneous services. 
SERVICE UNIT 
As used in Section 14-8.14 (Impact Fees), means the standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions . The service unit for road and traffic signal impact fees is average daily vehicle-miles of travel. The service unit for neighborhood and regional park impact fees is equivalent dwelling units . The service unit for fire and police impact fees is square feet, which are measured in terms of heated living area for residential uses and gross floor area for nonresidential development . 
SETBACK 
The minimum distance prescribed between the nearest point of a structure and a lot line. 
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS 
An adult arcade , adult bookstore or adult video store , adult cabaret , adult escort agency , adult motel , adult motion picture theater , adult news rack or adult performance and encounter (live) business . 
SFHP 
The Santa Fe Homes Program. 
SFHP DEVELOPMENT 
A tract of land or any improvements on the tract that are subject to a SFHP agreement. 
SFHP UNIT 
A dwelling unit required to be provided on site by a SFHP developer or a SFHP property owner to satisfy the SFHP requirements. 
SHELTERED CARE FACILITY 
A boarding home or other home for the sheltered care of adult or juvenile persons that, in addition to having the capacity to provide food and shelter to between nine and twenty-five persons unrelated to the proprietor, provides personal care and services, habilitation or supervision beyond food, shelter and laundry; provided that live-in nursing care is not a primary part of the services provided. Sheltered care facility includes group homes , half-way houses, homes for battered persons and children and homes designed to provide a transition from long-term institutional care to normal activities. 
SHIELDING 
That portion of a luminaire that ensures that no light rays are emitted above the horizontal plane running through the lowest point of the luminaire where light is emitted. 
SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT 
A dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit rented for less than 30 days per Section 14-6.2(A)(5). 
SIGN 
Includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign , roof sign, illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, marquee , banner, awning, canopy and street clock and includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when it is placed out-of-doors or in view of the general public, including outdoor electric lights placed in trees, shrubs or other types of vegetation. 
SIGN AREA 
The net geometric area enclosed by the sign , including all elements such as borders or frames or perforated or solid background, but not including projected area or structural supports for ground signs , unless it is designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the background of the display. 
SIGN, BUILDING MOUNTED 
A sign mounted on a building and includes canopy sign , marquee sign , projecting sign , roof sign and wall sign . 
SIGN, CANOPY 
A sign mounted under and supported by a permanent awning , arcade or portal . 
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL 
A sign used only for the purpose of indicating the location or direction of an object, place or area and containing no advertising. 
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGING 
An electronic changeable copy sign , an electronic graphic display sign , or video display sign as follows: 
(A)  Electronic Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, non-pictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic display. 
(B)  Electronic Graphic Display Sign. A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixalization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects. 
(C)  Video Display Sign. A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including but not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs . Video display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects. 
SIGN FACING or SURFACE 
The surface of the sign on, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
SIGN, FREESTANDING 
A sign or sign structure that is permanently affixed to the ground supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground and that is not attached to a building or other structure . 
SIGN, HANGING 
A sign that is not supported by any means from the ground or sidewalk and that is fastened to or suspended from a structure . 
SIGN HEIGHT 
The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the sign . 
SIGN, ILLUMINATED 
An illuminated sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper. 
SIGNS, NUMBER 
For the purpose of determining the number of signs , a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign . 
SIGN, PORTABLE 
A movable sign structure not permanently attached to the ground or to any other structure . 
SIGN, PROJECTING 
A sign that is attached to a structure and extends beyond the line of the structure . 
SIGN, ROOF 
A sign painted, erected or constructed wholly upon or over the roof of a building and supported solely on the roof structure . 
SIGN, SANDWICH 
A sign that rests on the ground and consists of two sign faces attached at the top, with the sides of the sign forming a triangle and the base of the triangle forming the baseline of the sign . 
SIGN, TEMPORARY 
A sign that relates to an event, function or activity of a specific, limited duration, including flags, banners, pennants and similar paraphernalia. 
SIGN, WALL 
A sign that displays a single advertising surface and is painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the face of the outside wall of a building and supported by the wall, fence or building. Wall signs includes flat signs , signs with projecting letters attached to a wall or a painted sign board attached securely to a wall. 
SIGNIFICANCE 
The determination of the potential value of an archaeological site to increase the knowledge of the prehistory or history of Santa Fe, as set forth in Section 14-3.13 (Archaeological Clearance Permits). 
SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURE 
A structure located in a historic district that is approximately fifty years old or older, and that embodies distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction. For a structure to be designated as significant, it must retain a high level of historic integrity. A structure may be designated as significant: 
(A)  for its association with events or persons that are important on a local, regional, national or global level; or 
(B)  if it is listed on or is eligible to be listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National Register of Historic Places. 
SIGNIFICANT TREE 
A deciduous tree six (6) inches in caliper or greater or an evergreen tree eight (8) feet or greater in height. 
SITE WATER BUDGET 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  50) 
SLOPE 
An inclined ground surface, expressed in terms of measures of horizontal distance to measures of vertical distance or percent of vertical component to horizontal component. 
SOIL AMENDMENT 
Material added to improve the fertility, permeability or water storage capacity of soil. 
SOILS ENGINEERING REPORT 
A report prepared by a professional engineer indicating the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; design criteria for corrective measures when necessary and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading . 
SOLID WALL OR FENCE 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  50) 
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA 
The land in the floodplain within the city that has a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM , Zone A usually is refined in Zones A, AE, X or shaded X. For the city , the special flood hazard area may be further defined as floodway and flood fringe , where applicable. (Ord. No. 2012-19  5) 
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS 
Includes: 
(A)  less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region or buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(B)  human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: 
(A)  human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(B)  acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(C)  fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; 
(D)  excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subsections A through C of this definition; or 
(E)  a simulation of any of activities provided in Subsections A through D of this definition. 
START OF CONSTRUCTION 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations) and for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the federal Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), means the date the construction permit is issued; provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation ; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing and grading ; installation of streets or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure . 
STATE 
The state of New Mexico. 
STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES 
Includes drainage courses, constructed channels , underground storm sewers, streets , drop inlets, detention basins and other drainage improvements. 
STORY 
The division of a building comprising the space between two successive floors above ground level. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
STREET 
A right-of-way dedicated to public or private use to provide primary vehicular and pedestrian access to adjoining properties and is any public thoroughfare and the approach to a public thoroughfare, the boundaries of which extend to the abutting property line. 
STREET FRONTAGE 
The length of the boundary of the premises abutting the street . 
STREET TREE 
A tree that is planted within or along a street right-of-way , and that can be pruned for pedestrian clearance where appropriate. 
STREET WIDTH 
The area of street within which vehicles are permitted, including travel lanes and parking areas, but not including shoulders, curbs, sidewalks or swales. 
STREETSCAPE 
The visual character of a street or section of a street as defined by topography; the pattern of structures and open space ; building and wall setbacks; street design; architectural design; and heights, widths and proportions of structures , fixtures and graphics. 
STRUCTURAL TRIM 
The moldings, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms that are attached to a sign structure . 
STRUCTURE 
Anything that is constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including buildings , mobile homes , walls , fences, swimming pools, spas, tennis courts, signs , flag poles, microwave satellite receiving dishes, TV antennas and communication devices. 
SUBDIVIDE 
To divide land into two or more parts by platting or by metes and bounds description to: 
(A)  sell for building purposes; 
(B)  laying out a municipality or any part of a municipality; 
(C)  adding to a municipality; 
(D)  laying out suburban lots ; or 
(E)  resubdivide . 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure , the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure , either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred;. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure . Substantial improvement does not include either: 
(A)  any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that are necessary solely to assure safe living conditions; or 
(B)  any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
SUBSTANTIALLY DAMAGED 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIVE CHANGE 
As used in Section 14-5.2 (Historic Districts), means a change to a property in the historic districts or a landmark property outside the historic districts that requires review and approval by the historic districts review board. 
SUBSTATION 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means facility equipment that switches, changes, or regulates electric voltage. An electric power station that services as a control and transfer point on an electrical transmission system. Substations route and control electrical power flow, transform voltage levels, and serve as delivery points to industrial customers. 
SUBSURFACE AREAS 
Areas within a structure , the floor of which is at least six feet below average finished grade. 
SUSTAINABLE 
The ability of a system to maintain processes, functions and productivity over time using a defined quantity of resources. 
SWALE 
A shallow excavation constructed perpendicular to overland flow direction to detain storm water runoff, keeping it on-site and allowing it to infiltrate. 
SWITCHING STATION 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means facility equipment used to tie together two or more electric circuits through switches. The switches are selectively arranged to permit a circuit to be disconnected or to change the electric connection between the circuits. 
TANK 
An artificial reservoir for storing water, often above ground. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to, fiber optic lines, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, towers , antennas , electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunication services . 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS OWNER 
Includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunication service . 
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES 
The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points excluding only cable services. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER 
Includes every person who provides telecommunication service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities. 
TEMPORARY FACILITIES 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means electric facilities and distribution facilities used to provide service for less than one year. 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE 
A structure erected for a specific purpose, which is removed when the designated time period, activity or use for which it was erected has ceased. See Section 14-6.4(C) (Temporary Structures Treated as Permanent Structures). 
TOPSOIL 
The uppermost part of a soil, ranging in depth from three to six (6) inches, that can sustain vegetation and is free of caliche, trash or toxic materials. 
TOWER 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications), means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas used for telecommunications services , including self-supporting lattice towers , guyed towers , or monopole towers . The term includes radio and television transmission towers , microwave towers , common-carrier towers , cellular telephone towers , and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. 
TOWER ALTERNATIVE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(E) (Telecommunications), means manmade trees, clock towers , bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers . 
TOWNSCAPE 
The interrelated elements of the urban landscape , including the physical setting, street patterns, watercourses, vegetation, building placement, building height, scale, wall types and prominent views. 
TOWNSCAPE STANDARDS 
As used in the BCD, means the specific requirements within a townscape subdistrict that provide for: 
(A)  maximum height of structures ; 
(B)  maximum lot coverage; 
(C)  building placement and yard requirements; 
(D)  minimum open space requirements; 
(E)  landscape treatment ; 
(F)  height of walls and fences; 
(G)  placement of parking; 
(H)  curb cuts; and 
(I)  portals . 
(Ord. No. 2012-11  29) 
TRACT 
An area for which a single project is proposed. 
TRANSIENT LODGING 
A stay of fewer than thirty consecutive days. 
TRANSMISSION FACILITIES 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means the network of high-voltage lines, transformers, and switches used to move electrical power from generators to the distribution system. Also used to interconnect different utility systems and independent power producers into a synchronized network. Transmission is considered to end when the energy is transformed for distribution to the customer. 
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL 
A station where transportation services are provided to the public, primarily transportation of persons as opposed to freight, to a regional area, including the city, or serves as a junction to points outside the city for the conveyance of passengers as a commercial enterprise. 
TREATMENT 
A plan for the recovery or protection of discovered cultural remains at those archaeological sites that are considered significant, including proposed excavation or preservation methods, proposed analysis techniques and plans for the final disposition of artifacts recovered. 
UNDERGROUND SYSTEM 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means a system of underground primary and/or secondary distribution cables which may have transformers, terminal boxes, switching devices and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such a system on the surface, or any portion thereof. 
UNIT 
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2014-31  50) 
UPGRADE 
As used in Section 14-6.2(F) (Electric Facilities), means to rebuild, improve, or increase the voltage or current carrying capability of an electric transmission line, switching station, or substation. 
URBAN AGRICULTURE 
The use of a lot for the cultivation of agriculture, composting , aquaponics , aquaculture , and/or hydroponics for commercial purposes. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
URBAN FARM, GROUND LEVEL, LARGE 
A ground level urban farm with a farm area greater than one (1) acre, that is used for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
URBAN FARM, GROUND LEVEL, MEDIUM 
A ground level urban farm with a farm area greater than or equal to ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, but no greater than one (1) acre, that is used for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
URBAN FARM, GROUND LEVEL, SMALL 
A ground level urban farm with a farm area less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet that is used for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
URBAN FARM, ROOF LEVEL, LARGE 
A roof level urban farm with a farm area greater than one thousand (1000) square feet, but no greater than five-thousand (5000) square feet that is used for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
URBAN FARM, ROOF LEVEL, SMALL 
A roof level urban farm with a farm area one thousand (1000) square feet or less that is used for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or non-profit. (Ord. No. 2016-41  5) 
USDA CLASSIFICATION ZONE 
A United States Department of Agriculture system of plant hardiness classifications grouped by the ability to withstand defined temperature ranges. 
USED OR OCCUPIED 
Includes "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied". 
UTILITY EASEMENT 
An easement acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes. 
UTILITY PROVIDER 
As used in Section 14-6.2(G) (Underground Electric, Telecommunications and Cable Utility Lines), means electric or cable service providers or their contractors constructing electric, telecommunication or cable utility lines. 
UTILITY SHED 
A prefabricated, one-story, detached accessory structure constructed of light material and used as a tool shed, play house or other suitable purpose; provided that the projected roof area shall not exceed one hundred twenty square feet. 
VACATION TIME SHARE PROJECT 
Real property for which the right to use and occupy a dwelling unit on a periodic basis constitutes a time share arrangement under the laws of New Mexico, in which the exclusive right of use or occupancy of a unit circulates among various owners for a contractually limited period or a private club with shared ownership in a vacation residence similar to the above including interval use. 
VETERINARY ESTABLISHMENT 
A facility or place where animals, including agricultural and farm animals, are given medical and surgical care and treatment and the boarding of animals limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
VIEW LINE 
As used in Section 14-5.6 (Escarpment Overlay District), means either the boundary between the ridge top subdistrict and foothill subdistrict or the delineated portion of the boundary of the ridge top subdistrict if there is no contiguous foothill subdistrict, as shown on the city 's official escarpment overlay district maps. 
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL 
A secondary or post-secondary education facility that meets state requirements as a vocational facility and that primarily teaches usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade. 
WALL 
A constructed solid barrier of concrete, stone, brick, tile, wood or similar material that borders or is constructed within a field, yard or lot and that limits visibility and restricts the flow of air and light; or the wall of a building or other enclosed structure. (Ord. No. 2014-31  51) 
WAIVER 
As used in Section 14-3.10 (Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas) and 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), a waiver to flood regulations is equivalent to a variance to National Flood Insurance Program regulations. (Ord. No. 2012-19  6) 
WAREHOUSE 
A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
WARM SEASON GRASS 
Grass that requires moderate or infrequent applications of water throughout its life, such as blue grama, buffalo and other grass species. 
WATER FEATURE 
An ornamental water structure used in a landscape , including fountains, streams and ponds. 
WATER HARVESTING 
The capture and use of precipitation from surfaces such as roofs, roads, parking lots and landscapes for plant irrigation, soil recharge or the collection and storage for future use. 
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION 
As used in Section 14-8.3 (Flood Regulations), means the height, in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
WHOLESALE OPERATIONS 
Businesses primarily engaged in selling merchandise or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for retailers; industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users; or other wholesalers. 
XERISCAPE 
A water conserving landscape , emphasizing the use of drought tolerant plant material and efficient watering systems. The principles of xeriscape include planning and design, appropriate choice of plants, soil analysis, efficient irrigation, practical and limited use of turf, mulching and proper maintenance. 
YARD 
The substantially open area adjacent to a property line; see " yard, required ." 
YARD, FRONT 
The part of a lot on the lot frontage side between the front lot line and the closest part of the perimeter of a structure on the lot , extended to both side lot lines. 
YARD, REAR 
The part of a lot opposite the lot frontage side between the rear lot line and the closest part of the perimeter of a structure on the lot , extended to both side lot lines. 
YARD, REQUIRED 
A required unoccupied, unobstructed open space adjacent to a property line. 
YARD, SIDE 
The part of a lot between the side lot lines and the closest part of the perimeter of a structure on the lot , extending from front to rear lot lines. 
YARD, SPECIAL 
In the case of an irregular lot , means a yard required to perform the same functions as a front , side or rear yard , but adjacent to the lot line so placed or oriented that the standard requirements are not clearly applicable. In such cases, the land use director shall require a special yard with minimum dimensions as would apply for a comparable front , side or rear yard in the district. Such determination shall be based on the relation of the lot in question to the adjoining lots with due regard to the orientation and location of required yards , structures and buildable areas on the lots . (Ord. No. 2013-16  66) 
YARD, STREET 
The yard or required yard adjoining a street . 
ZERO LOT LINE 
The location of a building wall on a side or rear lot line. 
APPENDIX for Chapter 14 Land Development 
Exhibit A, Table 14-8.6-1 Parking and Loading Requirements ..... LDCA:3 
Exhibit B, Illustrations of Parking Space Layout and Dimensional Standards ..... LDCA:9 
Exhibit C, Off-Street Bicycle Parking Tables 14-8.6-3, 14-8.6-4, 14-8.6-5, 14-8.6-6 ..... LDCA:13 
Exhibit D, Bicycle Rack Standards and Dimensions 14-8.6 ..... LDCA:15 
Exhibit E, Midtown Local Innovation Corridor (LINC) District Boundary ..... LDCA:17 
Chapter 14 - Appendix 

Exhibit A - Table 14-8.6-1 Parking and Loading Requirements 
TABLE 14-8.6-1: Parking and Loading Requirements Category Specific Use Parking and Loading RESIDENTIAL Group Living Continuing care communities 1 space per dwelling unit; plus one space per 2 beds in congregate housing plus one space per 2 beds in a nursing care unit or extended care facility Group homes for 8 or fewer residents 2 spaces per group home Group homes for more than 8 residents 1 space per two beds Household Living Attached dwelling unit (2-5 units): 2 spaces per dwelling unit Attached dwelling unit (over 5 units): Less than 800 square feet of heated floor area 1 assigned space and .25 unassigned space per dwelling unit Attached dwelling unit (over 5 units): 800-1,200 square feet of heated floor area 1 assigned space and 0.5 unassigned space per dwelling unit Attached dwelling unit (over 5 units): More than 1,200 square feet of heated floor area 1 assigned space and 1 unassigned space per dwelling unit Detached dwelling unit 2 spaces per dwelling unit Short-term rental unit (Ord. No. 2008-5  4) One bedroom One parking space Two or more bedrooms 2 parking spaces PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND CIVIC Day Care, Nursery, or Kindergarten Day care facilities Two spaces plus one additional space for each ten children Educational Elementary and junior high schools One space for each classroom, workshop, laboratory or office plus one space per 200 square feet of auditorium, gymnasium and cafeteria Senior high schools Four spaces for each classroom, workshop, laboratory or office plus one space per 200 square feet of auditorium, gymnasium and cafeteria Government Services Municipal neighborhood and community buildings One space per each 250 square feet of net leasable area Post offices One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Hospital Hospital, medical center, other treatment facilities One space per four beds, plus the number required, based on square feet measurement, for office, clinic, testing, research, administrative, teaching and similar activities associated with the principal use, at one space per each 350 square feet of net leasable area except for teaching facilities, which shall be one per each four seats Human Services Extended and sheltered care facilities, including group homes One space per each two beds Human services establishments One space per each 350 square feet of net leasable area except for lodging which shall be 1 space per 2 beds for dormitory rooms or 1 space per individual lodging unit Libraries, museums (not for profit) All uses One space per each 250 square feet of net leasable area Parks and Open Space Parks, athletic fields, tennis and pool facilities, golf courses, etc. As determined by the city Public buildings and grounds other than elementary or high schools One space per each 250 square feet of net leasable area Uses for general public gatherings One space per four seats, based on total capacity Religious Assembly All uses One space per four seats Transportation terminals All uses One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area COMMERCIAL Assembly Fraternal organizations One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Private clubs and lodges One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Financial Drive-in banks One space per each 350 square feet of net leasable area plus customer drive-in spaces as determined by the city Food & Beverages Drive-in eating and drinking establishments One space per each 30 square feet with a 10 space minimum Eating and drinking establishments One space per each 50 square feet of serving area Liquor stores One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Restaurants One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Offices Medical offices One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Non-medical offices One space per each 350 square feet of net leasable area Public Accommodation Bed and breakfast inns 0.7 space per rental unit Boarding, lodging, and bed and breakfast houses 0.7 space per rental unit in addition to the spaces required for the dwelling unit Hotels and motels One space per rental unit Residential suite hotels and motels One space per rental unit, plus one employee average shift Vacation time share project Same as household living, plus one employee per six units (see page 1 of table for household living) Recreation & Entertainment Auditoriums One space per 100 square feet of net leasable area Bowling alley 5 spaces per lane Enclosed recreational buildings, specialized facilities and related uses As determined by the city Gymnasiums, stadiums, field houses, grandstands and related facilities One space per each four seats or spectator spaces equal to 30 percent of the total permitted occupancy Private schools of instruction (music, karate, etc.) One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Recreational and community center buildings, recreation clubs and related uses Spaces equal to 30 percent of total permitted occupancy or as determined by the city Recreational and entertainment theater One space per each three seats Retail Sales & Services Art galleries One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Bicycle sales and repair Blueprinting and photocopying Business machines sales and service Carpet stores Currency exchanges Drug stores Dry cleaning establishments Flea markets One space for every 500 square feet of total vendor area as designated on the site plan Florist shops One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Food stores Funeral parlors Furniture stores Garden supply and nursery General merchandise and appliance stores General repair shops, e.g. electrical Gift shops Hardware stores Interior decorators Neighborhood groceries and laundromats One space per each 400 square feet of net leasable area Opticians or optometrists One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Other specific merchandise stores, e.g. draperies, fireplaces, glass, greeting cards, jewelry Paint and wallpaper stores Radio and television service and repair shops Shopping centers 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net leasable area Sporting goods stores One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Service Establishments Barber shops and beauty salons One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area Vehicles & Equipment Auto sales, new and used One space per each 200 square feet of building area, including repair shop minus area used for displaying cars Automotive service station and garage for minor repair One space per each 200 square feet of net leasable area INDUSTRIAL Industrial Service & Storage Auto and junkyards One space per 1,700 square feet of land and buildable area Mini warehouses One per 10 storage areas Other industrial and industrial parks As determined by the city Warehouse & Freight Movement Warehouse and distribution One space per 500 square feet of net leasable area ACCESSORY Accessory dwelling units All One space per unit if the accessory dwelling unit is less than 1,000 square feet, otherwise, two spaces per unit Home occupations All See Section 14-6.3(C)(2)(iii)  
Exhibit B - Illustrations of Parking Space Layout and Dimensional Standards 

Exhibit B Illustrations of Parking Space Layout and Dimensional Standards(Cont'd) 

Exhibit B Illustrations of Parking Space Layout and Dimensional Standards(Cont'd) 

Notes: (Ord. No. 2013-16  67) 
(1)  Types of Spaces Allowed 
(a)  All parking spaces shall be designated either "standard" or "small car" or "one size fits all," depending on the size of the car space. However, "one size fits all" spaces may not be used with "standard" or "small car" spaces. 
(b)  Parking lots with ten vehicles or more may have spaces designated for small car use. Up to 20% percent of the total spaces required of a parking lot may be designated for small car use. Small car spaces shall be clearly identified with signs or pavement markings. 
(2)  Minimum Standards for Surface Preparation 
(a)  All parking spaces, driveways and parking lot access aisles shall be constructed with a six-inch subgrade compacted to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Standard T-180-95%. 
(b)  Parking lots with fewer than 40 spaces must have a four-inch gravel surface and must be graded in such a manner to prevent erosion of the surface or transport of gravel or subsurface material into the public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
(c)  Parking lots with 40 or more spaces must have two (2) inches of asphalt treated material. 
(d)  Parking lots must meet applicable standards for spaces designated for persons with disabilities as provided in Section 14-8.6(B)(5). 
Exhibit C - Off-Street Bicycle Parking Tables 14-8.6-3, 14-8.6-4, 14-8.6-5, 14-8.6-6 
(Subsection 14-8.6(E)) 
TABLE 14-8.6-3: General Off-Street Bicycle Parking
For all uses except hotels or motels  Automobile Parking
Spaces RequiredBicycle Spaces Required 0-5 4 5-15 6 16-50 8 51-100 10 100 or more 12  
  
  
TABLE 14-8.6-4: Hotel or Motel Off-Street Bicycle Parking Bicycle Spaces Required Minimum 2 bicycle parking spaces 1 per 15 rooms. Establishments with more than 75 rooms shall provide 6 bicycle parking spaces for visitors.  
  
  
TABLE 14-8.6-5: School Off-Street Bicycle Parking  Type of School Bicycle Spaces Required Elementary, middle, or high school 1.5 bicycle spaces per 20 student seating capacity, 2 space minimum Colleges and universities 1 bicycle space per 10 student capacity, 2 space minimum.  
  
  
Table 14-8.6-6: Restaurant Off-Street Bicycle Parking Minimum 2 bicycle parking spaces 1 bicycle parking space for every 1,000 square feet of restaurant dining capacity.  
Exhibit D - Bicycle Rack Standards and Dimensions 
(Subsection 14-8.6(E)) 
Racks: 
 Inverted U type bicycle racks are the required bicycle parking rack. 
 Each rack must be securely anchored and accommodate a bicycle frame where one wheel can be locked to the rack with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle. 
 A space of two (2) feet by six (6) feet (12 square feet) must be provided for each required bicycle parking space so that a bicycle six (6) feet long can be securely held with two points supported so that the bicycle cannot be pushed, or fall in a way that would damage the bicycle frame, wheel, or components. 
 All racks must provide two points of contact with the frame at least 6" apart horizontally. 
 If a bicycle corral is sought within a public street right-of-way, all design elements shall be developed in coordination with and approved by the city of Santa Fe public works department and parking division. 
Distance to other racks: 
 Racks placed parallel to each other (side by side) must be at least thirty-six (36) inches apart, this includes rack units sold as multiple units attached together. 
 Racks aligned end to end must be at least ninety-six (96) inches apart. 
Distance from wall: 
 Racks placed perpendicular to a wall must be at least forty-eight (48) inches from the wall to the nearest vertical component of the rack. 
 Racks parallel to a wall must be at least thirty-six (36) inches from the wall. 
Distance from curb: 
 Racks placed perpendicular to a curb must be at least forty-eight (48) inches from the curb to the nearest vertical component of the rack. 
 Racks placed parallel to a curb must be at least twenty-four (24) inches from the curb to the rack. 
Distance from pedestrian aisle: 
 Rack units perpendicular to a pedestrian aisle must be at least forty-eight (48) inches from the rack to the edge of the aisle, and the pedestrian aisle should be at least sixty (60) inches wide. 
Parking and maneuvering areas: 
 Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without needing to move another bicycle. 
 There must be an aisle of at least five (5) feet wide behind all required bicycle parking to allow for maneuvering of the bicycle. Where bicycle parking is next to a sidewalk, the maneuvering area may extend into the sidewalk. 
 The area devoted to bicycle parking must be hard surfaced. 
Exhibit E - Midtown Local Innovation Corridor (LINC) District Boundary 
(Subsection 14-5.5(D)) 

ORDINANCE LIST 
Chapter 14, Land Development 
Santa Fe City Code 
  
  
Supplement No. 23 
Ord. No. 2011-16, adopted May 25, 2011 
Ord. No. 2011-17, adopted June 8, 2011 
Ord. No. 2011-25, adopted July 13, 2011 
Supplement No. 24 
Ord. No. 2011-37, adopted November 30, 2011 
Ord. No. 2012-2, adopted January 11, 2012 
Ord. No. 2012-11, adopted February 29, 2012 
Supplement No. 25 
Ord. No. 2012-19, adopted May 9, 2012 
Ord. No. 2012-21, adopted May 30, 2012 
Supplement No. 26 
Ord. No. 2012-23, adopted July 11, 2012 
Ord. No. 2012-31, adopted October 30, 2012 
Ord. No. 2012-33, adopted October 30, 2012 
Ord. No. 2012-37, adopted November 28, 2012 
Supplement No. 27 
Ord. No. 2013-1, adopted January 9, 2013 
Ord. No. 2013-16, adopted March 27, 2013 
Ord. No. 2013-17, adopted April 10, 2013 
Supplement No. 28 
Ord. 2014-4, adopted January 8, 2014 
Supplement No. 29 
Ord. 2014-8, adopted February 26, 2014 
Ord. 2014-10, adopted February 26, 2014 
Supplement No. 30 
Ord. No. 2014-28, adopted August 27, 2014 
Ord. No. 2014-31, adopted October 8, 2014 
Supplement No. 31 
Ord. No. 2014-36, adopted December 10, 2014 
Supplement No. 32 
Ord. No. 2015-14, adopted June 10, 2015 
Supplement No. 33 
Ord. No. 2015-25, adopted July 29, 2015 
Supplement No. 34 
Chapter 14, Land Development is now current through October 28, 2015. 
Supplement No. 35 (2/16) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2016-10 2-10-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-8.6E, off-street bicycle parking; amends Exhibit C, Off-Street Bicycle Parking Tables 14-8.6-3, 14-8.6-4, 14-8.6-5, 14-8.6-6; adds Exhibit D-Standards and Dimensions  
  
Supplement No. 36 (5/16) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2016-20 5-11-16 Amends Ch. 14, Land Development; 14-6.2A, Use-Specific Standards, Residential Uses  
  
Supplement No. 37 (11/16) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2016-33 7-27-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development, 14-6.2 Use-Specific Standards, Prohibits Use of Short-Term Rental Units Located in Residentially-Zoned Districts for Commercial Activities or Events 2016-39 10-26-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; creates 14-5.5(D) amends 14-3.8(B); Table 14-6.1-1; 14-6.2(A); 14-8.6(B); Table 14-8.7-2; 14-8.13(E); 14-8.14(D) Amends Chapter VII Building and Housing Code; 7-1.10 Amends Ch. XXII Sewers; 22-6.6 Exhibit A, Section 7; Amends Ch. XXV Water; 25-4.2 Exhibit B Rate Schedule 8; Amends Ch. XXVI Housing; 26-3.6 2016-40 10-26-16 Amends Ch. VII Building and Housing 7-4.2 Residential Green Building Code; Amends 14-8.2(D) Terrain and Stormwater Management, Standards for All Grading 2016-41 11-9-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-6.2 Use Specific Standards, Agricultural Uses; Table 14-6.1.1, 14-6.3(D) Standards for Specific Accessory Uses; 14-12 Definitions  
Supplement 1 (2018) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2017-15 7-26-17 Amends. Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-6.3(B)(2)(c) Multiple Principal Uses; Accessory Uses or Structures 2017-24 12-13-17 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-5.5(C)(1), 14-5.5(C)(5), 14-5.5(C)(11) Highway Corridor Protection Districts 2017-25 12-13-17 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; adds 14-5.11 West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District  
Supplement 2 (2018) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2018-6  1-10-18 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-3.11(B) Construction Permits - General Procedures  
Supplement 4 (2018) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2018-21  8-29-2018 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-5.5(C)(3), 14-5.5(C)(5), 14-5.5(C)(7) Highway Corridor Protection Districts  
Supplement 5 (2019) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2018-26 10-31-18 An Ordinance Relating to the Land Development Code, Chapter 14 SFCC 1987; Amending Sections 14-10.2 and 14-10.3 to Provide Exceptions for Legal Nonconforming Single Family Dwellings; and Making Such Other Changes that Are Necessary to Carry Out the Purpose of this Ordinance.  
CHAPTER XV - UTILITY BILLS 
15-1 - UTILITY BILLING.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2003-25,  60 established Section 15-1, Utility Billing. 

15-1.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 15-1: 
    Customer means any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or any agency of the federal, state or local government, being supplied with, and/or responsible for payment for, utility services by the city. 
    Renter means one who rents property, the lessee or tenant. 
    Utility means services provided by the city for water, wastewater, solid waste or stormwater. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  61) 
15-1.2 - Charges for utility services. 
A.  No city utility service shall be provided without charge except as provided by this chapter or through a court order or settlement. No amounts owed may be abated. Billings determined by the city to be in error may be corrected. 
B.  Specific rates and charges pertaining to the individual utilities are located in the respective chapters of this code. 
C.  In accordance with the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act, Chapter 7, Article 9 NMSA 1978, a surcharge shall be imposed on each billing for refuse collection and disposal, sewage services, and water sales. 
D.  The city agrees to promptly investigate any question as to accuracy of a bill for utility services and if the bill is in error, the city shall correct the error on a subsequent bill. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  62) 
15-1.3 - Poverty exemption. 
A.  Qualified customers shall be exempt from the following: 
(1)  Monthly residential sewer assessment and charges; 
(2)  Monthly residential refuse assessment and charges; 
(3)  Monthly residential service charge for water if individually metered; 
(4)  Yearly water conservation charge; and 
(5)  Monthly residential stormwater assessment. 
B.  In order to qualify for an exemption, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The customer shall file an affidavit setting out the following facts: 
(a)  The customer is the head of the household residing in the residence being assessed; and 
(b)  The household's gross annual income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the most recent federal poverty guidelines issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
(c)  The customer shall submit documents as required by city policy in order to verify income. 
(2)  The customer shall consent to any reasonable investigation and substantiation by the city of the facts stated in the affidavit. 
(3)  The filing of a false statement or otherwise fraudulently obtaining the benefits of this section is a violation of the Santa Fe City Code and is punishable pursuant to Section 1-3 of this code and shall entitle the city to recover any fraudulently exempted amount and applicable interest penalties. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  63; Ord. #2008-3  2) 
15-1.4 - Payment; delinquent accounts. 
A.  All charges shall be payable at the accounts receivable office of the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe, New Mexico, or other locations as designated by the city and shall become delinquent fifteen (15) calendar days following the "due" date on the customer's utility bill. If the last day for payment falls on a Sunday, legal holiday, or any other day when the offices of the city regularly used for the payment of customer bills are not open to the general public, the final payment date shall be extended through the next business day. 
B.  A penalty of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month shall be imposed on all delinquent accounts. 
C.  Customers or licensed contractors whose utility bills are delinquent shall not be awarded contracts or otherwise authorized to do business with the city. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  64) 
15-1.5 - Responsibility of payment, liens, and deposit. 
A.  The charges for utilities are the personal responsibility of the owner of the property served. 
B.  The city may file a lien on such property for such charges including any interest or penalties accruing on same. The city may assess a fee for the placement of the lien. 
C.  Paragraphs A and B shall not be applicable in the event the property is rented and the owner notifies the city that charges incurred by a renter will not be the responsibility of the owner. The notice shall be in the following form and contain the following information: 
(1)  It shall be in writing on city approved forms and it is the owner's responsibility to see that it is received by the accounts receivable office. 
(2)  It shall contain the name and address of the owner, the address of the property that the owner is disclaiming liability for and the name and address of the renter. 
(3)  In the event there is a change in the renter, the owner shall notify the city as provided herein prior to the date of such change and the name and address of the new renter. The owner shall also provide a forwarding address to the city of the prior tenant if known. 
(4)  In the event that the property becomes vacant, the owner shall be responsible for the utility charges. 
(5)  The failure to comply with these provisions shall cause any such disclaimer of liability to be null and void and of no effect. No such notice shall be effective until received by the city. In the event of a change in ownership, the disclaimer of liability of the original owner shall not be applicable to the new owner. 
D.  Reasonable deposits may be required of any customer including renters when the city deems it appropriate. 
E.  In the event a residential structure receiving curbside refuse and recycling collection service will become vacant for a minimum of three (3) consecutive months, the owner of the property may request suspension of the monthly refuse and recycling service charges upon the submittal to the city of a written application. The application shall contain the date of vacation, expected date of reoccupancy and the cause of the vacancy. 
(1)  Charges shall not be suspended until such application is approved by the city. 
(2)  The suspension of charges shall be for periods consisting of full calendar months beginning on the first day of the month following approval of the application. 
(3)  No retroactive credit shall be applied to a customer account for a period of vacancy which has occurred prior to the city's approval of an application. 
F.  The customer shall be liable for all services until such reasonable notice is given to the city and, in the case of water service, the city has made the final meter reading. Upon receipt of such notice, the city will read the meter within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  65; Ord. #2006-17,  1) 
15-1.6 - Payment arrangements. 
A.  The city and the customer may enter into a written payment arrangement in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the city and the customer agree to settle a disputed bill; or 
(2)  When a customer can demonstrate that they do not have adequate financial resources to pay the outstanding bill because the customer has a low income or is elderly, disabled, or subject to other special considerations. 
(3)  The city is not required to enter into a settlement agreement with a chronically delinquent customer. 
B.  The payment arrangement shall consider the following: 
(1)  The size of the outstanding balance; 
(2)  The customer's ability to pay; 
(3)  The customer's payment history; 
(4)  The time that the balance has been outstanding; 
(5)  The reasons why the balance has been outstanding; and 
(6)  Any other factors relevant to the customer's service. 
C.  A payment arrangement does not relieve a customer from the obligation to pay future bills on a current basis. 
D.  The customer shall receive a statement including the following: 
(1)  The actual service charges incurred for the current billing period; 
(2)  The amount of the installment payment due; 
(3)  The total amount due [sum of paragraphs (1) and (2)]; and 
(4)  An acknowledgment of previous installment payments. 
E.  While an installment payment plan is being negotiated, the city shall not discontinue service to such customer. In the event that either negotiation of the installment plan is discontinued or progress in its negotiation is stalled, the city may proceed with discontinuance of service. 
F.  Defaulting on a payment arrangement shall require immediate payment in full of any and all outstanding amounts owed or the city shall disconnect services as set forth in Rule No. 9 of Exhibit A, Chapter XXV SFCC 1987. 
G.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the city and a customer from renegotiating the terms of a payment arrangement. 
H.  Any dispute regarding an installment plan shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection 15-1.8 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  66) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A to Chapter XXV, referred to herein may be found at the end of Chapter XXV. 
15-1.7 - Discontinuance of service for unpaid charges. 
A.  The city may discontinue service to the property if any charge provided for herein remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days from the "due" date on the customer's utility bill or if a customer fails to comply with the terms of a payment arrangement. Discontinuance of service shall follow the procedures set forth in Rule No. 9 of Exhibit A to Chapter XXV SFCC 1987.* 
B.  Residential customers may apply in writing to participate in a third party notification program. The customer shall designate a specific person, organization, or governmental agency who or which is ready, willing and able to assist the residential customer in the payment of utility bills. The application shall include an affidavit from such person, organization or governmental agency agreeing to such designation. The city shall notify the third party as set forth in Rule No. 9H. of Exhibit A to Chapter XXV SFCC 1987.* 
C.  The city shall not discontinue service for: 
(1)  The failure of a customer to pay for service received at a separate metering point, residence or location. However, in the event of discontinuance or termination of service at a separate metering point, residence or location, the city may transfer any unpaid balance due to any other service account of the customer and proceed in accordance with Rule No. 9 of Exhibit A to Chapter XXV SFCC 1987.* 
(2)  Nonpayment of the disputed amount of a bill or payment arrangement until the city issues a written determination regarding the disputed bill. 
(3)  Delinquency in payment for service to a previous occupant of the same premises unless a court has found the new customer legally liable for the debt of the previous occupant, or a lien exists or the previous occupant continues to reside at the premises. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  67) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A to Chapter XXV, referred to herein may be found at the end of Chapter XXV. 
15-1.8 - Disputes; appeals. 
A.  Disputes concerning utility billing, payment arrangements or discontinuance of water service as set forth in Rule No. 9 of Exhibit A to Chapter XXV SFCC 1987* shall be submitted to the city in writing within thirty (30) days of the occurrence. The utility billing division shall respond to the party in writing. In the event that the customer is not satisfied with the response, the customer may submit a written appeal to the city. The appeal shall be received by the utility billing director within thirty (30) days of the division's response and include the following: 
(1)  The factual basis for the appeal; 
(2)  The legal basis for the appeal; and 
(3)  The desired or requested action or outcome. 
B.  Appeals shall be heard by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The customer shall be given notice of the hearing. The hearing officer shall take testimony from the city and the customer, record the proceedings and prepare a written report and recommendation to the city manager. The city manager shall provide a written decision to the customer. Such decision shall be final. 
C.  Appeals regarding discontinuance of service received by the utility billing director before the date the service is to be discontinued shall stay the discontinuance of service until and in accordance with the city manager's decision. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  68) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A to Chapter XXV, referred to herein may be found at the end of Chapter XXV. 
15-1.9 - Meter reading; estimated bills. 
    Meters will be read as nearly as possible at regular monthly intervals, in accordance with the city's administrative policies, and approximately every twenty-eight (28) to thirty-two (32) days; provided, however, in the event of the stoppage of, or the failure by any meter to register the full amount of water consumed, or of the inaccessibility of the meter, or when snow, ice or other justifiable problems cause one (1) or more consecutive meter readings to be missed, the city may bill the customer on an estimated consumption and the difference adjusted when the meter is again read. The basis for this estimate shall be the normal consumption for corresponding periods in the preceding year or normal consumption of preceding months. Generally the city will not estimate bills for more than six (6) consecutive months. 
(Ord. #2005-2,  1) 
15-1.10 - Meter tests. 
A.  All meters tests to determine the accuracy of registration shall be made with standard meter testing equipment. The city reserves the right to test meters at any time during business hours and to enter the premises of a customer if necessary for that purpose unless permission is denied by the customer. 
B.  Request by Customer. Upon request by a customer, the city shall make a test of the meter serving him/her and shall advise the customer that he/she may be present for the test. If the meter has been tested within the last twelve (12) months, the city shall charge the customer pursuant to the correct rate policy for making such a test. Such charge will be refunded to the customer whenever a meter proves to be in excess of two percent (2%) in error. The customer, or his/her representative, may be present, if he/she desires, when his/her meter is tested. If the customer wishes to be present, he/she should so notify the city at the time of his/her request for the meter test. The city shall give the customer reasonable advance notification as to the day, time, and place of said meter test. A report of the results of the test shall be made to the customer within a reasonable time after completion of the test, and a record of the report, together with a complete record of each test, shall be kept on file at the office of the city. 
C.  Fast Meters. When a meter is found to be fast in excess of two percent (2%) as a weighted average of the total volume of flow at all test rates, the city shall refund to the customer, without interest, an amount equal to the excess charged for the water incorrectly metered. The period over which the correction is to be made shall be the time elapsed since the last previous test or from the time of apparent failure; provided, however, the period shall not exceed six (6) months. No part of a minimum service charge shall be refunded. 
D.  Slow Meters. When a meter is found to be slow in excess of two percent (2%) as a weighted average of the total volume of flow at all test rates, the city may charge the customer for the water incorrectly metered. The period over which the correction is to be made shall be the time elapsed since the last previous test, or from the time of apparent failure; provided, however, the period shall not exceed six (6) months. 
E.  Failure to Register. If a meter fails to register water flow, the city will replace the meter and may back-bill the customer based on past recorded water consumption. 
(Ord. #2005-2,  2) 
CHAPTER XVI - CRIMINAL CODE 
16-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 

16-1.1 - Title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the "City of Santa Fe Criminal Code". 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
16-1.2 - Purpose. 
    The governing body adopts the "City of Santa Fe Criminal Code" for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of and visitors to the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
16-2 - CRIMES OF ASSAULT AND BATTERY. 

16-2.1 - Assault. 
A.  Assault consists of either: 
(1)  An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of another; 
(2)  Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct which causes another person to reasonably believe that he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery; or 
(3)  The use of insulting language toward another impugning his honor, delicacy or reputation. 
B.  Whoever commits assault is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-2.2 - Battery. 
A.  Battery is the unlawful, intentional touching or application of force to the person of another when done in a rude, insolent or angry manner. 
B.  Whoever commits battery is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-4 NMSA 1978. 
16-2.3 - Reasonable detention; assault, battery, public affray or criminal damage to property. 
A.  As used in this section: 
(1)  Licensed premises means all public and private rooms, facilities and areas in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served in the customary operating procedures of establishments licensed to sell or serve alcoholic liquors; 
(2)  Proprietor means the owner of the licensed premises or his manager or his designated representative; and 
(3)  Operator means the owner or the manager of any establishment or premises open to the public. 
B.  Any law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any persons he has probably cause for believing have committed the crime of assault, battery, public affray, or criminal damage to property as defined in his code. Any proprietor or operator who causes such an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he has actual knowledge, communicated truthfully and in good faith to the law enforcement officer that the persons so arrest have committed the crime of assault, battery, public affray or criminal damage to property. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-6 NMSA 1978. 
16-3 - CRIMES AGAINST HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS. 

16-3.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Household member means a spouse, former spouse or family member, including a relative, parent, present or former step-parent, present or former in-law, a co-parent of a child or a person with whom the person has had a continuing personal relationship. Cohabitation is not necessary to be deemed a household member for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-11 NMSA 1978. 
16-3.2 - Assault against a household member. 
A.  Assault against a household member consists of: 
(1)  An attempt to commit a battery against a household member; or 
(2)  Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct that causes a household member to reasonably believe that he/she is in danger of receiving an immediate battery. 
B.  Whoever commits assault against a household member is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-12 NMSA 1978. 
16-3.3 - Arrest without warrant, liability. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, a peace officer may arrest a person and take that person into custody without a warrant when the officer is at the scene of a domestic disturbance and has probable cause to believe that the person has committed an assault or battery upon a household member. 
B.  No peace officer shall be held criminally or civilly liable for making an arrest pursuant to this section, provided he acts in good faith and without malice. 
C.  Whether or not an arrest is made pursuant to this section, a peace officer may remain with the victim and assist the victim in getting to a shelter or receiving proper medical attention. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-6, 30-3-10 through 30-3-16, and 31-1-7 NMSA 1978. 
16-3.4 - Assault; battery; school personnel. 
A.  As used in this section: 
(1)  In the lawful discharge of his duties means engaged in the performance of the duties of a school employee; and 
(2)  School employee includes a member of a local public school board and public school administrators, teachers and other employees of the board. 
B.  Assault upon a school employee consists of: 
(1)  An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of a school employee while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties; or 
(2)  Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct which causes a school employee while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties to reasonably believe that he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery. 
C.  Whoever commits assault upon a school employee is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-9 NMSA 1978. 
16-3.5 - Assault, battery; sports officials. 
A.  As used in this section: 
(1)  In the lawful discharge of his duties means engaged in the performance of the duties of a sports official; 
(2)  Sports official means a person who: 
(a)  Serves as a referee, umpire linesman, timer or scorer, or who serves in a similar capacity, while working, supervising or administering a sports event; and 
(b)  Is registered as a member of a local, state, regional, or national organization that is engaged in providing education and training to sports officials. 
B.  Assault upon a sports official consists of: 
(1)  An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of a sports official while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties; or 
(2)  Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct that causes a sports official while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties to reasonably believe that he is in danger of receiving an immediate battery. 
C.  Whoever commits assault upon a sports official is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
D.  Battery upon a sports official is the unlawful, intentional touching or application of force to the person of a sports official while he is in the lawful discharge of his duties, when done in a rude, insolent or angry manner. 
E.  Whoever commits battery upon a sports official is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3-9.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-3.6 - Harassment. 
A.  Harassment consists of knowingly pursuing a pattern of conduct that is intended to annoy, seriously alarm or terrorize another person and that serves no lawful purpose. The conduct must be such that it would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress. 
B.  Whoever commits harassment is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-3A-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-4 - HATE CRIMES. 

16-4.1 - Hate crimes. 
A.  Hate crimes is a specific offense and penalty for prohibited conduct involving actions that cause damage to persons or properties and that are motivated by animus toward a certain person because of his or her actual or perceived race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, disability or age.* 
B.  When a separate finding of fact by the court shows that an offender committed a petty misdemeanor in which a person was intentionally injured or his property was intentionally damaged because of the actual or perceived race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, disability or age of that person, whether or not the offender's belief or perception was correct, the basic sentence of imprisonment prescribed for the offense of Section 1-3 SFCC 1987 may be increased by thirty (30) days. The sentence imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be the first thirty (30) days served and may be suspended or deferred. In addition, alternative sentencing including, without limitation, education and/or counseling may be imposed. 
C.  When an offender commits a second or subsequent petty misdemeanor in which a person was intentionally injured or his property was intentionally damaged because of the actual or perceived race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, disability or age of that person, whether or not the offender's belief or perception was correct, the basic sentence of imprisonment prescribed for the offense in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987 may be increased by (sixty) 60 days. The sentence imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be the first sixty (60) days served and may be suspended or deferred. In addition, alternative sentencing including, without limitation, education and/or counseling may be imposed. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
Editor's note- *Subsection A was ordained as Ord. #1999-2,  2. 
16-5 - CRIMES WITH A DEADLY WEAPON. 

16-5.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Carrying a deadly weapon means being armed with a deadly weapon by having it on the person, or in close proximity thereto, so that the weapon is readily accessible for use. 
    Deadly weapon means any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; or any weapon which is capable of producing death or great bodily harm, including but not restricted to any type of daggers, brass knuckles, switchblade knives, bowie knives, poniards, butcher knives, dirk knives, blow darts and all such weapons with which dangerous cuts can be given, or with which dangerous thrusts can be inflicted, including swordcanes, and any kind of sharp pointed canes, also slingshots, slung shots, bludgeons; or any other weapons with which dangerous wounds can be inflicted. 
(Ord. # 2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-1-12, 30-7-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.2 - Unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon. 
A.  Unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon consists of carrying a concealed loaded firearm or any other type of deadly weapon anywhere, except in the following cases: 
(1)  In the person's residence or on real property belonging to him as owner, lessee, tenant or licensee; 
(2)  In a private automobile or other private means of conveyance, for lawful protection of the person's or another's person or property; 
(3)  By a peace officer in accordance with the policies of his law enforcement agency who is certified pursuant to the Law Enforcement Training Act; 
(4)  By a peace officer in accordance with the policies of his law enforcement agency who is employed on a temporary basis by that agency and who has successfully completed a course of firearms instruction prescribed by the New Mexico law enforcement academy or provided by a certified firearms instructor who is employed on a permanent basis by a law enforcement agency; or 
(5)  By a person in possession of a valid concealed handgun license issued to him by the department of public safety or other authorized law enforcement agency pursuant to the provisions of the Concealed Handgun Carry Act (For state law, see Chapter 29, Article 19, or the federal Law Enforcement Officer Safety Act (public law No. 108-277). 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the carrying of any unloaded firearm. 
C.  Whoever commits unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. # 2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Ch. 29, Art. 7, and  30-7-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.3 - Unlawful possession of a handgun by a person. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Person means an individual who is less than nineteen (19) years old; and 
(2)  Handgun means a loaded or unloaded pistol, revolver or firearm which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosion and the barrel length of which, not including a revolving, detachable or magazine breech, does not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
B.  Unlawful possession of a handgun by a person consists of a person knowingly having a handgun in his possession or knowingly transporting a handgun, except when the person is: 
(1)  In attendance at a hunter's safety course or a handgun safety course; 
(2)  Engaging in the use of a handgun for target shooting at an established range authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction in which the range is located or in an area where the discharge of a handgun without legal justification is not prohibited by law; 
(3)  Engaging in an organized competition involving the use of a handgun; 
(4)  Participating in or practicing for a performance by an organization that has been granted exemption from federal income tax by the United States commissioner of internal revenue as an organization described in Section 501c(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended or renumbered; 
(5)  Legal hunting or trapping activities; 
(6)  Traveling, with an unloaded handgun in his possession, to or from an activity described in paragraph, (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this subsection; or 
(7)  On real property under the control of the person's parent, grandparent or legal guardian and the person is being supervised by his parent, grandparent or legal guardian. 
C.  A person who commits unlawful possession of a handgun by a person is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-2.2 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.4 - Seizure and forfeiture of a handgun possessed or transported by a person in violation of unlawful possession of a handgun by a person. 
A.  A handgun is subject to seizure and forfeiture by a law enforcement agency when the handgun is possessed or transported by a person in violation of the offense of unlawful possession of a handgun by a person. 
B.  The provisions of the Forfeiture Act [31-27-1 to 31-27-8 NMSA 1978] apply to the seizure, forfeiture and disposal of a handgun subject to forfeiture pursuant to paragraph A of this section. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-2.3 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.5 - Negligent use of a deadly weapon. 
A.  Negligent use of a deadly weapon consists of: 
(1)  Discharging a firearm into any building or vehicle or so as to knowingly endanger a person or his property; 
(2)  Carrying a firearm while under the influence of an intoxicant or narcotic; 
(3)  Endangering the safety of another by handling or using a firearm or other deadly weapon in a negligent manner; or 
(4)  Discharging a firearm within one hundred fifty (150) yards of a dwelling or building, not including abandoned or vacated buildings on public lands during hunting seasons, without the permission of the owner or lessees thereof. 
B.  The provisions of paragraphs (1), (3) and (4) of paragraph A of this subsection shall not apply to a peace officer or other public employee who is required or authorized by law to carry or use a firearm in the course of his employment and who carries, handles, uses or discharges a firearm while lawfully engaged in carrying out the duties of his office or employment. 
C.  The exceptions from criminal liability provided for in paragraph B of this subsection shall not preclude or affect civil liability for the same conduct. 
D.  Whoever commits negligent use of a deadly weapon is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-4 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.6 - Unlawful possession of switchblades. 
A.  Unlawful possession of switchblades consists of any person, either manufacturing, causing to be manufactured, possessing, displaying, offering, selling, lending, giving away or purchasing any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, or any knife having a blade which opens or falls or is ejected into position by the force of gravity or by any outward or centrifugal thrust or movement. 
B.  Whoever commits unlawful possession of switchblades is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-8 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.7 - Negligent use of explosives. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Explosive means any chemical compound or mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to explode and includes but is not limited to dynamite and other high explosives, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord and igniters; and 
(2)  Explosive device or incendiary device means: 
(a)  Any explosive bomb, grenade, missile or similar device; 
(b)  Any device or mechanism used or created to start a fire or explosion with or without a timing mechanism except cigarette lighters and matches; or 
(c)  Any incendiary bomb or grenade, fire bomb or similar device or any device which includes a flammable liquid or compound and a wick or igniting agent composed of any material which is capable of igniting the flammable liquid or compound. 
B.  Negligent use of explosives consists of negligently exploding, attempting to explode or placing any explosive in such a manner as to result in injury to another or to property of another, or in the probability of such injury. 
C.  Whoever commits negligent use of explosives is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-6, Explosives Act  30-7-17,  30-7-18 NMSA 1978. 
16-5.8 - Barter or exchange of deadly weapons. 
A.  It is unlawful to give, sell, trade, barter or exchange for anything of value any deadly weapon, air rifle, air gun or B-B gun, or ammunition for any firearm to any person under the age of nineteen (19) years provided that this section shall not be construed to prevent any parent or legal guardian from purchasing firearms or ammunition for his child or ward. 
B.  Whoever violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
Editor's note- Formerly Section 20-19 SFCC 1987. 
16-5.9 - Interference with bomb or fire control. 
A.  Interference with bomb or fire control consists of: 
(1)  Intentionally interfering with the proper functioning of a fire alarm system; 
(2)  Intentionally interfering with the lawful efforts of a firearm or police officer to control or extinguish a fire or to secure the safety of any object reasonably believed to be a bomb, explosive or incendiary device; or 
(3)  Intentionally interfering with the lawful efforts of a fireman or police officer to preserve for investigation or investigate the scene of a fire or explosion to determine its cause. 
B.  Any person who commits interference with bomb or fire control is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-22 NMSA 1978. 
16-6 - CRIMES RELATED TO PUBLIC NUISANCES. 

16-6.1 - Public nuisance. 
A.  A public nuisance consists of knowingly creating, performing or maintaining anything affecting any number of citizens without lawful authority which is either: 
(1)  Injurious to public health, safety, morals or welfare; or 
(2)  Interferes with the exercise and enjoyment of public rights, including the right to use public property. 
B.  Whoever commits a public nuisance for which the act or penalty is 
    not otherwise prescribed by law is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-8-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-6.2 - Abandonment of dangerous containers. 
A.  Abandonment of dangerous containers consists of any person: 
(1)  Abandoning, discarding or keeping in any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container, cabinet or similar container, of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, which is no longer in use, without having the attached doors, hinges, lids or latches removed or without sealing the doors or other entrances so as to make it impossible for anyone to be imprisoned therein; or 
(2)  Who, being the owner, lessee or manager of any premises, knowingly permits any abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container, cabinet or similar container of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, and which remains upon such premises in a condition whereby a child may be imprisoned therein. 
B.  Whoever commits abandonment of dangerous containers is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-8-9 NMSA 1978. 
16-6.3 - Polluting water. 
A.  Definitions are used in this subsection: 
(1)  Body of public water means any public river or its tributary, stream, lake, pond, reservoir, acequia, canal, ditch, spring, well or declared or known ground waters. 
B.  Polluting water consists of knowingly and unlawfully introducing any object or substance into any body of public water causing it to be offensive or dangerous for human or animal consumption or use. Polluting water constitutes a public nuisance. 
C.  Whoever commits polluting water for which the act or penalty is 
    not otherwise prescribed by law is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-8-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-6.4 - Littering. 
A.  Littering consists of discarding refuse: 
(1)  On public property in any manner other than by placing the refuse in a receptacle provided for the purpose by the responsible governmental authorities, or otherwise in accordance with lawful direction; or 
(2)  On private property not owned or lawfully occupied or controlled by the person except with the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. 
B.  Whoever commits littering is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The use of misdemeanor citations is authorized for the enforcement of this section. The court may to the extent permitted by law, as a condition to suspension of any other penalty provided by law, require a person who commits littering to pick up and remove from any public place or any private property, with prior permission of the legal owner, any litter deposited thereon. 
C.  Any jail sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph B of this section may be suspended, in the discretion of the judge, upon conditions that the offender assist in litter clean-up in the jurisdiction for a period not to exceed the length of the suspended sentence. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
Editor's note- For additional laws regarding littering, see Section 10-1 SFCC 1987. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-8-4 NMSA 1978. 
16-7 - CRIMES RELATED TO SEX OFFENSES.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- For regulations regarding adult entertainment facilities, see subsection 14-6.2(C) SFCC 1987. 

16-7.1 - Prostitution. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Sexual act means sexual intercourse, cunnilingus, fellatio, masturbation of another, anal intercourse or the causing of penetration to any extent and with any object of the genital or anal opening of another, whether or not there is any emission. 
B.  Prostitution consists of knowingly engaging in or offering to engage in a sexual act for hire. 
C.  Whoever commits prostitution is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, unless such crime is a second or subsequent conviction, in which case such person is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-9-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-7.2 - Patronizing prostitutes. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
    Sexual act means sexual intercourse, cunnilingus, fellatio, masturbation of another, anal intercourse or the causing of penetration to any extent and with any object of the genital or an anal opening of another whether or not there is any emission. 
B.  Patronizing prostitutes consists of: 
(1)  Entering or remaining in a house of prostitution or any other place where prostitution is practiced, encouraged or allowed with intent to engage in a sexual act with a prostitute; or 
(2)  Knowingly hiring or offering to hire a prostitute, or one believed by the officer to be a prostitute, to engage in a sexual act with the actor or another. 
C.  Whoever commits patronizing prostitutes is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, unless such crime is a second or subsequent conviction, in which case such person is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-9-3 NMSA 1978. 
16-7.3 - House of prostitution; public nuisance. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  House of prostitution means a building, enclosure or place that is used for the purpose of prostitution as that crime is defined in Section 30-9-2 NMSA 1978. 
B.  A house of prostitution is a public nuisance per se. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-9-8 NMSA 1978. 
16-7.4 - Public indecency. 
A.  Short Title. Subsection 16-7.4 may be cited as the "Public Indecency Ordinance." 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
C.  Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 
(a)  Engage in sexual intercourse; 
(b)  Appear in a state of nudity; 
(c)  Fondle the genitals of himself or another person. 
(2)  No person who owns or operates a public place shall knowingly or intentionally permit or allow another person to violate the provisions of this section in that public place; provided, however, this section shall not apply to forms of expression and the communications of ideas, such as theatrical appearances, which may not be prohibited absent a finding of obscenity. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to breastfeeding, consistent with NMSA 1978,  28-20-1, as it may be amended. 
D.  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. Each time this section is violated shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3; Ord. #2010-22,  1) 
16-7.5 - Indecent dancing. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Female breast means the areola, and "exposing" does not include any act in which the intimate part is covered by any nontransparent material. 
(2)  Intimate parts mean the mons pubis, penis, testicles, mons veneris, vulva, female breast or vagina. 
B.  Indecent dancing consists of a person knowingly and intentionally exposing his intimate parts to public view while dancing or performing in a licensed liquor establishment. 
C.  Whoever commits indecent dancing is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
D.  A liquor licensee, his transferee or their lessee or agent who allows indecent dancing on the licensed premises is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and his license may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of the Liquor Control Act [60-3A-1 NMSA 1978]. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-9-14.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-7.6 - Indecent waitering. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Intimate parts means the mons pubis, penis, testicles, mons veneris, vulva, female breast or vagina. 
(2)  Female breast means the areola and "exposing" does not include any act in which the intimate part is covered by any nontransparent material. 
B.  Indecent waitering consists of a person knowingly and intentionally exposing his intimate parts to public view while serving beverage or food in a licensed liquor establishment. 
C.  Whoever commits indecent waitering is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
D.  A liquor licensee or his lessee or agent who allows indecent waitering on the licensed premises is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and his license may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of the Liquor Control Act [60-3A-1 NMSA 1978]. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-9-14.2 NMSA 1978. 
16-8 - CRIMES 
RELATED TO THE VIOLATION OF CIVIL RIGHTS. 

16-8.1 - Disturbing lawful assembly. 
A.  Disturbing lawful assembly consists of: 
(1)  Disturbing any religious society or any member thereof when assembled or collected together in public worship; or 
(2)  Disturbing any meeting of the people assembled for any legal object. 
B.  Whoever commits disturbing lawful assembly is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-13-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-9 - CRIMES OF TRESPASS. 

16-9.1 - Criminal trespass. 
A.  Criminal trespass consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon posted private property without possessing written permission from the owner or person in a control of the land. The provisions of this subsection do not apply if: 
(1)  The owner or person in control of the land has entered into an agreement with the department of game and fish granting access to the land to the land to the general public for the purpose of taking any game animals, birds or fish by hunting or fishing; or 
(2)  A person is in possession of a landowner license given to him by the owner or person in control of the land that grants access to that particular private land for the purpose of taking any game animals, birds or fish by hunting or fishing. 
B.  Criminal trespass also consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon the unposted lands of another knowing that such consent to enter or remain is denied or withdrawn by the owner or occupant thereof. Notice of no consent to enter shall be deemed sufficient notice to the public and evidence to the courts, by the posting of the property at all vehicular access entry ways. 
C.  Criminal trespass also consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon lands owned, operated or controlled by the city or any of its political subdivisions knowing that consent to enter or remain is denied or withdrawn by the custodian thereof. 
D.  Any person who enters upon the lands of another without prior permission and injures, damages or destroys any part of the realty or its improvements, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs or other natural features, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and he shall be liable to the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession for civil damages in an amount equal to double the value of the damage to the property injured or destroyed. 
E.  Whoever commits criminal trespass is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Additionally, any person who violates the provisions of paragraphs A, B or C of this subsection, when in connection with hunting, fishing or trapping activity, shall be referred to the state game commission for revocation of his hunting or fishing license pursuant to the provisions of Section 17-3-34 NMSA 1978. 
F.  Whoever knowingly removes, tampers with or destroys any "no trespass" sign is guilty of a petty misdemeanor; except when the damage to the sign amounts to more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), he or she is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the magistrate court for imprisonment in the county jail for a definite term less than one (1) year or a fine not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or to both such imprisonment and fine in the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-14-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-9.2 - No Trespassing notice. 
A.  The owner, lessee or person lawfully in possession of real property in New Mexico, except property owned by the state or federal government, desiring to prevent trespass or entry onto the real property shall post notices parallel to and along the exterior boundaries of the property to be posted, at each roadway or other way of access in conspicuous places, and if the property is no fenced, such notices shall be posted every five hundred feet (500') along the exterior boundaries of such land. 
B.  The notices posted shall prohibit all persons from trespassing or entering upon the property, without permission of the owner, lessee, person in lawful possession or his agent. The notices shall: 
(1)  Be printed legibly in English; 
(2)  Be at least one hundred forty-four (144) square inches in size; 
(3)  Contain the name and address of the person under whose authority the property is posted or the name and address of the person who is authorized to grant permission to enter the property; 
(4)  Be placed at each roadway or apparent way of access onto the property, in addition to the posting of the boundaries; and 
(5)  Where applicable, state any specific prohibition that the posting is directed against, such as "no trespassing," "no hunting," "no fishing," "no digging" or any other specific prohibition. 
C.  Any person who posts public lands contrary to state or federal law or regulation is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-14-6 NMSA 1978. 
16-9.3 - Types of trespass, injury to realty. 
A.  Any person who enters and remains on the lands of another after having been requested to leave is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person who enters upon the lands of another when such lands are posted against trespass at every roadway or apparent way of access is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
C.  Any person who drives a vehicle upon the lands of another except through a roadway or other apparent way of access, when such lands are fenced in any manner, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
D.  In the event any person enters upon the lands of another without prior permission and injures, damages or destroys any part of the realty or its improvements, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs or other natural features, he shall be liable to the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession for damages in an amount equal to double the amount of the appraised value of the damage of the property injured or destroyed. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-14-1.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-9.4 - Wrongful use of public property; permit. 
A.  Wrongful use of public property consists of: 
(1)  Knowingly entering any public property without permission of the lawful custodian or his representative when the public property is not open to the public; 
(2)  Remaining in or occupying any public property after having been requested to leave by the lawful custodian, or his representative, who has determined that the public property is being used or occupied contrary to its intended or customary use or that the public property may be damaged or destroyed by the use; or 
(3)  Depriving the general public of the intended or customary use of public property without a permit. 
B.  As used in this section, "public property" means any public building, facility, structure or enclosure used for a public purpose or as a place of public gathering, owned or under the control of the state or one of its political subdivisions or a religious, charitable, educational or recreation association. 
C.  Any person who commits wrongful use of public property is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
D.  Any person who commits wrongful use of public property after having been requested to leave by the lawful custodian or his representative or any peace officer, who has jurisdiction, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-14-4 NMSA 1978. 
16-10 - CRIMES RELATED TO PROPERTY DAMAGE. 

16-10.1 - Criminal damage to property. 
A.  Criminal damage to property consists of intentionally damaging any real or personal property of another without the consent of the owner of the property. 
B.  Whoever commits criminal damage to property is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, except that when the damage to the property amounts to more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) he is guilty of a fourth degree felony, and should be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-15-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-10.2 - Unauthorized graffiti on personal or real property. 
A.  Graffiti consists of intentionally and maliciously defacing any real or personal property of another with ink, paint, spray paint, crayon, charcoal, glass etchers or the use of any object without the consent or a reasonable ground to believe there is consent of the owner of the property. 
B.  Whoever commits graffiti to real or personal property when the damage to the property is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be required to perform a mandatory one hundred (100) hours of community service within a continuous six-month period immediately following his conviction and shall be required to make restitution to the property owner for the cost of damages and restoration. 
C.  Whoever commits graffiti to real or personal property when the damage to the property is greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) is guilty of a fourth degree felony and shall be referred to this district attorney's office for prosecution. 
D.  When a single occurrence of graffiti is committed by more than one (1) individual, the court may apportion the amount of restitution owned by each offender in accordance with each offender's degree of culpability. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-15-1.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-10.3 - Desecration to a church. 
A.  Desecration of a church consists of willfully, maliciously and intentionally defacing a church or any portion thereof. 
B.  Whoever commits desecration of a church is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, except that when the damage to the church amounts to more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) he is guilty of a fourth degree felony and shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-15-4 NMSA 1978. 
16-11 - CRIMES OF LARCENY. 

16-11.1 - Larceny. 
A.  Larceny consists of the stealing of anything of value which belongs to another. 
B.  Whoever commits larceny when the value of the property stolen is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
C.  Whoever commits larceny when the value of the property stolen is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.2 - Fraud. 
A.  Fraud consists of the intentional misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations. 
B.  Whoever commits fraud when the value of the property misappropriated or taken is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
C.  Whoever commits fraud when the value of the property misappropriated or taken is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-6 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.3 - Embezzlement. 
A.  Embezzlement consists of the embezzling or converting to his own use of anything of value, with which he has been entrusted, with fraudulent intent to deprive the owner thereof. Each separate incident of embezzlement or conversion constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
B.  Whoever commits embezzlement when the value of the thing embezzled or converted is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
C.  Whoever commits embezzlement when the value of the thing embezzled or converted is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-8 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.4 - Receiving stolen property. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Dealer means a person in the business of buying or selling goods or commercial merchandise; and 
(2)  Stolen property means any property acquired by theft, larceny, fraud, embezzlement, robbery or armed robbery. 
B.  Receiving stolen property means intentionally to receive, retain or dispose of stolen property knowing that it has been stolen or believing it has been stolen, unless the property is received, retained or disposed of with intent to restore it to the owner. 
C.  The requisite knowledge or belief that property has been stolen is presumed in the case of a dealer who: 
(1)  Is found in possession or control of property stolen from two (2) or more persons on separate occasions; 
(2)  Acquires stolen property for a consideration which the dealer knows is far below the property's reasonable value. A dealer shall be presumed to know the fair market value of the property in which he deals; or 
(3)  Is found in possession or control of five (5) or more items of property stolen within one (1) year prior to the time of the incident charged pursuant to this subsection. 
D.  Whoever commits receiving stolen property when the value of the property is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
E.  Whoever commits receiving stolen property when the value of the property is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-11 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.5 - Falsely representing self as incapacitated. 
A.  Falsely representing self as incapacitated consists of any person falsely representing himself to be blind, deaf, dumb, crippled or otherwise physically defective for the purpose of obtaining money or other thing of value. 
B.  Whoever commits falsely representing self as incapacitated is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-12 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.6 - Cheating machine or device. 
A.  Cheating machine or device consists of any person, with intent to defraud, attempting to operate or causing to be operated any automatic vending machine, parking meter, coin-box telephone, or any machine or device designed to receive lawful money of the United States in connection with the sale, use or enjoyment of property or service, by means of any slug, or by any false, counterfeited, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device. 
B.  Whoever commits cheating machine or device is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-13 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.7 - Shoplifting. 
A.  Shoplifting. 
(1)  Shoplifting consists of any one (1) or more of the following acts: 
(a)  Willfully taking possession of any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it; 
(b)  Willfully concealing any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it; 
(c)  Willfully altering any label, price tag or marking upon any merchandise with the intention of depriving the merchant of all some part of the value of it; or 
(d)  Willfully transferring any merchandise from the container in or on which it is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of all or some part of the value of it. 
(2)  Whoever commits shoplifting when the value of the merchandise shoplifted: 
(a)  Is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor; or 
(b)  Is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(3)  Any individual charged with a violation of this subsection shall not be charged with a separate or additional offense arising out of the same transaction. 
B.  Presumptions. Any person who willfully conceals merchandise on his person or on the person of another or among his belongings or the belongings of another or on or outside the premises of the store shall be prima facie presumed to have concealed the merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it. If any merchandise is found concealed upon any person or among his belongings it shall be prima facie evidence of willful concealment. 
C.  Reasonable Detention. If any law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant has probable cause for believing that a person has willfully taken possession of any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it, or has willfully concealed merchandise, and that he can recover the merchandise by detaining the person or taking him into custody, the law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant may, for the purpose of attempting to effect a recovery of the merchandise, take the person into custody and detain him in a reasonable manner for a reasonable time. Such taking into custody or detention shall not subject the officer or merchant to any criminal or civil liability. 
    Any law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any person he has probable cause for believing has committed the crime of shoplifting. Any merchant who causes such an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he has probable cause for believing the person so arrested has committed the crime of shoplifting. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-20, 30-16-22, 30-16-23 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.8 - Falsely obtaining service or accommodations. 
A.  Falsely obtaining services or accommodations consists of any person obtaining service, food, entertainment or accommodations without paying with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or person supplying such service, food, entertainment or accommodations. 
B.  Any law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any person he has probable cause for believing has committed the crime of falsely obtaining services or accommodations as defined in this section. Any merchant, owner or proprietor who causes such an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he has actual knowledge that the person so arrested has committed the crime of falsely obtaining services or accommodations. 
C.  Whoever commits falsely obtaining services or accommodations when the value of the service, food, entertainment or accommodations furnished is: 
(1)  Less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is guilty of a petty misdemeanor; or 
(2)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-16 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.9 - Possession of a credit card stolen, lost, mislaid or delivered by mistake. 
    A person other than the issuer who receives or possesses a credit card that he knows or has reason to know to have been stolen, lost, mislaid or delivered under a mistake as to the identity or address of the cardholder, and who retains possession thereof with the intent to use it or to sell it or to transfer it to a person other than the issuer or the cardholder, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-27 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.10 - Receipt of property obtained in violation. 
A.  Any person who receives the money, goods, services or anything else of value obtained in violation of Section 30-16-33 NMSA 1978 (Fraudulent use of credit cards), and who knows or has reason to believe that it was so obtained, violates this subsection. 
B.  The degree of the offense is determined as follows: 
(1)  If the value of all things of value obtained from any person or persons in violation of this section is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less in any consecutive six-month period, then the offense is a petty misdemeanor. 
(2)  If the value of all things of value obtained from any person or persons in violation of this section is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more in any consecutive six-month period, the case shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-36 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.11 - Fraudulent acts to obtain or retain possession of rented or leased vehicle or other personal property. 
    Any person who rents or leases a vehicle or other personal property and obtains or retains possession of its by means of any false or fraudulent representation, fraudulent concealment, false pretense or personation, trick, artifice or device, including but not limited to a false representation as to his name, residence, employment or operator's license is guilty: 
A.  Of a fourth degree felony if the property is a vehicle or has a value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00); or 
B.  Of a petty misdemeanor if the property is not a vehicle and has a value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-39 NMSA 1978. 
16-11.12 - Fraudulent refusal to return a leased vehicle or other personal property. 
A.  Any person who, after leasing a vehicle or other personal property under a written agreement which provides for the return of the vehicle or personal property to a particular place at a particular time and who, with intent to defraud the lessor of the vehicle or personal property, fails to return the vehicle or personal property to the place within the time specified, is guilty: 
(1)  Of a petty misdemeanor if the property is not a vehicle and has a value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less. 
(2)  If the property has a value of more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) the violation shall be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
B.  Failure of the lessee to return the vehicle or personal property to the place specified within seventy-two (72) hours after mailing to him by certified mail at his address shown on the leasing agreement a written demand to return the vehicle or personal property shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the failure to return the vehicle or personal property was with intent to defraud. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-16-40 NMSA 1978. 
16-12 - CRIMES RELATED TO FIRE. 

16-12.1 - Improper handling of fire. 
A.  Improperly handling of fire consists of: 
(1)  Setting fire, or causing or procuring a fire to be set to any inflammable vegetation or forest material, growing or being on the lands of another person and without the permission of the owner thereof; 
(2)  Allowing fire to escape or spread from the control of the person having charge thereof without using reasonable and proper precaution to prevent such fire from escaping or spreading; 
(3)  Burning any inflammable vegetation or forest material, whether upon his own land or that of another person, without using proper and reasonable precaution at all times to prevent the escape of such fire; 
(4)  Leaving any campfire burning and unattended upon the lands of another person; or 
(5)  Causing a fire to be started in any inflammable vegetation or forest material, growing or being upon the lands of another person, by means of any lighted cigar, cigarette, match or other manner, and leaving such fire unquenched. 
B.  Provided, nothing herein shall constitute improper handing of fire where the fire is a backfire set for the purpose of stopping the progress of a fire then actually burning. 
C.  Whoever commits improper handling of fire is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-17-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-12.2 - False report. 
A.  False report consists of knowingly conveying or causing to be conveyed to any police agency or fire department a false report concerning a fire or explosion or the placement of any explosives or explosive or incendiary device or any other destructive substance and includes, but is not limited to, setting off a fire alarm. 
B.  Any person who commits false report which causes death or great bodily harm to another is guilty of a fourth degree felony, but if such death or great bodily harm is not caused, nor injury of any kind the person is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-7-21 NMSA 1978. 
16-13 - CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE. 

16-13.1 - Disorderly conduct. 
A.  Disorderly conduct consists of: 
(1)  Engaging in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to disturb the peace; or 
(2)  Maliciously disturbing, threatening or, in an insolent manner, intentionally touching any house occupied by any person. 
B.  Whoever commits disorderly conduct is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-20-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-13.2 - Public affray. 
A.  Public affray consists of two (2) or more persons voluntarily or by agreement engaging in any fight or using any blows or violence toward each other in an angry or quarrelsome manner in any public place, to the disturbance of others. 
B.  Whoever commits public affray is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-20-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-13.3 - Unlawful assembly involving force or violence. 
A.  Unlawful assembly consists of three (3) or more persons assembling together with intent to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the person or property of another, and who shall make any overt act to carry out such unlawful purpose. 
B.  Whoever commits unlawful assembly is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-20-3 NMSA 1978. 
16-13.4 - Interference with public officials. 
A.  No person shall, at or in any building or other facility or property owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its political subdivisions, willfully deny to staff, public officials or the general public: 
(1)  Lawful freedom of movement within the building or facility or the land on which it is situated; 
(2)  Lawful use of the building or facility or the land on which it is situated; or 
(3)  The right of lawful ingress and egress to the building or facility or the land on which it is situated. 
B.  No person shall, at or in any building or other facility or property owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its political subdivisions, willfully impede the staff or a public official or a member of the general public through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or when force and violence are present or threatened. 
C.  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave the property of or any building or other facility owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its political subdivisions when requested to do so by a lawful custodian of the building, facility or property if the person is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which would disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful mission, processes, procedures or functions of the property, building or facility. 
D.  No person shall willfully interfere with the educational process of any public or private school by committing, threatening to commit or inciting others to commit any act which would disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful mission, processes, procedures or functions of a public or private school. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent lawful assembly and peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, including any labor dispute. 
F.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-20-13 NMSA 1978. 
16-13.5 - Interference with athletic event. 
A.  Definitions as used in this subsection: 
(1)  Athletic event means a scheduled sports event for which an admission fee is charged to the public. 
B.  Interference with athletic event consists of intentionally throwing any object on or across the field of play of an athletic event with the intent to interfere with the normal conduct of that event while the contestants of that event are on that field. 
C.  Any person other than an official or a contestant of an athletic event who commits interference with an athletic event is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-20-18 NMSA 1978. 
16-13.6 - Curfew for parks and recreation areas. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person other than duly authorized employees or officers of the city to be in or on any park or recreational area within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except when organized activities are scheduled by approval of the appropriate city department. 
B.  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  3-18-18 NMSA 1978. 
16-13.7 - Loitering of minors. 
A.  Loitering of minors consists of a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years attending, frequenting or loitering in or about a saloon without being accompanied by the parent or guardian of the person. 
B.  Whoever commits loitering of minors is guilty of a petty misdemeanor (For state law see Section 30-20-10 NMSA 1978). Those minors under the age of eighteen (18) shall be referred to the juvenile probation office. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
16-13.8 - Saloon owners permitting the loitering of minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any saloon to permit a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to attend, frequent or loiter in or about such premises without being accompanied by the parent or guardian of the person.* 
B.  Whoever permits the loitering of minors is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
Editor's note- *Subsection A derived from Sec. 30-20-10 NMSA 1978. 
16-14 - CRIMES RELATED TO THE INTERFERENCE WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT. 

16-14.1 - Resisting, evading or obstructing an officer. 
A.  Resisting, evading or obstructing an officer consists of: 
(1)  Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any officer of this state or any other duly authorized person serving or attempting to serve or execute any process or any rule or order of any of the courts of this state or any other judicial writ or process; 
(2)  Intentionally fleeing, attempting to evade or evading an officer of this state when the person committing the act of fleeing, attempting to evade or evasion has knowledge that the officer is attempting to apprehend or arrest him; 
(3)  Willfully refusing to bring a vehicle to a stop when given a visual or audible signal to stop, whether by hand, voice, emergency light, flashing light, siren or other signal, by a uniformed officer in an appropriately marked police vehicle; or 
(4)  Resisting or abusing any judge, magistrate or peace officer in the lawful discharge of his duties. 
B.  Whoever commits resisting, evading or obstructing an officer is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-22-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-14.2 - Refusing to aid an officer. 
A.  Refusing to aid an officer consists of refusing to assist any peace officer in the preservation of the peace when called upon by such officer in the name of the United States or the state of New Mexico. 
B.  Whoever commits refusing to aid an officer is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-22-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-14.3 - Concealing identity. 
A.  Concealing identity consists of concealing one's true name or identity, or disguising oneself with intent to obstruct the due execution of the law or with intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any public officer or any other person in a legal performance of his duty or the exercise of his rights under the laws of the United States or of this state. 
B.  Whoever commits concealing identity is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-22-3 NMSA 1978. 
16-14.4 - Escape from community custody release program. 
A.  Escape from community custody release program consists of a person who has been lawfully committed to a judicially approved community custody release program, including a day reporting program, an electronic monitoring program, a day detention program or a community tracking program, escaping or attempting to escape from the community custody release program. 
B.  Whoever commits escape from a community custody release program, when the person was committed to the program for a petty misdemeanor charge, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-22-8.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-14.5 - False report. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to intentionally make a report to a law enforcement agency or official, which report he knows to be false at the time of making it, alleging a violation by another person of the provisions of the Criminal Code [30-1-1 NMSA 1978]. 
B.  Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-39-1 NMSA 1978. 
16-14.6 - Impersonating a peace officer. 
A.  Impersonating a peace officer consists of: 
(1)  Without due authority exercising or attempting to exercise the functions of a peace officer; or 
(2)  Pretending to be a peace officer with the intent to deceive another person. 
B.  Whoever commits impersonating a peace officer is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, the offender is guilty of a fourth degree felony and should be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-27-2.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-15 - CRIMES RELATED TO CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. 

16-15.1 - Intent; synthetic cannabinoids; possession prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person intentionally to possess one (1) ounce or less of synthetic cannabinoids for the purpose of causing a condition of or inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes. 
B.  A person who violates this section shall, for the first offense, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days. 
C.  The municipal court does not have jurisdiction over subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. # 2005-7,  3; Ord. No. 2013-7; Ord. #2014-29,  1) 
16-15.2 - Possession, delivery or manufacture of drug paraphernalia prohibited; exceptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person to use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substances Act. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to a person who is in possession of hypodermic syringes or needles at the time he is directly and immediately engaged in a harm reduction program, as provided in the Harm Reduction Act or to a person who is in possession of drug paraphernalia intended for marijuana use. 
B.  It is unlawful for a person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with the intent to deliver drug paraphernalia with knowledge, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harm, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce in the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substances Act. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to: 
(1)  Department of health employees or their designees while they are directly and immediately engaged in activities related to the harm reduction program authorized by the Harm Reduction Act; or 
(2)  The sale or distribution of hypodermic syringes and needles by pharmacists licensed pursuant to the Pharmacy Act. 
C.  A person who violates this section with respect to paragraph A of this subsection is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for a definite term of ninety (90) days, or both. A person who violates this section with respect to paragraph B of this subsection is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3; Ord. #2014-29,  2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-31-25.1 NMSA 1978. 
16-15.3 - Sniffing of glue or aerosol spray products. 
A.  No person shall intentionally smell, sniff or inhale the fumes or vapors from a glue, aerosol spray product or other chemical substance for the purpose of causing a condition of or inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses, or for the purpose of, in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the audio, visual or mental processes. 
B.  No person shall intentionally possess glue, aerosol spray product or other chemical substance for any purpose set forth in paragraph A, above. 
C.  The provisions of this section do not apply to any aerosol spray product or other chemical substance used for legitimate medicinal purposes and obtained either on a prescription basis or for medicinal purposes by a person over the age of eighteen (18). 
D.  A person violating this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3) 
Editor's note- Formerly subsection 20-18.8 SFCC 1987. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  30-29-2 NMSA 1978. 
16-15.4 - Prohibiting the procurement of tobacco by minors. 
A.  Definitions as used in this section: 
(1)  Electronic smoking device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. "Electronic smoking device" includes any component part of such product whether or not sold separately. 
(2)  Minor means an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  Tobacco product means any product that is made from or derived from tobacco or contains nicotine or any substance intended to be inhaled or ingested in a way that simulates smoking, and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus or an electronic smoking device. 
B.  No person shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, barter or give any tobacco product to any minor. 
C.  No minor shall procure or attempt to procure any tobacco products. 
D.  No person shall sell, offer to sell or deliver a tobacco product in a form other than an original factory-sealed package. 
E.  Evidence of the age and identity of the person may be shown by any document that contains a picture of the person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, including a motor vehicle driver's license or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
F.  Any person selling goods at retail or wholesale may refuse to sell tobacco products to any person who is unable to produce an identity card as evidence that he is eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
G.  No minor shall present any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age or identity that is false for the purpose of procuring or attempting to procure any tobacco products. 
H.  A person who sells, distributes, promotes or advertises tobacco products shall not provide free samples or tobacco products to a minor. This shall not apply to an individual who provides free samples of tobacco products to a family member or to an acquaintance on private property not held open to the public. 
I.  The police department is authorized to conduct random, unannounced inspection of facilities where tobacco products are sold to ensure compliance with the provisions of the section. 
J.  Any person who violates paragraphs B, D and H of this subsection is guilty of a petty misdemeanor. A person who violates paragraphs C and G of this subsection shall be referred to the juvenile probation office. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  3; Ord. #2014-5) 
Editor's note- For other restrictions regarding tobacco products see Section 20-27 SFCC 1987. 
CHAPTER XVII - RESERVED 
CHAPTER XVIII - LICENSES AND TAXES 
18-1 - BUSINESS LICENSES.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- For provisions concerning licensing of Special Police and Private Detectives, see Chapter XX, Police Regulations, Section 20-24. 

18-1.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Business License Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1981-64,  1; SFCC 1981,  9-4-1) 
18-1.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Antique dealer means a person whose primary business is buying and selling pieces of furniture, or decorative objects made at least one hundred (100) years ago. 
    Artist/artisan means any individual who displays or offers for sale his or her own hand-crafted products. 
    Business means any commercial activity or enterprise for financial gain, benefit, advantage or livelihood. 
    Distress merchandise sale means any offer to sell to the public, or sale to the public, of goods, wares or merchandise on the implied or direct representation that such sale is in anticipation of the termination of a business at its present location or that the sale is being held other than in the ordinary course of business. Distress merchandise sales shall include but are not limited to any sale advertised either specifically or in substance as a "fire sale," "smoke and water damage sale," "adjustment sale," "liquidation sale," "creditor's sale," "insolvent sale," "trustee's sale," "bankrupt sale," "save us from bankruptcy sale," "insurance salvage sale," "mortgage sale," "assignee's sale," "adjuster's sale," "must vacate sale," "quitting business sale," "receiver's sale," "loss of lease sale," "forced out of business sale," "removal sale," "change of ownership sale," "new location sale," "everything must go," "moving sale," "clearance sale," "remodeling sale," or "going out of business sale." 
    Itinerant vendor means any person that does not have an established business location within the city who brings into the city and offers for sale food, beverages, merchandise, or services on the appropriately zoned private property of another person. 
    Massage means the practice, for compensation, of full body massage by hand through the use of any mechanical apparatus incorporating nonspecific stretching techniques, the use of oil rubs, heat lamps, salt glows, hot and cold packs, tubs, showers, or cabinet baths, steam baths and mineral water. Variations of the following procedures are employed: touch, stroking, friction, kneading, vibration, percussion and gymnastics, or any combination of equipment; masseurs or masseuses shall not diagnose or treat classified diseases, nor practice spinal or other joint manipulation, nor prescribe medicine or drugs. 
    Massage parlor means a place of business where massage is performed, which employs two (2) or more persons. 
    Person means any individual, estate, trust, receiver, cooperative association, association, club, corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other entity. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, escort agency, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult newsrack, or adult performance and encounters (live) business. See further definitions in subsection 14-12.1 SFCC 1987. 
    Special event vendor means any person who offers for sale food, beverages, merchandise, or services, at one (1) or more special events in the city with the permission of a special event sponsor. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  2; Ord. #1982-38,  1; SFCC 1981,  9-4-2; Ord. #1987-51,  1; Ord. #1990-5,  1; Ord. #1998-10,  17; Ord. #2000-9,  1; Ord. #2002-35,  1; Ord. #2007-17,  1; Ord. #2009-33,  25; Ord. #2011-25,  2; Ord. #2015-13  1) 
18-1.3 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ordinance No. 1990-5, Section 12, subsection 18-1.3, Business Activities-Fees, previously contained herein, has been renumbered as subsection 18-8.10, Business License-Fees. 
18-1.4 - License application; information required. 
A.  Applicants for licenses under this section shall file with the city a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Address; 
(3)  Current state revenue division taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current state revenue division taxpayer identification number; 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the business; 
(5)  Proof of insurance coverage, when applicable; 
(6)  Proof of bond, when applicable; and 
(7)  An attestation clause that states that the business shall comply with the requirements of the Living Wage Ordinance, 28-1 SFCC 1987. 
B.  In addition to the information required in paragraph A, the following businesses shall also include the following information with their applications: 
(1)  Carnival operators shall submit a copy of their special use permit, as required by subsection 18-7.2 SFCC 1987; 
(2)  Circus operators shall submit a copy of their special use permit, as required by subsection 18-7.2 SFCC 1987; 
(3)  Itinerant vendors seeking to conduct sales as defined under subsection 18-5.1 SFCC 1987 shall submit a copy of their petition as approved by the governing body, as required in subsection 18-5.1 SFCC 1987; 
(4)  Jewelry auction operators, as defined in subsections 18-5.1 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987, shall provide information required by subsections 18-5.12 and 18-5.14 SFCC 1987, including a notarization of the application; 
(5)  Mobile home park operators shall submit a copy of their certificate of occupancy; 
(6)  Private day-care nurseries, facilities and kindergarten operators, when approval is required by the board of adjustment, as per the provisions of Table 14-6.1-1 SFCC 1987, shall include a sworn affidavit stating that they have received such approval; and 
(7)  Septic tank cleaners shall submit a sworn affidavit stating that they have conformed to the requirements set forth in subsection 22-4.9 SFCC 1987. 
(8)  Flea market operators shall submit: 
(a)  A copy of a current certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall be reissued annually; and 
(b)  A sworn affidavit stating that they have conformed to the requirements set forth in subsection 14-6.2C SFCC 1987. 
(9)  Alarm installation companies and monitoring companies, as defined in subsection 20-5.4 SFCC 1987, shall submit the following documents as required by subsection 20-5.8 SFCC 1987; 
(a)  A copy of a valid license issued by the construction industries division of the regulation and licensing department of the state of New Mexico; and 
(b)  Proof of bonding. 
(10)  Businesses who sell any item advertised as Native American arts or crafts in the Native American arts or crafts district, as defined in subsection 18-5.29A, shall abide by the provisions set forth in subsection 18-5.29. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  4; Ord. #1982-28,  3; SFCC 1981,  9-4-4; Ord. #1987-48,  9; Ord. #1998-10  18; Ord. #2009-33,  26; Ord. #2012-13  1; Ord. #2014-38  1; Ord. No. 2016-38  1) 
Editor's note- Santa Fe City Code references in paragraphs B(6) and B(8)(b) are corrected to conform with Ordinance No. 2011-37. 
18-1.5 - Payment of license fees required; assessments; protest. 
A.  On or before March 15 of each year, all businesses engaging in a type of business enumerated as requiring business licenses under this section shall apply for a business license for that year. These businesses shall: 
(1)  Include payment with the application; and 
(2)  Show proof of insurance and bond, if the business is so required; and 
(3)  Attest that the business shall comply with the requirements of the Living Wage Ordinance, 28-1 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Upon payment of the business license fee, the city shall issue a business license to the applicant unless refused pursuant to Section 3-28-2 NMSA 1978. 
C.  Any business may protest the amount of the business license fee assessment by filing a written protest with the city clerk, on or before March 15. The finance committee shall give the protesting business no less than five (5) days notice of a hearing, at which time the protest shall be heard by the finance committee. 
D.  The finance committee shall have the same authority and power as that of the governing body as contained in subsection 18-1.6 SFCC 1987. 
E.  Any business which must have a business license as enumerated in this section, which begins operations after March 15, shall apply to the city for a business license prior to engaging in business. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  5; SFCC 1981,  9-4-5; Ord. #1996-11,  1; Ord. #2014-38  2) 
18-1.6 - Denial or revocation of license; hearing. 
A.  For the purpose of regulation and when deemed in the public interest, the governing body may refuse to grant a license but no license shall be refused until the person seeking the license has been given the opportunity to be heard by the governing body. After such hearing, the majority of the governing body at the hearing may still refuse to grant a license. The license applicant shall be given not less than five (5) days notice of the hearing. 
B.  When a person is guilty of violating a regulation relating to the granting of a license, or in the judgment of the governing body the public welfare requires a license be revoked, the governing body may revoke the license. 
C.  The procedures set forth in subsection 20-24.5 SFCC 1987, shall govern revocation of licenses for special police and detectives insofar as those procedures conflict those set out herein. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  6; SFCC 1981,  9-4-6) 
18-1.7 - Notice of violation; penalty. 
A.  If a person required to secure a business license and pay a business license fee is in violation of this section or any provision of SFCC 1987 or is operating in a manner contrary to the public welfare, the city shall: 
(1)  Send the person a notice of violation specifically stating the nature of the violation; or 
(2)  If there are past due fees, ordering that the past due fees plus a penalty which is double the amount due, be paid immediately. 
B.  The notice may further state that if the fee and penalty are not paid, and if the provisions of this section or other provisions of SFCC 1987 are not complied with or that the operation contrary to the public welfare is not discontinued within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice, the person shall appear before the finance committee to show cause why the business should not be closed. The notice shall set a date, time and place of the hearing by the finance committee. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  7; SFCC 1981,  9-4-7; Ord. #1996-11,  2) 
18-1.8 - Enforcement; hearing; cease and desist order. 
A.  If, at the hearing before the finance committee, the person fails to show cause why the business should not be closed, the finance committee shall issue a cease and desist order closing the business. Such cease and desist order shall prevent the owner or operator of the business from conducting any business in the building, structure, or on the land, until the terms of this section have been complied with. 
B.  The hearing before the finance committee shall not be less than thirty (30) days after the notice provided in subsection 18-1.7 of this section is mailed. 
C.  An appearance may be made by counsel and the person charged with violating this section may present evidence and call witnesses to show cause why his license should not be denied or revoked. 
D.  Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the finance committee may submit to the governing body a written petition for appeal. Such petition for appeal shall: 
(1)  Be submitted to the city clerk's office within thirty (30) days of the date the action appealed was taken by the finance committee. 
(2)  Set forth that such proceedings or assessments were in error in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the appeal. 
(3)  Be included on the agenda of the next possible regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, during the evening session. Verbal or written notice shall be given to the appellant at least five (5) calendar days prior to the meeting of the governing body. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  8; SFCC 1981,  9-4-8; Ord. #1996-11,  3) 
18-1.9 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be liable for the amount of the license fee, in addition to a penalty which is double the amount due and shall be subject to revocation or denial of the license as set forth in Section 3-38-2 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  9; SFCC 1981,  9-4-9) 
18-1.10 - Itinerant businesses; notice of violation; penalty. 
    Persons operating itinerant businesses required to pay a business license fee, who are in violation of this section, may be served a written notice of violation by a uniformed police officer, specifically stating the nature of the violation and ordering that the past due fee, plus a penalty, which is double the amount due, be paid immediately, and that he discontinue operation until he is in compliance. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  10; SFCC 1981,  9-4-10) 
18-1.11 - Alternate enforcement procedure. 
A.  This section shall be enforced by the city attorney as other municipal regulations are enforced. 
B.  In addition, if any business is conducted in violation of this section or any ordinance, the city attorney shall institute any appropriate action or proceedings to: 
(1)  Prevent the conduct of the business; 
(2)  Restrain, correct or abate the violation; or 
(3)  Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land on which the business is located. 
C.  In addition to the remedies provided in paragraphs A and B of this subsection, the business license fee may be collected and Chapter 3, Article 38 NMSA 1978 shall be enforced by the city attorney by suit in district court or under such other regulation or ordinance or authority as the governing body may provide. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  11; SFCC 1981,  9-4-11) 
18-1.12 - Lien created. 
    There is hereby created a lien on the personal property of each business licensed; such lien is in favor of the city and enforced pursuant to Section 3-38-6 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  12; SFCC 1981,  9-4-12) 
18-1.13 - Record of licenses. 
    The city clerk, in conjunction with the appropriate city office, shall keep a record of all business licenses issued, including the names of the license holders, the date issued, the amount paid and other relevant information. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  13; SFCC 1981,  9-4-13) 
18-1.14 - Savings clause. 
    This section does not apply to offenses committed prior to the effective date of the Business License Ordinance. Offenses committed prior to the effective date of this section are punishable as provided by the regulation in force at the time the offense was committed. Nothing in this section shall be construed as adversely affecting any prior obligations incurred under the former subsections 9-4.1 through 9-4.21 SFCC 1981. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  51; SFCC 1981,  9-4-14) 
18-1.15 - Annual review. 
    It is the desire of the governing body that the city staff responsible for the administration of this section, review the amounts collected and report to the governing body annually as to any changes in the cost of administering this section. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  52; SFCC 1981,  9-4-15) 
18-2 - BUSINESS REGISTRATION FEE. 

18-2.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Business Registration Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1981-63,  1; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-1) 
18-2.2 - Definition. 
    As used in this section: 
    Business means an activity or enterprise for financial gain, benefit, advantage or livelihood. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-2) 
18-2.3 - Imposition of fee. 
    There is imposed on each place of business conducted in the city and not licensed pursuant to Section 3-38-1, NMSA 1978, and Section 18-1, Business Licenses, an annual business registration fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). The fee is imposed pursuant to Section 3-38-3, NMSA 1978, and shall be known as the "business registration fee". The business registration fee may not be prorated for businesses for a portion of the year. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  5; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-3; Ord. #1987-4,  1; Ord. #1993-19,  1) 
18-2.4 - Application; required. 
A.  Any person proposing to engage in business after the effective date of this section, shall apply to the city for a certificate of occupancy and pay a business registration fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), for each outlet, branch, location, or person doing business in the municipal limits of the city, prior to engaging in business, unless such person is required to pay for and obtain a business license, as specified in Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
B.  Upon application for a business registration, the person proposing to engage in business shall attest that the business shall comply with the requirements of the Living Wage Ordinance, 28-1 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1981-63  6; SFCC 1981  9-4A-4; Ord. #1987-4  2; Ord. #1993-19  2; Ord. #2014-38  3) 
18-2.5 - Renewal of business registration. 
A.  Prior to March 16 of each year, any person engaging in a business within the city and subject to the business registration fee shall apply for renewal of his business registration with the city. 
B.  Upon renewal of a business registration, the person renewing the business registration shall attest that the business shall comply with the requirements of the Living Wage Ordinance, 28-1 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  5; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-5; Ord. #2014-38  4) 
18-2.6 - Taxpayer identification number required. 
    Any person filing an application for issuance or renewal of a business registration shall include in the application his current taxpayer identification number from the state taxation and revenue department, revenue division, or evidence of his application for a current revenue division taxpayer identification number, provided that the person is required to file for same. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  6; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-6) 
18-2.7 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of the Business Registration Ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be liable for the amount of the registration fee, in addition to a ten dollar ($10.00) late fee. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  7; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-7; Ord. #1987-4,  3; Ord. #1993-19,  3) 
18-2.8 - Notice of violations. 
A.  If a person who is required to pay a business registration fee and register the business, fails to register or pay the fee, the city shall send the person a notice of violation: 
(1)  Specifically stating the nature of the violation; and 
(2)  Ordering that the past due registration fee plus a late fee of ten dollars ($10.00) be paid immediately. 
B.  The notice shall further state that the city will order the person to appear before the finance committee to show cause why the business should not be closed if the fees are not paid within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  8; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-8; Ord. #1987-4,  4; Ord. #1993-19,  4; Ord. #1996-11,  4) 
18-2.9 - Hearing; time for compliance after division. 
A.  If the business is not registered or the registration fee is not paid by the deadline date set forth in the notice of violation, then the city shall send a notice to such person ordering them to appear before the finance committee to show cause why the city should not issue a cease and desist order closing the business. 
B.  The hearing before the finance committee shall not be less than thirty (30) days after the notice is mailed, and the notice shall include the date of the hearing. An appearance may be made by counsel, and the person charged with violating this section may present evidence and call witnesses to prove that there was no violation of this section. 
C.  If, at the hearing before the finance committee, the person fails to show cause why the business should not be closed, the finance committee shall issue a cease and desist order closing the business. Such cease and desist order shall prevent the owner or operator of the business from conducting any business in the building structure, or on the land, until the terms of this section have been complied with. 
D.  Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the finance committee may submit to the governing body a written petition for appeal. Such petition for appeal shall: 
(1)  Be submitted to the city clerk's office within thirty (30) days of the date the action appealed was taken by the finance committee. 
(2)  Set forth that such proceedings or assessments were in error in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the appeal. 
(3)  Be included on the agenda of the next possible regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, during the evening session. Verbal or written notice shall be given to the appellant at least five (5) calendar days prior to the meeting of the governing body. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  9; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-9; Ord. #1996-11,  5) 
18-2.10 - Record of businesses registered. 
    The city clerk, in conjunction with the appropriate city office, shall keep a record of all businesses registered, including the names of the owners of the businesses, the date issued, the amount paid and other relevant information. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  10; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-10) 
18-2.11 - Temporary provision. 
    Nothing in this section shall affect the collection of occupation taxes under Section 18-1, SFCC 1987 due and payable prior to July 1, 1981. Any taxpayer who has paid an occupation tax for a full 1981 calendar year shall not be required to pay a business registration fee for conducting the same business in the city from the effective date of this section through December 31, 1981. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  11; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-11) 
18-2.12 - Annual review. 
    It is the desire of the governing body that the city staff responsible for the administration of this section review the amounts collected and report to the governing body annually as to any charges in the cost of administering this section. 
(Ord. #1981-63,  12; SFCC 1981,  9-4A-12) 
18-3 - SOLICITATION.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1973 Code  19-6(21) and 19-27; SFCC 1981  9-6.1-9-6.4 and Ordinance Nos. 1956-35, 1974-25 and 1974-39. 

18-3.1 - Short title. 
    Section 18-3 SFCC 1987 shall be cited as the "Solicitation Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2010-23,  7) 
18-3.2 - Legislative findings. 
A.  The governing body is concerned for the health, safety, peace and welfare of the citizens of the city of Santa Fe. 
B.  Current city of Santa Fe laws consider the practice of going onto property by commercial solicitors or itinerant vendors a nuisance. 
C.  The Supreme Court of the United States and other federal courts have determined that door-to-door solicitation is commercial speech, protected under the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
D.  The Supreme Court also established a test for governmental regulation of commercial speech. In part, the test requires that "The governmental interest must be substantial, such as the need to (i) protect privacy, (ii) prevent crime and/or (iii) for consumer protection, Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission, 447 U.S. 557 (1980); 100 S. Ct. 2343. 
E.  The governing body recognizes the First Amendment protection door-to-door solicitors have; however, the governing body further recognizes the need to protect the health, safety, peace and welfare of the citizens of Santa Fe. 
F.  This Solicitation Ordinance balances the First Amendment protection of commercial solicitors and the health, safety, peace and welfare of the citizens of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  8) 
18-3.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to regulate solicitation on private property within the city of Santa Fe while protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  9) 
18-3.4 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 18-3 SFCC 1987: 
    Charitable means the purpose of an organization which (i) has received a letter of determination approving tax exempt status under Title 26 of the United States Code Section 501(c)(3); or the purpose of a school organization, club or team, recognized and affiliated with a public or private school, having a program with annual campaigns to support the public or private school club. 
    Chief of police means the city's chief of police or the chief's designee. 
    Office means the city's accounts receivable office. 
    Person means any individual. 
    Political means on behalf of a political party or candidate or for the purpose of influencing legislation or personal belief. 
    Religious means on behalf of an established religion which means a particular system of faith and worship recognized and practiced by a particular church, sect or denomination. 
    Solicitation 
A.  Means the act of any person traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance who goes on private property to: 
(1)  Request, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value; 
(2)  Take or attempt to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind, or description for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, either in person or by distributing flyers and leaflets; 
(3)  Sell and make immediate delivery of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind or description; or 
(4)  Communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs or otherwise disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly receive such information, provided that such information is of a commercial nature. 
B.  Does not mean the following: 
(1)  A person communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs or otherwise disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly receive such information, provided that such information is of a political, religious or charitable nature; 
(2)  A person seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant of any residence regarding any political or religious matter; 
(3)  A person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence, an indication of the occupant's belief in regard to any political or religious matter; 
(4)  A person conducting a poll, survey or petition drive in regard to any political matter; 
(5)  A person carrying, conveying, delivering or transporting dairy products, newspapers or other goods to regular customers on established routes or to the premises of any person who had previously ordered such products or goods and is entitled to receive the same; and 
(6)  A person whose business is to solicit dealers or permanent merchants in the usual course of business. 
    Solicitor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, engaged in solicitation. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  10) 
18-3.5 - Solicitation for charitable, religious or political purposes exempt. 
    Solicitation for charitable, religious or political purposes is exempt from the licensing provisions set forth in subsection 18-3.6 SFCC 1987; however, the organization or person, if the solicitation is not on behalf of an organization, is required to comply with the provisions set forth in subsections 18-3.11B, C, and D SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  11) 
18-3.6 - License required. 
A.  Except as set forth in subsection 18-3.5 SFCC 1987 above, it is unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation within the city without a valid solicitation license issued by the city of Santa Fe. 
B.  Licenses are not assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  12) 
18-3.7 - License application. 
A.  The application for a license shall be available at the city's accounts receivable office and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, permanent residence address of the applicant, date of birth, social security number, a brief description of the applicant and a photograph of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant shall present a valid identification card issued by a state within the United States of America; 
(3)  Complete employment history for the past ten (10) years; 
(4)  Disclosure of any criminal convictions, infraction or misdemeanor citations received, including any municipal code violations and criminal or civil cases pending. This shall include any cases dismissed or expunged pursuant to state law; 
(5)  A statement that the person is not currently under investigation for any crimes related to solicitation or other criminal offense including, but not limited to, violent crimes, sexual assault, possession of controlled substances, theft, fraud or burglary; 
(6)  Name and addresses of employer if applicable; 
(7)  Requested time and place to solicit within the city; and 
(8)  Such other information as the office may require. 
B.  The application shall include the signature of the applicant acknowledging that the information contained in the application is true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge; that the applicant consents to a criminal background check at the expense of the applicant; and that the applicant will comply with all provisions of Section 18-3 and all applicable city, state and federal laws. The applicant's signature shall be notarized. 
C.  The application shall be submitted to the office at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the time the solicitor requests to engage in solicitation. 
D.  An application fee, as established by resolution of the governing body, shall be paid at the time the application is submitted. 
E.  The applicant shall maintain, at all times, accurate application information with the city. If there is any change, or modification to the information provided on the initial application, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the office within two (2) weeks of the change. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  13) 
18-3.8 - Criminal background check. 
A.  Upon the request of the city's accounts receivable office, the chief of police shall initiate the criminal background check of prospective solicitors. 
B.  The chief of police is authorized to receive criminal history record information from any agency or department of the state of New Mexico or the United States government. 
C.  The office shall not issue a license to a person who refuses to consent to or cooperate in the securing of a criminal background check subject to the provisions of this section. 
D.  The office shall not issue a license to a person that the chief of police has received a criminal background check revealing a conviction for any felony offense or serious misdemeanor including, but not limited to, violent crimes, sexual assault, possession of controlled substances, theft, fraud or burglary. Such person shall be disqualified from receiving a license. 
E.  The office shall promptly notify a person whose criminal background check reveals a disqualifying criminal conviction. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  14) 
18-3.9 - Renewal; revocation. 
A.  All licenses granted under the provisions of this section shall be valid for up to one (1) year and may be renewed thereafter, unless sooner revoked. 
B.  Prior to the expiration of a license and upon application for renewal of the license, the city's accounts receivable office shall determine if the solicitor has acted in compliance with the applicable provisions of this section and conditions of the license. 
(1)  If determined to have been in substantial compliance, the license shall be renewed upon payment of any applicable renewal fee. 
(2)  If a determination has been made that the solicitor is not in substantial compliance with this section, the license shall not be renewed and no other license shall be issued to the solicitor within one (1) year of the date of the determination. 
C.  Renewal fees shall be established by resolution of the governing body. 
D.  The office may revoke any license granted under the provisions of this section for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant provided false, misleading or misrepresented information in procuring license; 
(2)  The applicant or any person who worked on behalf of or with the applicant failed to comply with the requirements, regulations, laws and conditions of approval applicable to the license; 
(3)  The applicant or any person who worked on behalf of or with the applicant is convicted of violating any federal, state or local law while in the course of operating under the license; or 
(4)  The activities for which the license was granted were or are being conducted in a manner that is detrimental to the public health, safety, peace or welfare of the citizens of Santa Fe. 
E.  The office shall promptly notify a person whose license has not been renewed or has been revoked in writing certified mail to the last known address filed. 
F.  When a license is revoked, no other license for solicitation shall be issued under the provisions of this section to the same applicant within one (1) year of the date of revocation. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  15) 
18-3.10 - Appeal; hearing officer. 
A.  The applicant aggrieved by a decision of the city's accounts receivable office to deny an application for or renewal of a license or revocation of a license shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of a notice by the office to appeal such decision to a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 
B.  The appeal shall be filed on forms provided by the office together with any applicable fee established by resolution of the governing body. 
C.  The appeal request shall set forth the appellant's reasons for asserting the decision was in error or in violation of any city of Santa Fe ordinance or other applicable law. 
D.  A hearing officer appointed by the city manager shall conduct a formal hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal. The office shall give written notice by certified mail to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
E.  The hearing officer shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the date of the hearing. The hearing officer shall affirm or reverse the decision of the office. 
F.  The hearing officer's decision shall be final. 
G.  The failure of an appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall extinguish the appeal. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  16) 
18-3.11 - Solicitation operating requirements. 
A.  All persons who engage in solicitation that are required to obtain a license shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Carry a photo identification and a copy of a valid license issued pursuant to this section; and if soliciting on behalf of another, carry written authorization to act on behalf of such third party and carry a copy of the license issued to such third party; and 
(2)  Immediately present a solicitation license, identification and authorization to act on behalf of a third party, if applicable, to any person approached for said solicitation and to any law enforcement official. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to go upon, ring the bell, knock on the door of or attempt to gain admission to the premises of any residence in the city where the owner, adult occupant or other person in control of the property has expressed an objection to such activity either by explicit instructions, oral or written, or by posting a sign or decal bearing the words "No Solicitation" or similar words, unless prior to such entry, bell ringing or knocking, such person has been requested or invited by the owner or adult occupant or other person in control of the premises to be there for such purpose. The sign or decal may be one provided by the city or otherwise. Activities related to a service requested by the owner or occupant of the property and undertaken in the ordinary course of business, including but not limited to mail delivery, deliveries of utility notices, telephone directory deliveries, regular newspaper deliveries, work order notices and service inquiries, are presumed to be requested or invited for the purpose of this section. 
C.  No person shall engage in abusive solicitation. Such abusive activity shall mean to do one (1) or more of the following while soliciting or immediately thereafter: 
(1)  Coming closer than three feet (3') to the person solicited unless and until the person solicited indicates that the person wishes to make a purchase or otherwise receive the solicitation; 
(2)  Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited; 
(3)  Repeating the solicitation after the person solicited has indicated an objection to the solicitation; 
(4)  Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside such person after the person has indicated an objection to the solicitation; 
(5)  Threatening the person solicited with physical harm by word or gesture; 
(6)  Abusing the person solicited with words which are offensive and inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction; or 
(7)  Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person, while soliciting, to go upon, ring the bell, knock on the door of or attempt to gain admission to the premises of any residence, dwelling or apartment in the city after 8:00 p.m. or earlier than 10:00 a.m., unless such person has been requested or invited by the owner or adult occupant of the premises to be thereupon for such purposes. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  17) 
18-3.12 - Not an endorsement. 
    A license granted under this section is not an endorsement by the city of the solicitor or of any goods, wares, merchandise, services or information that may be sold or distributed by the solicitor, and it is unlawful for any person to represent that such an endorsement has been made. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  18) 
18-3.13 - Public education. 
    The city shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of the Solicitation Ordinance to the citizens of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  19) 
18-3.14 - Enforcement. 
A.  The applicant or solicitor shall be responsible for the conduct of all persons acting with or on the behalf of the applicant or solicitor while in the course of operating under the license. All persons found working, helping, volunteering or in any way assisting in the activities for which the license was granted shall be considered employees of the applicant or solicitor. Any act or omission of any person acting with or on the behalf of the applicant or solicitor constituting a violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed the act or omission of the applicant or solicitor for purposes of determining whether the applicant's or solicitor's license shall be granted, denied, renewed or revoked. 
B.  Any violation of this section shall be cause for revocation of a solicitation license and the violator will be ineligible to receive a new license for a period of one (1) year. 
C.  The police department may issue a citation or file a complaint against any person who violates any provision of the Solicitation Ordinance. Any person who violates any provision of the Solicitation Ordinance is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and is subject to the provisions of Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. #2010-23,  20) 
18-4 - SECONDHAND DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS, CORE RECYCLERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS. 

18-4.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 18-4 SFCC 1987: 
    Core recycler means a person, including a junk dealer, that buys used individual catalytic converters, transmissions, or other parts previously removed from a vehicle. A person that buys a vehicle that may contain these parts is not a core recycler. 
    Junk dealer means a person engaged in the business of purchasing or selling secondhand or cast-off material of any kind, which is commonly known as and is hereinafter designated and referred to as "junk" such as old iron, copper, brass, lead, zinc, tin, steel and other metals, metallic cables, wires, ropes, cordage, bottles, bagging, rags, rubber, paper and other like materials. 
    Pawnbroker means a person engaged in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property or who purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price. If a pawnbroker also purchases used merchandise for resale, he must do so in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, firm or association or any combination thereof. 
    Precious metal means any object comprised, in whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a precious metal. Aluminum, brass and other valuable metals shall not be deemed as precious metals. 
    Precious metals dealer shall mean any person who deals, in whole or in part, in the purchase, trade or pledge of precious metals. 
    Secondhand dealer means a person whose primary business is conducting a secondhand store or dealing in secondhand goods, other than used car dealers and merchants taking furniture, appliances and like items, whether or not such person, in addition to or in connection with such secondhand business keeps in stock for retail, goods, wares or merchandise. 
    Transient precious metals dealer means a precious metals dealer who maintains a place of business in the city for less than one (1) calendar year. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-7-1; Ord. #1982-38,  4; Ord. #2011-29,  2) 
State Law reference- Used merchandise generally, the Used Merchandise Act,  57-9-1 through 57-9-5 NMSA 1978; junk dealers,  57-7-1 through 57-7-7 NMSA 1978; authority of city to license and regulate secondhand dealers and junk dealers or any person who accepts used merchandise for value,  3-18-24 NMSA 1978. 
18-4.2 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for a person to engage in any business as defined by subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, and coming under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987, without first obtaining a business license, as required by Section 18-1 SFCC 1987. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-7.2; Ord. #1981-64,  33; Ord. #2011-29,  3) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require licenses,  3-18-24 NMSA 1978. 
18-4.3 - Applicant for pawnbroker's license. 
    An applicant for a license as a pawnbroker must be of good moral character and shall not have been convicted of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude. A license shall be denied to any applicant whose license was revoked for cause or who was a partner, officer, director, trustee, manager or stockholder of any corporation or unincorporated association the license of which was revoked for cause. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  2; Code 1973,  20-2; SFCC 1981,  9-7-3) 
18-4.4 - Investigation of applicant. 
    Any application for license as a pawnbroker shall be referred to the police department for investigation as to the qualifications of the applicant and as to the truth of all statements in the application. In making their investigation, the police shall use current methods of police inquiry, including, without limitation, fingerprints and photographs. The police shall, as soon as practical, make their report to the city clerk who shall grant the license only if the report is favorable. The applicant may appeal a denial of his application to the governing body, as provided in Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  3; Code 1973,  20-3; Ord. #1981-64,  34; SFCC 1981,  9-7-4) 
18-4.5 - Bond required. 
    Before a license can be granted, a person seeking a license as a pawnbroker must execute and deliver a bond to the city clerk to be approved by the clerk and the city attorney in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a corporate surety authorized by the laws of the state to write surety bonds therein and conditioned for the conduct of such pawnbroker business according to the law and for the true and faithful observance of applicable provisions of the Santa Fe City Code of 1987 and ordinances pertaining thereto; such bond shall be for the benefit of the city and of every person damaged by breach of any condition thereof. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  4; Code 1973,  20-4; SFCC 1981,  9-7-5) 
18-4.6 - Daily report. 
A.  It is the duty of every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker to furnish an accurate and complete record each business day to the police department on forms to be furnished by the city, of all property received or purchased during the preceding business day. 
B.  Each item shall be listed on a separate form. The report shall include: 
(1)  The name of the item; 
(2)  A description of the item, including make and model, if any; 
(3)  Serial numbers and other identifying marks; 
(4)  The date, time and type of transaction; 
(5)  The name and address of the person offering the item; 
(6)  A description of the person offering the item, including age, sex, complexion, hair color, approximate height and weight, and date of birth; 
(7)  The type of identification used by the person offering the item and identifying number of said identification. If the person presents a driver's license, the report shall also indicate the state of issuance; and 
(8)  Other information which may be required. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  6; Code 1973,  20-6; SFCC 1981,  9-7-6) 
18-4.7 - Transfer of pawnbroker's license. 
    A pawnbroker's license may not be transferred to another location without the prior consent of the governing body. A license is not assignable or transferable to any other person. If the licensee sells, transfers or assigns the business, the succeeding owner shall obtain a new license. Any change in the members of a partnership, ten percent (10%) or more of the membership of an association, or ten percent (10%) or more of the voting stock of a corporation holding a pawnbroker's license will constitute a change in ownership of the business. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  13; Code 1973,  20-13; SFCC 1981,  9-7-7) 
18-4.8 - When junk dealer required to obtain secondhand dealer license. 
    Every junk dealer who, in addition to, or in connection with his junk business, carries on a regular secondhand business, or keeps in stock for retail any substantial quantity of new personal property for the sale of which either a license or an occupation tax is imposed shall, notwithstanding the license paid by him as a junk dealer, be subject to and shall pay the license or occupation tax as is prescribed for the particular business so conducted. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-7-8) 
18-4.9 - Record of business transactions. 
A.  Every person licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 shall maintain a written record of all transactions made, except as provided in paragraph B, below. The record shall contain: 
(1)  An accurate and complete description of every item purchased or pledged, including serial numbers, if any; 
(2)  An accurate and complete description of the person from whom the items were purchased or pledged; and 
(3)  The name of the person from whom the items were purchased or pledged, his date or birth, identification number and type of identification shown. 
B.  Every person licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 shall maintain a written record of all transactions made for the purchase or pledge of copper, catalytic converters, precious metals or other items designated by resolution of the governing body. The record shall contain: 
(1)  The time, place and date of the transaction; and 
(2)  A brief description of each item, including any serial number or identification number; and the price paid therefor, the item traded for or the amount of the pledge accepted; and 
(3)  The name of the person selling or pledging the object; date of birth of the seller or pledger, the address of the seller or pledger and a record of a form of valid identification containing a photograph of the individual presented by such person at the date of sale or pledge, such record the identifying number contained on such identification; and 
(4)  A statement indicating either that the seller of the item is the owner, or the name of the person from whom he or she has obtained the item, including the business, if applicable, as shown on a signed transfer document; and 
(5)  The name of the person who accepts the item for purchase or pledge on behalf of the licensed business. 
C.  Any record made under the provisions of this section shall not be damaged, altered or destroyed. 
D.  All records required to be made and kept under the provisions of this subsection shall be maintained at the principal place of business within the city for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date a record is made. However, a transient precious metals dealer shall store all records at a location in the city of Santa Fe, designated by the dealer, during such times within the eighteen-month record-keeping period as the transient precious metals dealer is not maintaining a place of business within the city. The transient precious metals dealer shall notify the Santa Fe police department of the location of the stored records. 
E.  All records kept in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be available for inspection by law enforcement officers of Santa Fe county, the city of Santa Fe and state of New Mexico or the city business license administrator, during regular business hours, at the principal place of business. In the case of a transient precious metals dealer, all records shall be stored at location designated by the dealer where such records are open for inspection at least forty (40) hours each week. 
F.  All records kept in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be the property of the business and shall in no respects be considered public records. 
G.  Only the following methods of payment may be used in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  A catalytic converter shall be purchased by check, mailed to the address of the seller or pledger; or cash after the five (5) day period required by subsection 18-4.10 SFCC 1987 has lapsed. 
(2)  All other items may be purchased with an immediate payment by check or cash. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  5; Code 1973,  20-5; SFCC 1981,  9-7-9; Ord. #2011-29,  4) 
State Law reference- Requiring records of junk dealers,  57-7-2; inspection of records for used merchandise,  57-9-4 NMSA 1978;  3-18-24 NMSA 1978. 
18-4.10 - Time period for retaining purchased goods. 
A.  A person licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 shall not sell or remove from his place of business any item or secondhand goods other than furniture and household goods purchased by him until the same have been in his possession for a period of five (5) working days. 
B.  All copper, catalytic converters, precious metals or other items designated by resolution of the governing body shall be retained by persons licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987, in the form in which such items were purchased, for a period of five (5) working days. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-7-10; Ord. #2011-11,  5) 
18-4.11 - Business hours. 
    Persons licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1978 may operate their businesses only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. each day and shall keep their businesses closed to the public at all other times. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  12; Code 1973,  20-12; SFCC 1981,  9-7-11; Ord. #2011-29,  6) 
18-4.12 - Premises to be kept in sanitary condition. 
A.  The place where articles are kept or stored by persons licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition. 
B.  The place of business of any person coming under the provisions of this section shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the chief of police, the county sheriff or the public health officers of the state, district, county or city. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-7-12; Ord. #2011-29,  7) 
18-4.13 - Location of secondhand and junk dealers restricted. 
A.  No secondhand dealer shall, by virtue of his license, keep more than one (1) store, shop, house or place of buying, receiving or selling secondhand goods or articles, but he may have or keep, under and by virtue of a single secondhand dealer's license, more than one (1) place for storage purposes. 
B.  No junk dealer shall store or hold junk at any location in the city other than that specified in his license. 
(SFCC 1981,  9-7-13) 
18-4.14 - Furnishing of false information. 
    It is unlawful for a person licensed under the provisions of this section to falsify any record required under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 or for a license or any other person to furnish false information in connection with the sale, pledge or exchange of any goods. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  7; Code 1973,  20-7; SFCC 1981,  9-7-14; Ord. #2011-29,  8) 
18-4.15 - Accepting property from minors or other persons restricted. 
    It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 to knowingly: 
A.  Buy or accept property as a sale or pledge from any minor without the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to so deliver or dispose of the property; or 
B.  Buy or accept property as a sale or pledge from any person who is at the time intoxicated, an habitual drunkard, under the influence of narcotic or other incapacitating drugs, a thief or an associate of thieves, a receiver of stolen property or a person convicted of a felony. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  9; Code 1973,  20-9; SFCC 1981,  9-7-15; Ord. #2011-29,  9) 
18-4.16 - Marked property. 
A.  A person licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 shall not purchase any property or receive the same as a pledge, if the property is clearly marked as being the property of a person, other than the person offering to sell or pledge such property. However, if the person offering to sell or pledge the property shows satisfactory evidence in writing that he is the lawful owner of the property; or has been granted permission by the owner of the property; or has been granted permission by the owner to sell or pledge the property, then the person licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987 may purchase the property. 
B.  Failure to require such written evidence, as prescribed in paragraph A, above shall be prima facie evidence of guilty knowledge on the part of the licensee, his agents or employees that the person offering to pledge or sell the property is not the rightful owner thereof and shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the license of the licensee by the city after notice and public hearing held before the governing body, as provided in Section 18-1 SFCC 1987, Business Licenses. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  10; Code 1973,  20-10; Ord. #1981-64,  35; SFCC 1981,  9-7-16; Ord. #2011-29,  10) 
18-4.17 - Applicability of section to existing businesses. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to any person presently licensed under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  14; Code 1973,  20-14; SFCC 1981,  9-7-17; Ord. #2011-29,  11) 
18-4.18 - Duties of agents and employees. 
    The requirements of this section shall apply to any agent or employee of the persons engaged in the businesses defined in this section. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  11; Code 1973,  20-11; SFCC 1981,  9-7-18) 
18-4.19 - Confiscation of stolen property. 
A.  The police department has the right to confiscate from a licensee any item which has been reported as being stolen or which the police department has reason or probable cause to believe has been stolen. The officer confiscating the property shall be given a receipt therefor containing sufficient information to identify adequately the item taken. 
B.  The officer confiscating suspect property from a licensee shall proceed without delay to determine whether the item actually was stolen. Should it be determined that the property was stolen, the item may be retained as evidence or returned to its rightful owner; otherwise the property shall be returned to the licensee. As a condition of licensing, licensees shall cooperate fully with the police department in its efforts to recover stolen property, and to this end shall render all reasonable aid and assistance. 
(Ord. #1968-13;  8; Code 1973,  20-8; SFCC 1981,  9-7-19) 
18-4.20 - Violations of section. 
A.  Any person, or his agents or employees, who violates any provision of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987, shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-3, SFCC 1987. 
B.  Violation of this section shall constitute sufficient cause for revocation of a license issued under the provisions of Section 18-4 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1968-13,  15; Code 1973,  20-16; SFCC 1981,  9-7-21; Ord. #2011-29,  12) 
18-5 - SALES AND AUCTIONS. 

18-5.1 - Distress merchandise sale license. 
A.  License. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a distress merchandise sale without having first obtained a distress merchandise sale license to do so in accordance with this section. 
B.  Application. Any person desiring to conduct a distress merchandise sale within the city shall make a written application verified under oath to the finance department at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date on which the sale is to commence unless the merchandise to be sold consists of perishable goods, or goods damaged by smoke, fire or water in which case the fifteen (15) day time period is not applicable. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold; 
(2)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
(3)  The nature of the occupancy of the place where such sale is to be held, whether by lease or otherwise, and the effective date of the termination of the occupancy of the premises; 
(4)  The commencement and termination dates of the distress merchandise sale; 
(5)  A full and complete statement of the facts regarding the reasons why the distress merchandise sale is being conducted, the manner in which the sale is to be conducted, the means to be employed in advertising the sale, together with the content of any proposed advertisement or advertising themes, or copies thereof; 
(6)  If a defunct business is involved, the name and address of the defunct business, and the owner or former owner thereof, 
(7)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise including goods received on consignment to be offered at the distress merchandise sale, the terms and conditions of the acquisition of the property, the amount and description of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold and the location of the goods, wares and merchandise at the time of the filing of the application; 
(8)  A statement that the applicant has not in contemplation of the distress merchandise sale ordered, purchased or received on consignment any goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling them at the sale within ninety (90) days prior to the filing of the application; 
(9)  A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the application is made or during the sale; and 
(10)  A statement that the applicant or its principal officers or agents have not been convicted of a violation of the Distress Sales Act [57-10-1 to 57-10-12 NMSA 1987] or this section or had a distress merchandise sale license issued under the Act or this section revoked within five (5) years of the filing of this application. 
(11)  A letter of attestation from the property owner as to the dates of the lease. 
C.  Examination and Investigation; Grounds for Denial of License . The city may upon the filing of an application investigate the applicant and examine the applicant's affairs in relation to the proposed sale and may examine the inventory and records of the applicant. A distress merchandise sale license shall not be issued if it is found that: 
(1)  The business has held a sale subject to regulation under the Distress Sales Act [57-10-1 to 57-10-12 NMSA 1978] or this section at the location described in the application, within three (3) years from the date of the application, and the business is not unique from the business that previously occupied that location and had a distress merchandise sale license within three (3) years, which can be established by a preponderance of characteristics such as unique advertising, branding, logo(s), operations, ownership structure, inventory, products, services, location, physical separation or other characteristics that would make the commercial operation distinctly different; 
(2)  The application states that the applicant or any of its principal officers or agents have been convicted of a violation of the Distress Sales Act or this section or has had a distress merchandise sale license issued under the act or this section revoked within five (5) years of the filing of the application; 
(3)  The inventory submitted with the application includes goods, wares or merchandise purchased or held on consignment by the applicant or added to the applicant's stock in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling the stock at the distress merchandise sale. Any unusual addition to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise which is made within ninety (90) days prior to the filing of the application shall be prima facie evidence that the addition was made in contemplation of the sale and for the purpose of selling the goods at the sale; 
(4)  The applicant, in ticketing the goods, wares or merchandise for sale has misrepresented the original retail price or value thereof; 
(5)  The advertisement or advertising themes are false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect; 
(6)  The sales methods to be used by the applicant in conducting the sale will work a fraud upon the purchasers; 
(7)  The information set forth in the application is insufficient; 
(8)  Representations made in the application are false; or 
(9)  The applicant has acquired bankrupt stock or other distress sale merchandise from another area within six (6) months of the application. 
D.  Issuance of License; Conditions. If the application complies with the provisions of the Distress Sales Act [57-10-1 to 57-10-12 NMSA 1978] or this section and the distress merchandise sale license fee as set forth below has been paid, a distress merchandise sale license shall be issued to advertise and conduct the sale described in the application subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The sale shall be held at the place named in the application; 
(2)  The sale shall be held by the distress merchandise sale licensee for a period of not more than sixty (60) days following the date set forth in the license; 
(3)  Only goods, wares and merchandise included in the inventory attached to the application shall be displayed on the premises and sold at the sale; 
(4)  The distress merchandise sale license shall be prominently displayed at the location of the sale at all times; and 
(5)  The distress merchandise sale licensee shall keep suitable books at the sale location that shall be open for inspection by the city during normal business hours. 
(6)  The applicant has already obtained a distress merchandise sale sign pursuant to subsection 14-8.10(H)(28)(f) SFCC 1987. 
E.  License Fee. The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or one-fourth of one percent (1/4 of 1%) of the inventory cost value of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold at the sale, whichever is more, to a maximum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
F.  Renewal of License. If during the period that the distress merchandise sale license is in effect it appears to the city that all of the goods in the original inventory have not been sold, the city may upon application and for good cause shown extend the distress merchandise sale license for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. 
G.  Revocation of License . The distress merchandise sale license shall be revoked if the city manager finds the following: 
(1)  Violation of any provision of the Distress Sales Act or this section; 
(2)  Violation of any condition of the distress merchandise sale license; 
(3)  Material misstatement in the application for the distress merchandise sale license; 
(4)  Failure to include in the inventory required by the Distress Sales Act or this section all the goods, wares or merchandise being offered for sale; 
(5)  Offering or permitting to be offered at the sale any goods, wares or merchandise not included in the inventory attached to the application; 
(6)  Failure to keep suitable records of the sale; 
(7)  Making or permitting to be made any false or misleading statements or representations in advertising the sale or in displaying, ticketing or pricing goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale; or 
(8)  Any fraudulent practice in the conduct of the sale authorized by the distress merchandise license. 
(9)  For any of the reasons stated in paragraph G, the city manager may also suspend or revoke the applicant's business license, subject to appeal to the governing body within fifteen (15) days of the city manager's written decision, 
H.  Confidentiality Requirements. The filing of an application for a distress merchandise license, the contents of the application and the issuance of the distress merchandise sale license shall be confidential information and no disclosure thereof shall be made except that which is necessary in the administration of the Distress Sales Act or this section. However, disclosure of the abovementioned information may be made with the consent of the applicant. The filing of the application and the issuance of the distress merchandise sale license shall not be confidential after public notice of the proposed sale has been given by the applicant. 
(Code 1953,  21-1; Code 1973,  27-11; SFCC 1981,  9-9-1; Ord. #2002-35,  2; Ord. No. 2015-31) 
18-5.2 - Penalty. 
    Any violation of subsection 18-5.1 SFCC 1987 is punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for a term of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, the provisions of subsection 18-5.1 may be enforced through appropriate civil action. 
(Code 1953,  21-1; Code 1973,  27-12; Ord. #1981-64,  38; SFCC 1981,  9-9-2; Ord. #2002-35,  4, 5) 
18-5.3 - Applicability of distress sales licenses. 
    Subsection 18-5.1 SFCC 1987 shall not apply to any sale conducted by a public officer as a part of his or her official duties, to any sale for which an accounting must be made to a court of law, to any sale conducted pursuant to an order of a court of law, or to seasonal sales, clearance sales or similar special sales of non-distress merchandise. 
(Code 1953,  21-3; Code 1973,  27-13; SFCC 1981,  9-9-3; Ord. #2002-35,  6, 7) 
18-5.4 - Auction of jewelry, watches, semiprecious or precious stones or metals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale in the city at public auction, or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction within the city, any jewelry, diamonds or other precious or semiprecious stones, watches, clocks, gold, silverware, plated ware or any other precious metals, whether the same is his own property or whether the sale is made by or through him as agent or employee of the owner, or in any other capacity, without first complying with the provisions of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987. 
(Code 1953,  21-5; Code 1973,  27-15; SFCC 1981,  9-9-4) 
State Law reference- Auction sales of jewelry,  61-16-1 through 61-16-17 NMSA 1978. 
18-5.5 - Misrepresentation by auctioneers. 
    It is unlawful for any person acting as auctioneer to make any material misrepresentation or suppression of fact concerning the goods to be auctioned pursuant to subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987, including the quality, quantity, character, present condition, value, cost or selling price. 
(Code 1953,  21-6; Code 1973,  27-16; SFCC 1981,  9-9-5) 
18-5.6 - By-bidding, capping, boosting prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to act as by-bidder, "capper" or "booster", at any auction held pursuant to subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987, or to offer to make any false bid or to offer any false bid to buy or pretend to buy any goods sold or offered for sale at any such auction. 
(Code 1953,  21-7; Code 1973,  27-17; SFCC 1981,  9-9-6) 
18-5.7 - Description and designation of bidder. 
    It is the duty of the auctioneer to make a reasonable description of the person making the bid at the time each bid is announced and to point to or otherwise designate the position of the bidder on the premises. 
(Code 1953,  21-8; Code 1973,  27-18; SFCC 1981,  9-9-7) 
18-5.8 - Tags to be attached to sale articles. 
    The person whose goods are being sold at public auction pursuant to subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987 shall attach to each article sold the selling price when it amounts to ten dollars ($10.00) or more. The tag shall contain in plain and legible writing or printing a full, complete and accurate description of the article sold, including its kind and quality and the retail price for which it was being offered for sale prior to the time of the beginning of the auction. Where diamonds, precious stones and semiprecious stones are sold at auction, the tag shall not only contain a full, complete and accurate description of the same, stating its size, grade, quality and the retail price for which it was being offered for sale prior to the time of the beginning of the auction, but shall also contain a statement of the weight of such diamond, precious stone or semiprecious stone. 
(Code 1953,  21-9; Code 1973,  27-19; SFCC 1981,  9-9-8) 
18-5.9 - Location of auction sale restricted. 
    No auction sale shall be held or conducted pursuant to subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 on any vacant lot, street or public place in the city. 
(Code 1953,  21-10; Code 1973,  27-20; SFCC 1981,  9-9-9) 
18-5.10 - Excepted sales. 
    Subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 shall not apply to judicial sales; sales made by executors or administrators; sales by trustees, mortgagees or assignees under the terms of any instrument given to secure a bona fide indebtedness under which he exercises the power of sale; sales made by or in behalf of licensed pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges; sales of unclaimed freight or express as provided by law; sales by sheriffs, constables or other officers as provided by law; nor to any other particular kind of auction sale expressly authorized by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 1953,  21-11; Code 1973,  27-21; SFCC 1981,  9-9-10) 
18-5.11 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale in the city at public auction or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction within the city, jewelry, diamonds, other precious or semiprecious stones, watches, clocks, gold, silverware, plated ware, or any other precious metals whether they are his own property or whether the sale is made by or through him as agent or employee of the owner, or in any other capacity, without first obtaining a business license issued by the city, as provided in Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
(Code 1953,  21-12; Code 1973,  27-22; Ord. #1981-64,  39; SFCC 1981,  9-9-11) 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to license and regulate business activities,  3-38-1 NMSA 1978. 
18-5.12 - Application for license. 
A.  Any person desiring to hold an auction sale of any of the goods described in subsection 18-5.11 shall apply to the city for a license. The application shall be in writing, signed and sworn to before a notary public of the county, stating the name of the applicant; his residence; the street and number of the proposed place of sale; the length of time for which the license is desired; the ownership of the property to be sold; whether the applicant was previously engaged in a like or similar business, designating the place where such business was conducted and the length of time conducted. The applicant shall furnish the city with such further evidence as may be required of him. 
B.  In the case of an individual, any affidavit under this section shall be made by him; in the case of a firm, it shall be made by one (1) of the partners; in the case of a corporation, it shall be made by the president, general manager, secretary or treasurer. 
(Code 1953,  21-13; Code 1973,  27-23; Ord. #1981-64,  40; SFCC 1981,  9-9-12) 
18-5.13 - License fee. 
    Before any license is issued under subsections 18-5.13 through 18-5.23, the applicant shall pay to the city a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, as prescribed in Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
(Code 1953,  21-14; Code 1973,  27-24; Ord. #1981-64,  41, SFCC 1981,  9-9-13) 
Cross reference- See subsection 18-1.3 SFCC 1987 for license fee for auctions. 
18-5.14 - Inventory of items to be auctioned. 
    Any application for a license under subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23, and Section 18-1, Business Licenses, shall have attached to it a sworn, itemized inventory of all diamonds and diamond-set jewelry, watches, silverware and silver-plated ware or other precious metals to be auctioned, giving the wholesale cost of each article and showing the kind and character. No diamonds, diamond-set jewelry, watches, gold or silverware, silver plated ware or other precious metals mentioned in subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23 shall be sold at auction, except those referred to and included in the inventory. 
(Code 1953,  21-15; Code 1973,  27-25; Ord. #1981-64,  42; SFCC 1981,  9-9-14) 
18-5.15 - Bond required. 
    Any person desiring a license under subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23 and Section 18-1, Business Licenses, shall furnish a bond to the city, duly executed by the applicant as principal and two (2) or more good and solvent persons who reside in the county or a good and solvent surety company authorized to do business in the state and having an agent in the county, as sureties, in the principal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which bond shall be payable to the city, to be approved by the city clerk and city attorney and conditioned that the principal shall pay all loss and damage which may lawfully be claimed against him on account of any material misrepresentation of fact or any material suppression of fact concerning the goods to be auctioned at any such sale or which may grow out of violation of any of the provisions of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23, and any person sustaining any loss or damage may bring suit in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county to recover the same. The provisions of the bond shall be construed liberally in favor of any person sustaining such loss or damage. All remedies on or under such bond shall be in addition to and cumulative of all other remedies the parties may have at law or in equity for recovery of any such losses or damages. Cumulative recoveries may be had on the bond to the full amount thereof. 
(Code 1953,  21-16; Code 1973,  27-26; Ord. #1981-64,  43; SFCC 1981,  9-9-15) 
18-5.16 - Term of license. 
    A license issued under subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23 and Section 18-1, Business Licenses, shall be for the period of time designated in the application; provided that no license shall be issued for a longer period than fifteen (15) days from the date thereof. 
(Code 1953,  21-17; Code 1973,  27-27; Ord. #1981-64,  44; SFCC 1981,  9-9-16) 
18-5.17 - Issuance of license. 
    The city may issue a license to any person upon compliance by such person with the terms of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 and Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
(Code 1953,  21-18; Code 1973,  27-28; Ord. #1981-64,  45; SFCC 1981,  9-9-17) 
18-5.18 - Appeal if license is denied. 
    The city may deny a license and the applicant, in such an event, shall be granted a hearing, as provided by Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  46; SFCC 1981,  9-9-18) 
18-5.19 - Revocation of license by governing body. 
    The governing body may at any time it may see fit, for good cause shown, revoke any license granted as provided by Section 18-1, Business Licenses. 
(Code 1953,  21-20; Code 1973,  27-30; Ord. #1981-64,  47; SFCC 1981,  9-9-19) 
18-5.20 - Revocation of license by court. 
    In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any violation of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23, the court in which the conviction of the violation is had may revoke the license under which the person was acting; it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person whose license is revoked to hold any auction in the city of goods covered by the provisions of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23. No such revocation shall operate to prohibit or disqualify the person whose license was revoked from making application to the city for a new license. 
(Code 1953,  21-21; Code 1973,  27-31; SFCC 1981,  9-9-20) 
18-5.21 - Applications and inventories to be filed. 
    The city shall keep on file the application and inventory referred to in subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23 as a part of the public record. 
(Code 1953,  21-22; Code 1973,  27-32; Ord. #1981-64,  48; SFCC 1981,  9-9-21) 
18-5.22 - Index of licensees. 
    The city shall keep an index of the persons to whose licenses have been issued under subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23. 
(Code 1953,  21-23; Code 1973,  27-33; Ord. #1981-64,  49; SFCC 1981,  9-9-22) 
18-5.23 - Inspection and investigation of goods. 
    The city may inspect and investigate any part or all of the goods coming within the purview of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 before issuing the license provided for in subsections 18-5.11 through 18-5.23, or at any time thereafter while such license is in existence. 
(Code 1953,  21-24; Code 1973,  27-34; SFCC 1981,  9-9-23) 
18-5.24 - Sales and auctions in residential districts. 
    Subsections 18-5.24 through 18-5.28 are adopted for the express purpose of providing harmony and adequate open spaces for traffic, on- and off-street parking within residential areas and to provide for a distribution of population, parking and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  27-35 by Ord. #1974-7,  1; SFCC 1981,  9-9-24) 
18-5.25 - Definitions. 
    As used in subsections 18-5.25 through 18-5.28: 
    Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
    Person means any person who is occupying any home or mobile home located within a residential district of the city and who conducts a sale as defined herein. 
    Sale of goods means the selling of goods in bulk within a residential area of the city, commonly known as home or mobile home, garage, patio and yard sales and other associated sales activities held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease the selling of goods at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  27-36 by Ord. #1974-7,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-9-25) 
18-5.26 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of subsections 18-5.24 through 18-5.28 shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
A.  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
B.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
C.  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction; and 
D.  Any duly licensed bona fide merchant of the city conducting a seasonal or a special sale ordinarily conducted by merchants or to any bona fide merchant who is closing out his stock of goods and advertises such sale to that effect or to a bona fide merchant whose stock of goods has been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise and who advertises as such. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  27-37 by Ord. #1974-7,  3; SFCC 1981,  9-9-26) 
18-5.27 - Regulations for sales and auctions in residential districts. 
    Sellers shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Proper Advertising. Each seller shall refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; 
B.  Adherence to Advertising. Each seller shall conduct the sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incidental thereto; 
C.  Time Period. The selling period pertaining to the sale of goods as defined herein shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days; 
D.  Interval Between Sales. To refrain from selling goods at the same location stated in the advertisement, there shall be an interval of at least ninety (90) days from the last day of the original selling period. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  27-38 by Ord. #1974-7,  4; SFCC 1981,  9-9-27) 
18-5.28 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of subsections 18-5.24 through 18-5.28 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  27-39 by Ord. #1974-7,  5; SFCC 1981,  9-9-28) 
18-5.29 - Native American arts or crafts district. 
A.  The Native American arts or crafts district ("district") covers all businesses within an area bounded by Sandoval and Grant Streets on the west, Alameda Street on the south, Paseo de Peralta on the east, and Marcy Street on the north and incorporates an additional area bounded by Paseo de Peralta on the west, East Palace Avenue on the north, East Alameda Street and Camino del Monte Sol on the east, and Canyon Road and Acequia Madre Street on the south. This area is shown in Exhibit A which may be found at the end of this section. 
(1)  The term "Indian tribe" and "Indian" as defined in Section 30-33-4 NMSA 1978 shall, for the purpose for this subsection, refer to Native American, and means any person who is an enrolled member of a Native American tribe as evidenced by tribal enrollment card or certified tribal records; or any person who can meet the minimum qualifications for services offered by the United States government to Native Americans: 
(a)  Any person who is an enrolled member of a Native American tribe as evidenced by a tribal enrollment card or certified tribal records; or 
(b)  Any person who can meet the minimum qualifications for services offered by the United States government to Native Americans because of their special status as Native Americans as evidenced by a certificate of degree of Native American blood card; 
(2)  The term "authentic Indian arts or crafts" shall, for the purpose for this subsection, refer to Native American arts or crafts, and means any products, including traditional or contemporary Native American arts, that: 
(a)  Are Native American handmade; and 
(b)  Were produced after 1935; and 
(b)  Are not made by machine; and 
(c)  Are not imported replicas of Native American arts or crafts from overseas/foreign countries. 
(3)  Businesses shall provide to the city the following information in order to be permitted to sell Native American arts or crafts within the district: 
(a)  Business name, address and owner; and 
(b)  Written certification that the business shall comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
(4)  Businesses shall be required: 
(a)  To display a Native American arts or crafts vendor sticker, provided by the city, at the public entrance to the business; and 
(b)  Clearly display a disclosure for each article offered for sale a statement that the article is "authentic Native American arts item" or "authentic Native American crafts item", or otherwise claimed to be Native American handmade, however phrased. 
(c)  At point of sale, clearly display, in the manner set forth by policy and procedures established by the city manager, signage informing buyers of their rights under both federal and state laws as it pertains to authentic Native American arts or crafts items. 
B.  Businesses Outside the Native American Arts and Crafts District. Businesses may voluntarily participate in the regulations for sale of Native American arts and crafts as set forth in subsection 18-5.29. 
C.  Revocation of Permit. The Native American arts or crafts vendor sticker shall be revoked if the city manager finds the following: 
(1)  Violations of subsection 18-5.29A(2) above relating to authentic Native American arts or crafts; or 
(2)  Failure to clearly display a disclosure of a statement that the article is "authentic Native American arts item" or "authentic Native American crafts item", and display signage informing buyers of their rights pursuant to subsection 18-5.29A(3)(b) above. 

(Ord. No. 2016-38  2) 
18-6 - TAXICAB SERVICES. 

18-6.1 - Short title. 
    Section 18-6 SFCC 1987 shall be cited as the "Taxicab Service Ordinance". 
(Ord. #2011-30,  13) 
18-6.2 - Legislative findings. 
A.  A "taxicab service" is regulated by the New Mexico public regulation commission in accordance with and as defined by the New Mexico Motor Carrier Act, Sections 65-2A-1 to 65-2A-40 NMSA 1978 ("Motor Carrier Act") and Section 18.3.6.9(H) NMAC. 
B.  As set forth in Section 18.3.7.8 NMAC, a taxicab service is required to prepare and file with the public regulation commission an annual report of its operations. 
C.  The annual report includes a list of the taxicab service drivers along with a written statement certifying that the taxicab service has received a current printout from the New Mexico motor vehicle division of the driving record of each of its taxicab drivers. 
D.  The Motor Carrier Act does not limit or restrict the police jurisdiction or power of a municipality over its streets, highways and public places except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30,  14) 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1973 Code  33-1-33-55, SFCC 1981 Code  9-12-1-9-12-12, 9-13-1-9-15, 9-14-1-9-14-19, 9-15-1-9-15-12 and Ordinance Nos. 1955-19, 1962-12, 1974-8, 1949-26 and 1980-43. 
18-6.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish city business licensing requirements for taxicab services in the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2011-30,  15) 
18-6.4 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 18-6 SFCC 1987: 
    Certificate means the operating authority issued by the commission to intrastate common motor carriers of persons or household goods. 
    Commission means the New Mexico public regulation commission. 
    Common motor carrier means a person offering compensated transportation by motor vehicle to the general public, whether over regular or irregular routes, or under scheduled or unscheduled service, but does not include commuter services. 
    Financial responsibility means the ability to respond in damages for liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle in the provision of transportation services. 
    Taxicab service means a common motor carrier engaged in unscheduled passenger transportation in a motor vehicle having a capacity of not more than eight (8) passengers, including the driver, not operated on a regular route or between specified places. Pursuant to 18.3.6.9(H) NMAC, a taxicab service: 
(1)  May not provide bingo bus service, charter service, commuter service, limousine service, non-emergency medical transport service, shared ride service, shuttle service, tour and sightseeing service, or terminal shuttle service; 
(2)  Shall charge rates based on one (1) charge for the first person and an additional small fixed charge for each additional person; 
(3)  Shall grant exclusive direction to the first person engaging the taxicab service; 
(4)  May provide one-way transportation of passengers; 
(5)  May solicit business on the streets or may prearrange to provide service; 
(6)  May not use chauffeur-driven luxury motor vehicles to provide taxicab service. 
(Ord. #2011-30,  16) 
18-6.5 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful for a taxicab service located within the municipal boundaries of the city of Santa Fe to engage in business without first obtaining a valid business license as required by Section 18-1 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Licenses are not assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. #2011-30,  12) 
18-6.6 - License application. 
A.  The application for a license shall be available at the city's accounts receivable office and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the taxicab service; 
(3)  New Mexico taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current New Mexico taxpayer identification number; 
(4)  A copy of the current certificate issued by the commission evidencing that the taxicab service is in good standing with the commission; 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's most recent annual report of its operations; 
(6)  Proof of financial responsibility; and 
(7)  Such other information as the city may require. 
B.  The application shall include the certification, under penalty of perjury, of the applicant certifying that the information contained in the application is true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge; and that the applicant has and will continue to comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws. The applicant's signature shall be notarized. 
C.  The applicant shall maintain, at all times, accurate current application information with the city. If there is any change, or modification to the information provided on the initial application, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the office within two (2) weeks of the change. 
(Ord. #2011-30,  13) 
18-7 - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES. 

18-7.1 - Operations. 
A.  It is unlawful to operate a carnival or circus unless prior approval of the proposed operation is secured from the city manager. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a carnival or circus for more than six (6) consecutive days. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  19-2 by Ord. #1978-48,  1, 2; Ord. #1980-32,  1; Ord. #1981-64,  31; SFCC 1981,  9-5-1; Ord. #2003-9,  1) 
18-7.2 - Permit. 
A.  Any person contemplating operating a carnival or circus shall apply to the city clerk's office for a permit to do so not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the contemplated day of beginning operation. The application shall be on a form available at the city clerk's office and accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover the city's administrative service charge in issuing a permit. 
B.  As a condition of issuance of a permit to operate a carnival or circus, the applicant shall show to the satisfaction of the city manager that it will assure: 
(1)  Any food vending facilities meet the appropriate laws and regulations; 
(2)  Adequate security is provided by the applicant; 
(3)  Safety standards established by appropriate city staff will be complied with; and 
(4)  Adequate public liability insurance shall be provided by the applicant. 
C.  At the time of submission by the applicant of information with regard to the size, nature and duration of the carnival or circus, the applicant shall pay to the city a fee established by the city manager to defray the cost of the cleanup after departure. The city manager shall refund any unexpended portions of the fee. 
D.  The city manager, in the interest of the public peace, health, welfare and safety may restrict any approved carnival or circus to specifically approved locations. 
E.  If the operation of the carnival or circus includes animals, the applicant shall obtain a special animal permit as set forth in subsection 5-10.1N. SFCC 1987. 
F.  The applicant shall obtain a business license as set forth in subsection 18-8.10 SFCC, 1987. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  19-2.1 by Ord. #1978-48,  3 through 7; Ord. #1980-32,  2; Ord. #1981-64,  32; SFCC 1981,  9-5-2; Ord. #2003-9,  2) 
18-8 - PUSHCARTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; VEHICLE VENDORS.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Title amended by Ord. No. 2015-13  2)   Former subsections 18-8.1-18.8.8: Prior ordinance history includes portions of SFCC  4-17-8.1-4-17-8.6 and 4-17-8.9 and Ordinance Nos. 1984-89, 1986-19, 1987-6, 1990-5 and 2002-41. 

18-8.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Courtyard means a space open to the sky, bounded on three (3) sides by a building and within the lot of a place of business. 
    Inside building means a permanent structure enclosed by four (4) walls including multiple units for business purposes. 
    Mall means an enclosed area providing building structures for multi-purpose tenancy where vendors of goods are located. A mall includes a public walkway that gives access to vendors' locations. 
    Pushcart means a non-permanent, non-motorized cart, barrow or unit that can be pushed by hand. 
(Ord. #2009-49,  2) 
18-8.2 - Pushcarts on private property. 
    Pushcarts are permitted on private property, with the permission of the property owner; or as otherwise permitted by the city manager. Private property includes malls, courtyards or inside buildings. Pushcarts, as defined in subsection 18-8.1 SFCC 1987, are governed under the provisions of Section 18-2 SFCC 1987, entitled Business Registration Fees. 
(Ord. #2009-49,  3) 
18-8.3-18-8.8 - Reserved. 
18-8.9 - Vehicle vendors. 
A.  Short Title. This subsection 18-8.9 may be cited as the "Vehicle Vendor Ordinance". 
B.  Definitions. As used in this subsection 18-8.9: 
    Mobile vehicle vendor means a vehicle vendor that parks at one (1) or more locations within a twenty-four-hour period, at each location for a period of three (3) hours or less, or for any period of time during a special event permitted by the city or otherwise authorized by a resolution of the governing body, subject to and in conformance with the provisions of subsections 18-8.9C. and D. 
    Motorized vehicle means a licensed and insured motor vehicle as defined by the state of New Mexico motor vehicle division that meets all requirements of the same for operation on public streets and is operated by a licensed driver. 
    Special event means an event that is permitted by the city pursuant to subsection 18-8.9 SFCC 1987, Section 23-4 SFCC 1987, subsection 23-5.2 SFCC 1987 or by resolution of the governing body. 
    Stationary vehicle vendor means a vehicle vendor that parks at a location for a period of more than three (3) hours within a twenty-four-hour period subject to and in conformance with the provisions of subsections 18-8.9C and E. 
    Travel trailer means a licensed and insured travel trailer as defined by the state of New Mexico motor vehicle division that meets all requirements of the same for operation on public streets and is operated by a licensed driver. 
    Utility trailer means a licensed and insured utility trailer as defined by the state of New Mexico motor vehicle division that meets all requirements of the same for operation on public streets and is operated by a licensed driver. 
    Vehicle vendor means a person who offers for sale food, beverages, merchandise, or services (except transportation services) from a motorized vehicle, from a utility trailer or travel trailer pulled by a motorized vehicle, or from a pedal-operated vehicle. 
C.  Vehicle Vendors-General Requirements. 
(1)  In addition to the vendors permitted by the Plaza Pushcart Ordinance and the Santa Fe Plaza Park Artist/Artisan Program Ordinance, vehicle vendor permits may be approved by the city manager or his designee pursuant to the requirements of Section 23-4 SFCC 1987 and this subsection 18-8.9 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  Vehicle vendors shall license or register their businesses with the city pursuant to the requirements of Section 18-1 SFCC 1987 or 18-2 SFCC 1987, as applicable. 
(3)  Each business license or registration application for a vehicle vendor shall state the make, model and license plate number of each vehicle to be used for vending. Only those vehicles listed on the application shall be used for vending. 
(4)  Each vehicle used for vending shall be individually permitted and shall clearly display the corresponding vehicle vendor permit on the outside of the vehicle at all times. 
(5)  A vehicle vendor intending to sell food or beverages shall furnish the city with a valid food establishment permit issued by the state of New Mexico environment department. The food establishment permit shall be clearly displayed on the outside of the vehicle at all times. 
(6)  An annual vehicle vendor fee shall be paid to the city for each vehicle used for vehicle vending pursuant to subsection 18-8.10A SFCC 1987. 
(7)  Vehicle vendors are not permitted in the Plaza, Plaza Park or the Plaza periphery area as defined by Section 23-5 SFCC 1987 unless the vehicle vendor is participating in a special event permitted by the city and has obtained the written permission of the special event sponsor, in which case a maximum of five (5) licensed vehicle vendors may be permitted, or are otherwise authorized by resolution of the governing body. 
(8)  Vehicle vendors are not permitted on public or private streets in the Canyon Road Periphery Area as defined by Section 23-5 SFCC 1987 unless authorized by resolution of the governing body. 
(9)  Use of loudspeakers or amplification of sound by vehicle vendors is prohibited. 
(10)  Vehicle vendors shall at all times keep the area immediately surrounding the outside of their vehicle free of litter and refuse that originates from vending operations and shall remove litter and refuse that originates from vending operations for proper disposal offsite of the vending location. 
(11)  If after fifteen (15) days written notice from the city to a vehicle vendor of violations of the Santa Fe Municipal Code or state law and the violations are not corrected, then the related vehicle vendor permit(s) shall be revoked by the city manager and the vehicle vendor shall be subject to penalties pursuant to Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. The vehicle vendor may appeal the decision of the city manager to revoke a vehicle vendor permit to the governing body within fifteen (15) days of the revocation. 
D.  Mobile Vehicle Vendors-Additional Requirements. In addition to the general requirements of this subsection 18-8.9 SFCC 1987, mobile vehicle vendors are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Mobile vehicle vendors are permitted to vend only on public streets or in public parking lots, or on private streets or in private parking lots with the written permission of the property owner; 
(2)  Mobile vehicle vendors shall not vend within or adjacent to the boundaries of city parks during events scheduled by the city unless authorized by the city manager; 
(3)  Mobile vehicle vendors are prohibited from parking for more than three (3) hours per day at any location or within a three hundred (300) foot radius of any location at which they have previously parked during the same day unless the mobile vehicle vendor is participating in a special event permitted by the city and has obtained the written permission of the special event sponsor; 
(4)  Mobile vehicle vendors parked at a metered parking space in any one (1) hour or two (2) hour parking meter zones, and that pay the meter, may remain at the metered space for up to three (3) hours without violating the posted meter time zone restrictions; 
(5)  Mobile vehicle vendors that sell food or beverages are prohibited from parking within a one-hundred-fifty-foot radius of the street-level entrance of any restaurant during the restaurant's hours of operation unless the mobile vehicle vendor has obtained the written permission of the restaurant owner, or is participating in a special event permitted by the city and has obtained the written permission of the special event sponsor, or is authorized by resolution of the governing body; 
(6)  Use of parking spaces on public streets and public parking lots by mobile vehicle vendors shall be on a first-come-first-served basis. Mobile vehicle vendors shall not reserve parking spaces by the placement of obstructions intended to block parking areas or by engaging other parties to park and hold parking areas for their use; 
(7)  Mobile vehicle vendors parked on public streets shall park only in single, legal parking spaces designated for parallel parking. Mobile vehicle vendors parked in public parking lots located in parks may park in any legal designated parking space; 
(8)  Mobile vehicle vendors shall pay all parking fees associated with the locations at which they are parked. 
(9)  The city may temporarily or permanently prohibit the use of all or a portion of any public or private parking area by mobile vehicle vendors if the use of the area adversely affects public safety or the operation of the parking area; 
(10)  The customer service window of a mobile vehicle vendor parked on a public or private street shall face the adjacent sidewalk or edge of roadway; 
(11)  The customer entry door of a mobile vehicle vendor parked on a public or private street shall face the adjacent sidewalk or edge of roadway, or be located at the rear of the vehicle; 
(12)  All vending from mobile vehicle vendors shall take place from the vehicle itself. Generators, electrical wiring, menu boards, tables, chairs, tents or other furniture or items associated with the mobile vehicle vendor shall not be placed outside of the vehicle. 
E.  Stationary Vehicle Vendors - Additional Requirements. In addition to the general requirements of this subsection 18-8.9, stationary vehicle vendors are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Stationary vehicle vendors shall be located only in zoning districts where the type of vending proposed is a permitted use pursuant to Section 14-6 of the city of Santa Fe Land Development Code; 
(2)  Stationary vehicle vendors shall be located only on private property and only with the written permission of the property owner; 
(3)  A stationary vehicle vendor permit shall allow vending at a single location and for the hours of operation and duration of operation approved by the city. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  8; SFCC 1981,  4-17-8; Ord. #1982-10,  3; Ord. #1984-32,  1; Ord. #1984-90,  1; Ord. #1990-5,  11; Ord. #2015-13  3; Ord. No. 2016-32  2) 
Editor's note- Subsection 4-17-8 SFCC 1981 was repealed by Ord. #1984-90,  1, and a new subsection 4-17-8 was ordained. 
18-8.10 - Business license-Fees. 
A.  Pursuant to Sections 3-38-1 through 3-38-6 NMSA 1978, it is hereby declared by the governing body of the city of Santa Fe, that in order to protect the public health, general welfare and morals of the citizens of the city of Santa Fe, and for purposes of business regulation in the public interest, a business license fee shall be assessed as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstores, as defined in Section 14-12 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(2)  Adult motion picture theaters, as defined in Section 14-12 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar year, for each place of business; 
(3)  Alarm installation companies and alarm monitoring companies, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per calendar year, for each place of business. 
(4)  Antique dealers, ten dollars ($10.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(5)  Artist/artisan, ten dollars ($10.00) per calendar year; 
(6)  Auctions, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day; 
(7)  Carnivals, under the conditions prescribed in Section 18-7 SFCC 1987, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day; 
(8)  Circuses, under the conditions prescribed in Section 18-7 SFCC 1987, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day; 
(9)  Core recyclers, as defined in subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar year for each place of business. 
(10)  Special event vendors, as defined in subsection 18-1.2, ten dollars ($10.00) for each vendor per calendar year. Special event vendors intending to sell food or beverages shall meet any applicable federal, state, and city requirements, and shall furnish the city with a copy of a valid food establishment permit issued by the state of New Mexico environment department; 
(11)  Itinerant vendors, ten dollars ($10.00) per calendar year, per location; 
(12)  Jewelry auctions as defined by subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. These auctions shall be licensed per the provisions of subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987 and the provisions of this section shall not apply if they conflict with Section 18-5 SFCC 1987; 
(13)  Junk dealers as defined in subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(14)  Massage parlors, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(15)  Mobile home parks, as defined by Section 14-12 SFCC 1987, two dollars ($2.00) per space, with a minimum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) per park; 
(16)  Pawnbrokers, as defined in subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, under the conditions prescribed by Section 18-4 SFCC 1987, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(17)  Precious metal dealers, as defined in subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(18)  Private day-care nurseries, facilities and kindergartens, under the conditions prescribed in subsection 14-6.2B(4) SFCC 1987, ten dollars ($10.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(19)  Private detectives or private detective agencies, as defined in subsection 20-24.1 SFCC 1987, and under the conditions prescribed by Section 20-24 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(20)  Sales of goods brought into the city temporarily by itinerant vendors, as described in Section 18-3 SFCC 1987, under the conditions prescribed in subsections 18-3.1 through 18-3.3 SFCC 1987, two hundred dollars ($200.00) per occurrence; 
(21)  Secondhand dealers, as defined in subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, under the conditions prescribed by Section 18-4 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business; 
(22)  Special policemen or special police agencies as defined in subsection 20-24.1 SFCC 1987, under the conditions prescribed in Section 20-24 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. Those special police exempted under subsection 20-24.4 SFCC 1987 shall not be required to obtain a business license; 
(23)  Septic tank cleaners or septage haulers, under the conditions prescribed in Section 22-4 SFCC 1987, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, for each place of business. 
(24)  Street performers, as defined in subsection 23-8.3 SFCC 1987, thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per year, unless a street performer will perform for no more than one (1) thirty-day period per year, ten dollars ($10.00). 
(25)  Taxicab service, as defined in subsection 18-6.4 SFCC 1987, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year for each place of business. 
(26)  Transient precious metals dealer, as defined in subsection 18-4.1 SFCC 1987, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per separate event and location as described in the license application. 
(27)  Vehicle vendors, as defined in Subsection 18-8.9 SFCC 1987, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per vehicle per calendar year. The annual vehicle vendor fee shall include any applicable annual fire inspection fees required pursuant to subsection 12-2.2 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Before a license is granted, the following businesses shall execute and deliver a bond to the city clerk to be approved by the clerk and the city attorney with a corporate surety authorized by the laws of the state to write surety bonds and conditioned for the lawful conduct of the businesses and for the true and faithful observance of applicable provisions of the SFCC 1987; such bond shall be for the benefit of the city and every person damaged by breach of any condition thereof; 
(1)  Pawnbrokers, in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); and 
(2)  Jewelry auctions, as defined in subsections 18-5.4 through 18-5.23 SFCC 1987, in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), as set forth in subsection 18-5.15 SFCC 1987. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the businesses, professions or trades defined in this section as requiring a license, within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a license as prescribed by this section and pursuant to Section 3-38-1 NMSA 1978. 
D.  The license fees established in this subsection are hereby declared to have been reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the governing body of the city of Santa Fe and are hereby found to bear a reasonable relationship to the costs of regulations of each business by the city of Santa Fe. 
E.  Prior to engaging in any business to which this section applies, there shall be paid to the city of Santa Fe the applicable license fee and in the event the fee is paid after the beginning of the calendar year, it shall not be prorated. 
F.  Any person filing an application for issuance or renewal of any business license shall include on the application his current revenue division taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current revenue division taxpayer identification number. No license shall be issued unless such number or application has been furnished. 
(Ord. #1981-64,  3; Ord. #1983-38,  2; Ord. #1982-67,  1; SFCC 1981,  9-4-3; Ord. #1987-48,  8; Ord. #1987-51,  2; Ord. #1989-34,  24; Ord. #1990-5,  12; Ord. #1997-19,  1; Ord. #2009-33,  27; Ord. #2009-50,  10; Ord. #2011-29,  13; Ord. #2011-30,  14; Ord. #2015-13  4) 
Cross reference- The reference numbers have been changed to agree with revised Chapter 14, adopted December 31, 2001. Requirements for adult bookstores and adult motion picture theaters may be found in subsection 14-6.2. Requirements for mobile home parks may be found in subsection 14-6.2. 
18-9 - TAXES, NEW OR INCREASED; REALLOCATION OF PROCEEDS. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of passage of an election resolution authorizing the placement of a question on the ballot that would seek to or impose a new or increase in any tax, the city shall provide information to the electorate of the city of Santa Fe regarding the purpose(s) of the new or increased tax. 
B.  Any reallocation of proceeds from a voter-approved tax that deviates materially from the information provided to the electorate by the city of Santa Fe pursuant to paragraph A, above, shall be voted upon by the governing body through the adoption of an ordinance. For the purposes of this paragraph B, a change order reallocating such proceeds due to unforeseen or latent conditions is not a material deviation. 
(Ord. #2013-33  2; Ord. #2014-30,  2; Ord. #2015-24,  2) 
Editor's note- Former Section 18-9, Plaza Park Vendors, previously contained herein was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1990-5,  13. 
18-10 - MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAX. 

18-10.1 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality, for the privileges of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the "municipal gross receipts tax." 
(Ord. #1981-45,  1; SFCC 1981,  9-4-22; Ord. #1983-7,  1; Ord. #1987-19; Ord. #23-1991; Ord. #2007-5,  1; Ord. #2016-5  1; Ord. No. 2016-15  1; Ord. No. 2016-34  1; Ord. No. 2016-37) 
18-10.2 - General provisions. 
    This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1987-19; Ord. #23-1991; Ord. #2016-5  1; Ord. No. 2016-34; Ord. No. 2016-37) 
18-10.3 - Specific exemptions. 
    No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from: 
A.  Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; 
B.  A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to subsection C of Section 7-1-6.4 NMSA 1978; or 
C.  Direct broadcast satellite services. 
(Ord. #1981-45,  2; SFCC 1981,  9-4-23; Ord. #1983-7,  2; Ord. #1987-19; Ord. #23-1991; Ord. #2007-5,  2; Ord. No. 2016-5  1; Ord. No. 2016-15  2; Ord. No. 2016-34; Ord. No. 2016-37) 
18-10.4 - Dedication. 
    Revenue from the one and one-half percent (1.5%) municipal gross receipts tax will be used for the purpose(s) listed below: 
A.  Revenue from the first two (2) one-quarter percent (1/4%) increments of the municipal gross receipts tax is dedicated for the following purposes: 
(1)  Annual debt service for municipal gross receipts tax revenue bonds or other bonds for municipal projects issued for the construction, reconstruction, improvements and replacement of city facilities, parks, streets, sidewalks, utilities, and other public works projects including the related equipment and furnishings for the facilities. 
(2)  If there are proceeds remaining they may be used for: 
(a)  Construction, reconstruction, improvements, replacement, facility structural maintenance and repair, including related equipment and furnishings for the facilities. 
(b)  Operating expenditures necessitated by the expansion of services and facilities to the public. 
(c)  Personnel, operating, contractual, accounting, administration, equipment, vehicles and other costs related to the city's capital improvements program and operations of public works department. 
(d)  Computer hardware and software. 
B.  Revenue from the third and fourth one-quarter percent (1/4%) increments of the municipal gross receipts tax is dedicated to the general fund. 
C.  Revenue from the fifth one-quarter percent (1/4%) increment of the municipal gross receipts tax is dedicated to the public bus system and quality of life purposes in the following manner: 
(1)  Finance the acquisition, operation, maintenance and any other expenses necessary for or incidental to the provision of a public bus system. In the event that the public bus system is ever discontinued, the funds allocated pursuant to this paragraph shall be used for general municipal operations and the discontinuance of the public bus system shall not affect the allocations set out in paragraph (2) below. The governing body shall not discontinue the public bus system until the notice and hearing requirements of subsections 2-2.3A, 2-2.3B, 2-2.4A, 2-2.4D, and 2-2.6 SFCC 1987 have been met. 
(2)  After satisfying the distribution provided for in paragraph C(1), the remaining proceeds of the gross receipts tax shall be allocated exclusively for the following quality of life purposes: recreational facilities, bike and pedestrian pathways - with a priority given to pathways that connect with bus stops - libraries, and parks. Allocations for these quality of life purposes shall not exceed eleven percent (11%) of the total amount received from the fifth one-quarter percent (1/4%) increment of the gross receipts tax, except that any amount unspent for quality of life purposes shall be used for general municipal operations. 
D.  Dedication. Revenue from the sixth one-quarter percent (1/4%) of the municipal gross receipts tax is dedicated to the general fund of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34  A) 
(Ord. #1981-45; Ord. #1983-7; Ord. #1987-19; Ord. #23-1991; Ord. #2007-5,  3; Ord. #2016-5  1; Ord. No. 2016-15  3; Ord. No. 2016-34; Ord. No. 2016-37) 
18-10.5 - Effective date. 
A.  The effective date of the first two (2) one-quarter percent (1/4%) increments of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be January 1, 1982. 
B.  The effective date of the third one-quarter percent (1/4%) increments of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be July 1, 1983. 
C.  The effective date of the fourth one-quarter percent (1/4%) increments of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be January 1, 1988. 
D.  The effective date of the fifth one-quarter percent (1/4%) increments of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be January 1, 1992. 
E.  The effective date of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be either January 1, or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three (3) months from the date this ordinance is adopted, unless an election is held on the question of approving the ordinance, in which case the effective date shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three (3) months from the date when the results of the election are certified to be in favor of the ordinance's adoption and the adopted ordinance is delivered or mailed to the taxation and revenue department. 
(Ord. #1987-19; Ord. #23-1991; Ord. #2007-5,  4; Ord. #2016-5  1; Ord. No. 2016-15  4; Ord. No. 2016-34; Ord. No. 2016-37) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-34 was adopted July 27, 2016. 
18-11 - LODGERS' TAX.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 1969-13, Code 1973  32-11, 32-26, 1977-25, 1979-20, 1980-38, SFCC 1981  9-11-1-9-11-4, 9-11-6-9-11-18, 1983-36, 1985-62, 1987-20, 1987-45, 1989-13. 

18-11.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Lodgers' Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1992-27,  2; Ord. #1996-25,  1) 
18-11.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to impose a tax which will be borne by persons using commercial lodging accommodations which tax will provide revenues for the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting facilities, tourist attractions, and acquisition, construction and maintenance of tourist attractions and recreational facilities, and for all other legally permissible purposes including those purposes as authorized in subsection 18-11.15 of this section. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  3; Ord. #1996-25,  2) 
18-11.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section. 
    Accounts receivable unit means the office, within the city of Santa Fe finance department, that is responsible for issuing business registrations. 
    Board means the lodgers' occupancy tax advisory board established herein to make recommendations for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions, facilities and events to the governing body, keep minutes of its proceedings and submit its recommendations, correspondence and other pertinent documents to the governing body. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe. 
    City cashier's office means the office, within the city of Santa Fe finance department, where all monies owed the city are collected and deposited. All lodgers' tax remittance will be collected and deposited in the cashier's office. 
    City clerk means the city clerk of Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
    City treasurer means the finance department director. 
    Convention center fee means the two percent (2%) increment imposed by the city under the Civic and Convention Center Funding Act, Sections 5-14-1 to 5-14-15 NMSA 1978. 
    Gross taxable rent means the total amount of rent paid for lodging, not including the state gross receipts tax or local sales taxes. 
    Increment means a specified unit of the total percent of occupancy tax or convention center fee imposed where the unit is derived by dividing the percent tax imposed into separate parts of one percent (1%) or portions of one percent (1%). 
    Lodgers' tax shall be used to collectively refer to the occupancy tax and convention center fee. 
    Lodging means the transaction of furnishing rooms or other accommodations by a vendor to a vendee who for a rent uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms or other units of accommodations in or at a taxable premises. 
    Lodgings means the rooms or other accommodations furnished by a vendor to a vendee by a taxable service of lodgings. 
    Occupancy tax means tax on lodging authorized by the Lodgers' Tax Act, Sections 3-38-13 to 3-38-24 NMSA 1978. 
    Person means a corporation, firm, other body corporate, partnership, association or individual, includes a property management company, includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law and acting in a representative capacity, but does not include the United States of America, the state of New Mexico, any corporation, department, instrumentality or agency of the federal government or the state government, or any political subdivision of the state. 
    Rent means the consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property or other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to a lodgers' tax authorized in the Lodgers' Tax Act and/or the Civic and Convention Center Funding Act. 
    Taxable premises means a hotel, apartment, apartment hotel, apartment house, condominium, town home, casita, time-share and fractional-share lodge, lodging house, rooming house, motor hotel, bed and breakfast, guest house, guest ranch, ranch resort, guest resort, mobile home, motor court, auto court, auto camp, trailer court, trailer camp, trailer park, tourist camp, cabin, short-term rental unit or other premises for lodging. 
    Tourist means a person who travels for the purpose of business, pleasure or culture to the city of Santa Fe. 
    Tourist-related events means events that are planned for, promoted to and attended by tourists. 
    Tourist-related facilities and attractions means facilities and attractions that are intended to be used by or visited by tourists. 
    Tourist-related transportation systems means transportation systems that provide transportation for tourists to and from tourist-related facilities, attractions and events. 
    Vendee means a natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise of the taxable service of lodging. 
    Vendor means a person furnishing lodgings in the exercise of the taxable service of lodging. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  4; Ord. #1992-39; Ord. #1996-25,  3; Ord. #2003-37,  1; Ord. #2004-17,  1; Ord. #2008-5,  6) 
18-11.4 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed an occupancy tax of five percent (5%) and a convention center fee of two percent (2%) for a total of seven percent (7%) of gross taxable rent for lodging at a taxable premise within the city of Santa Fe paid to vendors. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  5; Ord. #1999-16,  1; Ord. #2003-37,  2; Ord. #2004-17,  2) 
18-11.5 - Presumption of taxability. 
    Every vendor who is providing lodging within the city of Santa Fe is exercising a taxable privilege. The vendor must provide documentation as to any applicable exception under this section, if requested by the city. 
(Ord. #2003-37,  3) 
18-11.6 - Registration. 
A.  No vendor shall engage in the business of providing lodging in the city of Santa Fe who has first not obtained a business registration as provided in this subsection; 
B.  Applicants for a vendor's business registration shall submit an application to the accounts receivable unit stating: 
(1)  The name of the vendor, including identification of any person, as defined in this section, who owns or operates or both owns and operates a place of lodging and the name or trade names under which the vendor proposes to do business and the post office address thereof; 
(2)  A description of the facilities, including the physical address(es), the number of rooms and the usual schedule of rates; 
(3)  A description of other facilities provided by the vendor or others to users of the lodgings such as restaurant, bar, cleaning, laundry, courtesy car, stenographer, tailor or others, and a statement identifying the license/registration issued, to whom issued, the authority issuing, and the period for which issued. If applicable, also the identification number provided by the taxation and revenue department of the state of New Mexico; 
(4)  The nature of the business practices of the vendor and to what extent, if any, his business is exempt from the lodgers' tax; 
(5)  State of New Mexico gross receipts tax number (C.R.S. ID #); and 
(6)  Other information reasonably necessary to effect a determination of eligibility for such license; 
C.  The accounts receivable unit shall review applications for registration within ten (10) days of receipt thereof, and grant the registration in due course if the applicant is doing business subject to the lodgers' tax; 
D.  An applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the accounts receivable unit may appeal the decision to the city manager by written notice to the city clerk of such appeal to be made within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision of the accounts receivable unit on the application. The matter shall be referred to the city manager for hearing in the usual course of business. The decision of the city manager shall be expressed in writing and be communicated in the same manner as the decision of the accounts receivable unit is transmitted. The action of the city manager shall be deemed final; 
E.  If the city manager finds for the applicant, the accounts receivable unit shall issue the registration or other notice conforming to the decision made by the city manager. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  6; Ord. #1996-25,  4; Ord. #1999-16,  2; Ord. #2003-37,  4) 
18-11.7 - Change of ownership. 
    Upon any change in, or transfer of ownership of lodging facilities, the vendor is required to notify the city of Santa Fe in writing: 
A.  The nature of the ownership change; 
B.  Documentation of sale or incorporation, if applicable; 
C.  The effective date of the ownership change; and 
D.  The name and business address of the new owner. 
(Ord. #2003-37,  5) 
18-11.8 - Exemptions. 
    The occupancy tax or the convention center fee shall not apply to any portion of the gross taxable rent: 
A.  If a vendee: 
(1)  Has been a permanent resident of the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days as evidenced by a lease or other long-term lodging documentation; or 
(2)  Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at the taxable premises for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days; 
B.  If the rent paid by the vendee is less than two dollars ($2.00) a day; 
C.  To lodging accommodations at institutions of the federal government, the state or any political subdivision thereof; 
D.  To lodging accommodations at religious, charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions, including without limitation such accommodations at summer camps operated by such institutions; 
E.  To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities; 
F.  To privately-owned and operated convalescent homes, or homes for the aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill; 
G.  If the vendor does not offer at least three (3) rooms within or attached to a taxable premises for lodging, or at least three (3) other premises providing lodging facilities regardless of the number of rooms available at each taxable premises or a combination of these within the city. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  7; Ord. #1996-25,  5; Ord. #2003-37,  6; Ord. #2004-17,  3) 
18-11.9 - Collection of the tax and reporting procedures. 
A.  Every vendor providing lodgings shall collect the tax thereon on behalf of the city of Santa Fe and shall act as a trustee therefor. 
B.  The tax shall be collected from vendees and shall be charged separately from the rent fixed by the vendor for the lodgings. 
C.  Each vendor registered under this section shall be liable to the city of Santa Fe for the tax provided herein on the rent paid for lodging at his respective place of business. 
D.  Failure of the vendor to collect the tax is not cause for the city to forgive the tax due and owed by the vendor. 
E.  Each vendor shall make a report by the twenty-fifth day of each month, on forms provided by the city cashiers office, of the receipts for lodging in the preceding calendar month, and shall submit the proceeds of the lodgers' tax to the city of Santa Fe and include sufficient information to enable the city to audit the reports and shall be verified on oath by the vendor. 
F.  Lodgers' tax payments are due (postmarked by the United States Post Office or other such provider or hand delivered to and receipted by the city cashiers office) by the twenty-fifth day of each month for receipts of lodging in the preceding calendar month. The city, however, is not obligated to retain all envelopes as it is the responsibility of the vendor to ensure timely payments; 
G.  Upon application approved in writing by the city, a vendor may report and submit payments on a quarterly basis, which are due on the twenty-fifth day of the month after the end of the quarter for the receipts of lodging in the preceding calendar quarter, using separate reporting forms for each month in the quarter; 
H.  A vendor applying to make quarterly reports as described in subsection 18-11.9G shall have and shall at all times continue to have: 
(1)  A twelve (12) month average of gross taxable rent of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month; and, 
(2)  Not more than two (2) late payments out of the last eight (8) consecutive reporting periods. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  8; Ord. #1996-25,  6; Ord. #1999-54,  1; Ord. #2003-37,  7) 
18-11.10 - Duties of the vendor. 
    Vendor shall maintain adequate records of facilities subject to the tax and of proceeds received for the use thereof. Such records shall be maintained in Santa Fe, New Mexico, and shall be open to the inspection of the city during reasonable hours and shall be retained for three (3) years. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  9; Ord. #2003-37,  8) 
18-11.11 - Failure to make return; computation, civil penalty and notice; collection of delinquencies; occupancy tax is a lien. 
A.  Every vendor is liable for the payment of the proceeds of any occupancy tax and conventions center fee that the vendor failed to remit to the city, whether due to vendor's failure to collect the tax or otherwise. Vendor shall be liable for the tax plus a civil penalty equal to the greater of ten percent (10%) of the amount not remitted or one hundred dollars ($100.00). The city shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of the delinquency, which notice shall be mailed either to the vendor's local or business address, informing the lodging facility of the delinquency and penalty due. Failure to receive the notice does not abate the delinquency and penalty fee. 
B.  If payment is not received within fifteen (15) days of the date due, interest will accrue at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or pro rated for a partial month on the unpaid balance of the tax and penalty. 
C.  If payments are not received within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notice, the city may bring an action in law or equity in the district court for the collection of any amounts due, including without limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid principal at a rate not exceeding one percent (1%) a month. If the city attempts collection through an attorney or the city attorney for any purpose with regard to this section, the vendor shall be liable to the city for all costs, fees paid to the attorney or city attorney, and all other expenses incurred in connection therewith. 
D.  The occupancy tax and convention center fee imposed by the city of Santa Fe constitutes a lien in favor of the city upon the personal and real property of the property owner of the lodgings. The lien may be enforced as provided in Sections 3-36-1 through 3-36-7 NMSA 1978. Priority of the lien shall be determined from the date of filing. 
E.  The payments due under this section, together with all penalties, fees, interest and other charges prescribed, shall become a personal liability of the owner of the property. In addition to collection through foreclosure of the lien, collection may be enforced on such personal liability by resort to any other legal procedure available for the enforcement of personal liabilities. 
F.  Under process or order of court, no person shall sell the property of a vendor without first ascertaining from the city treasurer the amount of an occupancy tax or convention center fee due the city. Any occupancy tax or convention center fee due the city shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale before payment is made to any judgment creditor or any other person with a claim on the proceeds of the sale. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  10; Ord. #1996-25,  7; Ord. #1999-54,  2; Ord. #2003-37,  9) 
18-11.12 - Criminal penalties; other sanctions. 
A.  Any person who violates the provisions of the lodgers' tax ordinance for a failure to pay the tax, to remit proceeds thereof to the city or to properly account for any lodging and tax proceeds pertaining thereto shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. 
B.  The city may bring an action in the district court for collection of amounts due, including without limitation, penalties on the amounts due on the unpaid principal at a rate not exceeding one percent (1%) per month, the costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with the court action to collect the unpaid tax. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  11; Ord. #1996-25,  8; Ord. #2003-37,  10) 
18-11.13 - Refunds and credits. 
A.  If any person believes he has made payment of any lodgers' tax in excess of that for which he was liable, he may claim a refund thereof by directing to the city treasurer, no later than ninety (90) days from the date payment was made, a written claim for refund accompanied by a restated lodgers' tax reporting form for that period. Every claim for refund shall state the nature of the person's complaint and the affirmative relief requested. The city treasurer shall allow the claim in whole or in part or may deny it. 
B.  A refund may be made by the city unilaterally to a vendor in consideration of documentation presented in an audit report received as detailed in subsection 18-11.14 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  12; Ord. #1996-25,  9; Ord. #2003-37,  11) 
18-11.14 - Vendor audits. 
A.  The city treasurer may conduct random audit(s) to verify the amount of gross rent subject to the occupancy tax and to ensure that the full amount of occupancy tax on the rent is collected from each vendor thus audited. The city treasurer may also conduct audits as necessary to verify compliance with this section. 
B.  The audit(s) may be performed by the city treasurer or by any other designee. A copy of the audit shall be submitted to the city's finance committee and the advisory board for review. A copy of the audit(s) shall be filed annually with the local government division of the department of finance and administration. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  13; Ord. #1996-25,  10; Ord. #2003-37,  12) 
18-11.15 - Confidentiality of return and audit. 
    It is unlawful for any employee of the city of Santa Fe to reveal to any individual other than another employee or elected official of the city of Santa Fe any information contained in the return or audit of any taxpayer including vendors subject to the Lodgers' Tax Act, except: 
A.  To a court of competent jurisdiction in response to an order thereof in an action relating to taxes to which the city of Santa Fe is a party, and in which information sought is material to the inquiry; 
B.  To the taxpayer himself or to his authorized representative; 
C.  In such manner, for statistical purposes, the information revealed is not identified as applicable to any individual taxpayer; and 
D.  For the identity of vendors subject to the Lodgers' Tax Act. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  14; Ord. #1996-25,  11; Ord. #2003-37,  13; Ord. #2006-62) 
18-11.16 - Advisory board. 
    The governing body shall administer the lodgers' tax monies collected. The mayor shall appoint an advisory board of five (5) members; two (2) of whom shall be owners or operators of lodgings subject to the tax within the municipality, two (2) of whom are owners or operators of industries within the municipality that primarily provide services or products to tourists and one (1) member who is a resident of the municipality and represents the general public. The members of the board shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The board shall advise the governing body on expenditures of funds authorized under subsection 18-11.17A, of this section for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist attractions and facilities in the municipality and surrounding areas. The recommendations for the expenditures of funds shall be submitted to the governing body by the board. The budget approved by the governing body shall be furnished to the advisory board. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  15; Ord. #1996-25,  12; Ord. #2003-37,  14) 
18-11.17 - Use of lodger's tax monies. 
    The proceeds of the occupancy tax and convention center fee shall be used to defray costs as follows: 
A.  Not less than one-half (1/2) of the proceeds derived from the first three percent (3%) increments and not less than one-fourth (1/4) of the proceeds of the tax in excess of three percent (3%) increments shall be used for the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions, facilities and events; 
B.  Proceeds of the fourth one percent (1%) increment of the tax not otherwise allocated by subsection 18-11.17A SFCC 1987 shall be used by the city for advertising, publicizing, promoting of tourist-related attractions, facilities and events, specifically as they relate to nonprofit art activities, and nonprofit performing arts in Santa Fe less administration costs. The funds shall be administered by the arts commission as created in Section 6-1 SFCC 1987, or its successor. 
C.  After July 1, 1996, funds collected for use under paragraph A, herein, and at least one-fourth (1/4) of funds collected for use under paragraph B, herein, must be spent within two (2) years of the close of the fiscal year collected. 
D.  The proceeds in excess of the amount required by paragraph A, herein, or allocated by the city, pursuant to paragraph B, herein, to be used for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions, facilities and events may be used for: 
(1)  Collecting and administering the tax; 
(2)  Audits; 
(3)  Establishing, operating, purchasing, constructing, otherwise acquiring, reconstructing, extending, improving, equipping, furnishing or acquiring real property or any interest in real property for the site or grounds for tourist-related facilities or attractions or transportation systems of the municipality or the county in which the municipality is located; 
(4)  Advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions, facilities and events of the municipality or county and tourist facilities or attractions within the area; 
(5)  Providing police and fire protection and sanitation service for tourist-related events, facilities and attractions located in the respective municipality or county; 
(6)  Principal and interest of revenue bonds issued as authorized by Section 3-38-23 or 3-38-24 NMSA 1978; or 
(7)  Any combination of the foregoing purposes or transactions stated in this section, but for no other municipal or county purpose. 
E.  Proceeds of the fifth one percent (1%) increment of the tax shall be used by the city for establishing, operating, purchasing, constructing, otherwise acquiring, reconstructing, extending, improving, equipping, furnishing or acquiring real property or any interest in real property for the site or grounds for a new convention center, major reconstruction or addition to the current convention center, or adjoining parking facilities. These funds may be used for construction of other tourism related facilities as limited by state law. Authorized uses may also be the payment of principal and interest in connection with and any other charges pertaining to revenue bonds issued for any of the above purposes. At the end of each four (4) years from the date of the enactment of this fifth one percent (1%) increment, the occupancy tax advisory board (OTAB) shall review and assess this section, determine the status of the authorized uses as stated in this paragraph F, and make a recommendation to the governing body if the tax shall continue to be accrued for these purposes or if the tax and accumulated proceeds shall be applied to any other use as authorized in other subsections of this section for lodgers' tax. The governing body shall make the final determination through an amended ordinance if the use is to be changed. If no action is taken, the ordinance for the fifth one percent (1%) increment shall continue as stated. 
F.  Proceeds of the sixth one percent (1%) and the seventh one percent (1%) increments of the tax (also referred to as a convention center fee) may be used by the city for the following: 
(1)  The design, construction, equipping, furnishing, landscaping and other costs associated with the development of a civic and convention center and adjoining parking garage located within the city; 
(2)  Payments of principal, interest or prior redemption premiums due in connection with and any other charges pertaining to revenue bonds authorized by the Civic and Convention Center Fund Act Sections 5-14-1 to 5-14-15 NMSA 1978 including payments into sinking fund or reserve fund required by the revenue bond ordinance; and, 
(3)  Costs of collecting and otherwise administering the tax, provided that administration costs shall not be paid if there are current payments due pursuant to paragraph F(2) of this subsection and that no more than ten percent (10%) of the revenue collected in any fiscal year shall be used to pay administration costs. 
(4)  Operation costs of the civic and convention center and adjoining parking garage provided that no such costs shall be paid if there are current payments due pursuant to paragraph F(2) of this subsection; and 
(5)  Payments into a capital reserve fund established for the future payment for capital maintenance and improvements and equipment replacement costs of the civic and convention center and adjoining parking garage provided that: 
(a)  No payments shall be made pursuant to this paragraph if there are current payments due pursuant to paragraph F(2) of this subsection; and 
(b)  At least once every five (5) years, the governing body shall compare the amount of money in the fund with the expected future expenditures from the fund and decide if the convention center fees may be reduced pursuant to paragraph H of this section. 
G.  The sixth one percent (1%) and the seventh one percent (1%) increments of the lodgers' tax (also referred to as a convention center fee) shall be imposed only for the period necessary for payment of principal and interest on revenue bonds issued to accomplish the purpose for which the revenue is dedicated, but the period shall not exceed thirty (30) years from the date of the ordinance imposing the fee. 
H.  The governing body may decrease the rate of the convention center fee if the following are met: 
(1)  All required payments have been made pursuant to paragraph F of this subsection and the required levels of and estimated payments from any reserve fund, sinking fund or capital reserve fund can be sustained at a decreased rate; 
(2)  The decreased fee will not otherwise directly or indirectly impair outstanding revenue bonds issued under Section 5-14-13 NMSA 1978; and 
(3)  The local government division of the department of finance and administration of the state of New Mexico finds that the requirements of paragraphs H(1) and (2) of this subsection have been satisfied and otherwise approves the fee decrease. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  16; Ord. #1992-39,  2; Ord. #1996-25,  13; Ord. #2000-2,  1; Ord. #2003-37,  15; Ord. #2004-17,  4) 
18-11.18 - Contracting for services. 
    The governing body may contract for the management of programs and activities for advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions, facilities and events. The contractor shall be required to maintain the funds from the city in a separate account, not co-mingled with any other money, maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure, and make such records available for inspection upon request by the city. Subcontractors shall be subject to the same terms and conditions. Occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses and other administrative costs if incurred directly for the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related attractions, facilities and events. Quarterly reports of expenditures made for contracted services shall be made to the governing body and the advisory board. 
(Ord. #1996-25,  14; Ord. #2003-37,  16) 
18-11.19 - Local government division rules. 
    A report shall be made quarterly to the local government division of the state department of finance and administration of expenditure of lodgers' tax. A copy shall be submitted to the advisory board. 
(Ord. #1996-25,  15; Ord. #2003-37,  17) 
18-11.20 - Severability. 
    If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. #1992-27,  17; Ord. #1996-25,  16; Ord. #2003-37,  18) 
18-12 - MUNICIPAL ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES GROSS RECEIPTS TAX. 

18-12.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "municipal environmental services gross receipts tax ordinance." 
(Ord. #1993-20,  1) 
18-12.2 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for the privilege of engaging business in the municipality an excise tax equal to one sixteenth of one percent ( 1/16 %) of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Environmental Services Gross Receipts Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the "municipal environmental services gross receipts tax." 
(Ord. #1993-20,  2) 
18-12.3 - General provisions. 
    This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1993-20,  3) 
18-12.4 - Specific exemptions. 
    No municipal environmental services gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from: 
A.  The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; 
B.  Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; or 
C.  A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to subsection C of Section 7-1-66.4 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1993-20,  4) 
18-12.5 - Dedication. 
    Revenue from the municipal environmental services gross receipts tax will be used for the acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance of solid waste facilities, water facilities, wastewater facilities, sewer systems and related facilities. 
(Ord. #1993-20,  5) 
18-12.6 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the municipal environmental services gross receipts tax shall be January 1, 1994, unless an election is held pursuant to Section 7-19B-3(A) NMSA 1978 on the question of disapproving the section, in which case the effective date shall be either July 1 or January 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three (3) months from the date when the results of the election are certified to be in favor of the section's adoption. 
(Ord. #1993-20,  6) 
18-13 - MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX. 

18-13.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Municipal Infrastructure Gross Receipts Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1993-21,  1) 
18-13.2 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal to one sixteenth of one percent ( 1/16 %) of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Infrastructure Gross Receipts Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1993-21,  2) 
18-13.3 - General provisions. 
    This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1993-21,  3) 
18-13.4 - Specific exemptions. 
    No municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from: 
A.  The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; 
B.  Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; or 
C.  A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to subsection C of Section 7-1-6.4 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1993-21,  4) 
18-13.5 - Dedication. 
    Revenue from the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax will be used for repair, replacement, construction and acquisition of solid waste facilities, including siting, construction, development, maintenance, closure and post-closure care of any landfill operated or to be operated directly or indirectly by the city of Santa Fe or in conjunction with other public bodies, and for payment of special obligation bonds issued pursuant to a revenue bond act. 
(Ord. #1993-21,  5) 
18-13.6 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of at least three (3) months from the date this section is adopted. 
(Ord. #1993-21,  6) 
18-14 - CHILDREN AND YOUTH FUND. 

18-14.1 - Dedication. 
A.  When the annual budget is prepared, city staff shall include an amount of the general fund equal to a minimum of three percent (3%) of the city's share of the state gross receipts tax for council consideration, which shall be allocated annually to the children and youth fund and may be increased by other annual allocations the governing body approves. The budget shall be prepared consistent with the Bateman Act,  6-6-11 NMSA 1978. 
B.  If at the end of the fiscal year, the city's share of the state gross receipts tax revenues in the general fund is greater than the amended budget, and all general fund expenditures and reserve requirements have been met, and the realized surplus is at least the equivalent of one percent (1%) or one-third (?) of the children and youth fund allocation, then the amount will be transferred to the fund for the subsequent year not to exceed a four percent (4%) allocation to the children and youth fund. 
C.  The annual balance of the children and youth commission fund shall be no less than nine-hundred thousand dollars ($900,000.00). In the event of an economic downturn, the children and youth commission is permitted to supplement grant funding from this unexpended balance. 
D.  The children and youth fund will support the activities of the children and youth commission (subsection 6-10.1 SFCC 1987) and staff (subsection 6-10.3 SFCC 1987). 
E.  The fund shall be used to support community programs that promote the healthy development of children and youth, from birth through age twenty-one (21). 
F.  Applications for the children and youth fund shall be reviewed by the children and youth commission as set forth in subsection 6-10.1 SFCC 1987 prior to submission to the governing body for approval. The children and youth commission shall strive to promote an equitable distribution of funds addressing funding priorities identified by the commission and approved by the governing body. 
G.  The children and youth fund is limited to non-city programs except as specified in subsection 6-10.3 SFCC 1987. 
H.  Applicants for the children and youth fund shall be limited to nonprofit organizations that have been granted and currently hold tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or to public school programs. 
(Ord. #2001-7,  2; Ord. # 2018-3 ,  1) 
18-15 - MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX-REPAYMENT OF REVENUE BONDS SERIES 1995A AND 1995B.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1998-35, codified herein, was originally adopted as Section 18-14. It was renumbered for codification to avoid duplication of numbers. 

18-15.1 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal to one-sixteenth of one percent ( 1/16 %) of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the "municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax." 
(Ord. #1998-35,  2) 
18-15.2 - General provisions. 
    This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1998-35,  3) 
18-15.3 - Specific exemptions. 
    No municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from: 
A.  Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; 
B.  Business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by that municipality on which a state gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to subsection C of Section 7-1-6.4 NMSA 1978; or 
C.  Direct broadcast satellite services. 
(Ord. #1998-35,  4) 
18-15.4 - Dedication. 
    Revenues from the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax will be used for the purpose(s) listed below: 
A.  Repayment of subordinate lien gross receipts tax revenue bonds series 1995A and 1995B; and 
B.  Municipal general purposes. 
(Ord. #1998-35,  5) 
18-15.5 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of at least three (3) months from the date this section is delivered or mailed to the taxation and revenue department. 
(Ord. #1998-35,  6) 
18-15.6 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 18-15.6, Delayed Repeal, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1998-35, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-10,  1. 
18-16 - MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX-ADDITIONAL POLICE OFFICERS AND OTHER POLICE OPERATIONS. 

18-16.1 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal to one-sixteenth of one percent ( 1/16 %) of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the "municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax." 
(Ord. #1999-38,  1) 
18-16.2 - General provisions. 
    This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1999-38,  2) 
18-16.3 - Specific exemptions. 
    No municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from: 
A.  Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; 
B.  A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to subsection C of Section 7-1-6.4 NMSA 1978; or 
C.  Direct broadcast satellite services. 
(Ord. #1999-38,  3) 
18-16.4 - Dedication. 
    Revenues from the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax will be used for the purpose(s) listed below: 
    First, for the annual costs associated with the staffing of fifteen (15) police officers and the associated capital and operating costs related to these additional officers; and 
    Second, any residual amounts not used for the above listed purpose shall be used for other police equipment or other police staff or other police operations. 
(Ord. #1999-38,  4) 
18-16.5 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of at least three (3) months from the date this section is delivered or mailed to the Taxation and Revenue Department. 
(Ord. #1999-38,  5) 
18-17 - MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX-GENOVEVA CHAVEZ COMMUNITY CENTER. 

18-17.1 - Imposition of tax. 
    There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal to one-sixteenth of one percent ( 1/16 %) of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the "municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax." 
(Ord. #1999-39,  1) 
18-17.2 - General provisions. 
    This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. 
(Ord. #1999-39,  2) 
18-17.3 - Specific exemptions. 
    No municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from: 
A.  Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to another point outside the municipality; 
B.  A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to subsection C of Section 7-1-6.4 NMSA 1978; or 
C.  Direct broadcast satellite services. 
(Ord. #1999-39,  3) 
18-17.4 - Dedication. 
    Revenues from the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax will be used for the purpose(s) listed below: 
    First, for such annual costs associated with the operation of the Genoveva Chavez Community Center as the governing body shall annually determine to be appropriately funded through this tax revenue; and 
    Second, any residual amounts not used for the above-listed purpose shall be used only for one-time, nonrecurring parks and recreation purposes and not for personnel or other recurring expenditures. 
(Ord. #1999-39,  4) 
18-17.5 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of at least three (3) months from the date this section is delivered or mailed to the taxation and revenue department. 
(Ord. #1999-39,  5) 
18-18 - RESERVED.[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Ord. No. 2016-25, adopted June 23, 2016, Section 18-18 SFCC 1987, Municipal Capital Outlay Gross Receipts Tax, Ordinance Number 2004-50, effective July 1, 2005, and imposing one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) of municipal capital outlay gross receipts tax shall be repealed effective January 1, 2017, or July 1, 2017, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of at least three (3) months from the date this ordinance is delivered or mailed to the taxation and revenue department. 

18-19 - HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES FUND. 

18-19.1 - Dedication. 
A.  When the annual budget is prepared, city staff shall include an amount of the general fund equal to two percent (2%) of the city's share of the state gross receipts tax, which shall be allocated annually to the health and human services fund. 
B.  The health and human services fund will provide and maintain a safety net of services to help meet the essential health and human services needs of the residents of Santa Fe to include improving access to: 
(1)  Primary health care; 
(2)  Basic material goods, services, food and shelter; and 
(3)  Behavioral health services to include mental health, substance abuse, and recovery support services. 
C.  The fund shall be used to support community programs that align their agency's programs and services outcomes for participants ages eighteen (18) or above to the priority outcomes, as identified by the human services committee to include, but not limited to: 
(1)  Adult health and behavioral health; 
(2)  Community safety; and 
(3)  Social justice and quality of life. 
    The priority outcomes will be maintained, updated and/or revised during the annual strategic planning session in accordance with a local, state and national best practice standards and data-driven outcomes. 
D.  All requests for the use of the health and human services fund shall be reviewed by the human services committee, whose purpose is to understand the community needs and support services that help meet the essential health and human services needs of the residents of Santa Fe. 
E.  The health and human services fund is limited to non-city programs. 
F.  Applicants for the health and human services fund shall be limited to nonprofit organizations that have been granted and currently hold tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35) 
CHAPTER XIX - PERSONNEL 
19-1 - SHORT TITLE. 
    This chapter may be cited as the "City Personnel Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1983-44,  2; SFCC 1981,  2-2-1) 
19-2 - FRAUD, WASTE AND ABUSE HOTLINE.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former  19-2, Definitions, previously contained herein, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  1. 

19-2.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Fraud, Waste and Abuse Hotline Ordinance". 
(Ord. #2013-27) 
19-2.2 - Authority. 
    The city has the authority to enact this section under all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of New Mexico by virtue of its enactment of its charter pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico Constitution, and pursuant to the New Mexico Municipal Charter Act including all implied powers and all powers necessary to implement all express powers of the city, as if each and every one of the city's implied powers were fully, completely and expressly enumerated in its charter. 
(Ord. #2013-27) 
19-2.3 - Purpose; intent. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to establish a mechanism specifically for city employees, in good faith, to report alleged fraud, waste or abuse by city employees or city public officers of the city. 
B.  The intent of the governing body in enacting this section is to protect public employees by keeping confidential the name of the public employee who lodges a good faith complaint through the fraud, waste and abuse hotline from retaliation. 
(Ord. #2013-37) 
19-2.4 - Establishment of fraud, waste and abuse hotline. 
    There is established a fraud, waste and abuse hotline in the city for city employees to, in good faith, report confidentially alleged acts of fraud, waste and abuse committed by other city employees or city public officials. 
(Ord. #2013-37) 
19-2.5 - Confidentiality of complaints. 
    Pursuant to this section and the city's home rule powers, it is necessary for the welfare of the city's employees and its residents that all complaints filed by city employees using the fraud, waste and abuse hotline shall remain confidential and be exempt from any request to inspect public records submitted in accordance with the Inspection of Public Records Act, Chapter 14, Article 2 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #2013-37) 
19-2.6 - Adoption of Whistleblower Protection Act. 
    The New Mexico Whistleblower Protection Act provides protection to public employees and prohibits a public employer from taking any retaliatory action against a public employee based upon a communication about an action or a failure to act that the public employee believes in good faith constitutes an unlawful or improper act. The provisions of the Whistleblower Protection Act, Sections 10-16C-1 through 10-16C-6 NMSA 1978, are adopted by reference as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. #2013-37) 
19-2.7 - Annual review. 
    This section shall be reviewed one (1) year from the date of adoption and thereafter, on an annual basis. 
(Ord. #2013-37) 
19-3 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 

19-3.1 - Declaration of policy. 
    Pursuant to Sections 3-12-2, 3-12-4, and 3-14-12 NMSA 1978, it is the policy of the city of Santa Fe to endeavor to achieve quality public service by the adoption of a personnel merit system consistent with: 
A.  Recruitment, selection, and advancement of employees on the basis of their relative abilities, knowledge and skills, including consideration of qualified candidates for initial appointment; 
B.  Providing equitable and adequate compensation; 
C.  Training employees, as needed, to assure high-quality performance and on-the-job safety; 
D.  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected; 
E.  Assuring fair treatment of candidates and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, religious creed, medical condition or handicap and with proper regard for their privacy, and constitutional rights as citizens; and 
F.  Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for political purposes and are prohibited from using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the results of an election or a nomination for office. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  4; SFCC 1981,  2-2-3; Ord. #1992-10,  1) 
19-3.2 - Positions not covered by chapter. 
    This chapter covers all positions except: 
A.  Officials elected by popular vote or appointed to fill vacancies in elective offices; 
B.  Members of city boards and commissions; 
C.  City manager, directors of departments and employees designated as exempt by the city manager and approved by the governing body; 
D.  Those in the judicial branch of government; 
E.  Those on a professional services contract and those whose employment is temporary, or emergency. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  5; SFCC 1981,  2-2-4; Ord. #1989-20,  2) 
19-3.3 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Subsection 19-3.3, Factors of Employment, previously contained herein, has been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  3. 
19-3.4 - Prerogatives of employer. 
    It is the exclusive responsibility and prerogative of the city to determine the purpose of each of its agencies and departments, to set standards of services to be offered to the public, and to exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations. Nothing in this chapter or rules and regulations shall be interpreted to prohibit the right of the city to make a decision or choice based on other factors not specifically set forth therein. It is the responsibility and exclusive prerogative of the city to direct its employees to take disciplinary action for proper cause, to relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work, lack of funds or for other legitimate reasons, and to determine the methods, means and personnel by which the city's operations are to be conducted. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  7; SFCC 1981,  2-2-6) 
19-3.5 - Interpretive memoranda. 
    The city manager may issue interpretive memoranda necessary to interpret the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  8; SFCC 1981,  2-2-7) 
19-3.6 - Discrimination prohibited. 
A.  It is hereby established that the city is an "equal opportunity employer." The following acts of discrimination on the part of any person are expressly prohibited, and if such discriminatory acts occur, the person guilty of same is subject to dismissal or suspension from city employment or other appropriate disciplinary action. No city employee shall: 
(1)  Unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification, refuse to hire, discharge, promote or demote or to discriminate in matters of compensation against any person otherwise qualified, because of race, age, religion, handicap, national origin, ancestry, sex, political affiliation, Vietnam era veteran, or disabled status; 
(2)  Deny equal treatment or otherwise favor any employee on the basis of race, color, religion, handicap, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, political affiliation, Vietnam era veteran, or disabled status; 
(3)  Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication or to use any form of application for employment or membership to make any inquiry regarding prospective membership or employment which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion, handicap, national origin, ancestry, sex, age, political affiliation, Vietnam era veteran, or disabled status unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification; 
(4)  Intimidate, dismiss or otherwise discriminate against any person because he has filed a complaint, testified or participated in any proceeding under this section; 
(5)  Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the acts forbidden under this section; or to attempt to do so; or 
(6)  Attempt to favor or deny treatment to any employee or prospective employee or to attempt to cause any person to violate the terms of this chapter on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, ancestry, sex, age, political affiliation, Vietnam era veteran, or disabled status; 
(7)  Engage in any form of discrimination or harassment with regard to employees or applicants for employment, including making statements, remarks or comments which are racial or ethnic slurs, or amount to religious intimidation, epithets, or sexual harassment. 
B.  Charges of violations of this section shall be presented to the city manager, who shall hear and consider the complaint and take appropriate action. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  9; Ord. #1986-42,  1; SFCC 1981,  2-2-8) 
19-3.7 - Violation and penalty. 
    Any employee, who by himself or with others, willfully violates any provision of this chapter or the personnel rules and regulations, in addition to any other penalty imposed for such violation, is subject to suspension or dismissal. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  10; SFCC 1981,  2-2-9) 
19-3.8 - Domestic partner benefits. 
A.  For purposes of this subsection, "domestic partners" are two (2) individuals who live together in a long-term relationship of indefinite duration. There must be an exclusive mutual commitment similar to that of marriage, in which the partners agree to be financially responsible for one another's welfare and share financial obligations. The procedures of the extension of benefits to domestic partners of employees administrative policy shall be complied with in order to qualify as a "domestic partner" under this subsection. 
B.  The city shall offer employment benefits to the domestic partners of city employees who are eligible to receive benefits in the same manner such benefits are offered to the spouses of employees who are eligible to receive benefits, to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
C.  The city shall offer employment benefits to the dependent children of domestic partners of city employees who are eligible to receive benefits in the same manner such benefits are offered to the dependent children of employees who are eligible to receive benefits, to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
D.  The human resources department shall adhere to the city of Santa Fe administrative policy related to the extension of benefits to domestic partners of employees. 
(Ord. #2013-22) 
Editor's note- Former subsection 19-3.8, Payment for Employment or Promotion, previously contained herein, has been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  4. 
19-3.9 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Subsection 19-3.9, Collective Bargaining Prohibited, previously contained herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1983-44 and SFCC 1981,  2-2-11 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1993-2. 
19-3.10-19-3.12 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Subsections 19-3.10, Light Duty Assignments for Disabled Employees, 19-3.11, Employment Preference for Local Residents, and 19-3.12, Prohibited Employment, previously contained herein, have been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  5-7. 
19-4 - ADMINISTRATION. 

19-4.1 - Authority of city manager; personnel director. 
    The city manager has the sole authority to employ and discharge all municipal employees and to act in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. The city manager shall establish a personnel office and shall have the authority to employ a personnel director. The personnel director shall perform duties to be delegated to him by the city manager, and in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the governing body. The personnel director shall work under the direct control and supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  16; SFCC 1981,  2-3-1; Ord. #1996-49,  3) 
19-4.2 - Personnel duties and responsibilities of city manager. 
    The city manager is responsible for the administration of the city personnel merit system and shall perform the duties and have the following additional powers concerning personnel matters: 
A.  Administer and maintain the city personnel merit system and recommend rules and regulations necessary and incidental to the operation and maintenance of same, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  Issue supplemental personnel rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this personnel system and policies and rules and regulations adopted by the governing body pursuant to this personnel merit system; 
C.  As necessary, develop, maintain and apply procedures for the recruitment, compensation, promotion, training and disciplinary and related aspects of personnel management for all city personnel in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter; and 
D.  Recommend contractual arrangements with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical or professional services as may be desired. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  17; SFCC 1981,  2-3-2) 
19-4.3-19-4.4 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Subsections 19-4.3, Contracts with Employees, and 19-4.4, Personnel Records, previously contained herein, have been repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  8, 9. 
19-5 - RULES AND REGULATIONS. 

19-5.1 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
A.  Rules and regulations shall be adopted by resolution of the governing body, and upon such adoption and approval shall be filed in the personnel office and distributed to city employees, and shall be open to inspection by the public during normal business hours. The rules are adopted for the purpose of implementing the SFCC 1987 provisions to assure the continuance of the personnel merit system, thereby promoting efficiency in the conduct of public business and assuring fair and impartial treatment of all candidates for employment and all employees in the city. The rules and regulations shall provide for: 
(1)  The classification of city positions based on the duties and responsibilities of each position with provisions for the reclassification and combining, expanding or reducing any position when warranted by changed circumstances; 
(2)  Adoption of a pay plan for positions, including merit, and productivity pay increases; they may provide for compensation plans for longevity, training and incentive; 
(3)  Methods for determining qualifications, merit, adaptability, performance of candidates for appointment, reinstatement, promotion or transfer and policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and removal of employees; 
(4)  Hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for vacation and sick leave and other absences; and 
(5)  Transfer of employees, including transfers for promotion, transfers from positions to be eliminated to another position, transfers to a lesser classification and to otherwise seek to retain employees of merit. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  20; SFCC 1981,  2-4-1; Ord. #1989-20,  10) 
19-5.2 - Supplemental rules and regulations. 
A.  The city manager may promulgate rules and regulations to supplement: 
(1)  General rules and regulations adopted by the governing body; 
(2)  Policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments; 
(3)  Policies and procedures governing employees' relations with committees of the city; 
(4)  Policies and procedures regarding in-service programs and employee involvement programs; 
(5)  Policies and procedures necessary to the administration of the city personnel merit system; and 
(6)  Policies and procedures governing other employees not classified. 
B.  The supplemental rules and regulations issued by the city manager shall be on file and available for inspection during normal business hours in the personnel office of the city, and may be distributed to city employees. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  21; SFCC 1981,  2-4-2; Ord. #1989-20,  11) 
19-5.3 - Limitations. 
    Nothing contained in the rules and regulations shall be construed to take precedence over any ordinance of the city or any resolution duly adopted by the governing body. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  22; SFCC 1981,  2-4-3) 
19-5.4 - Conflicts. 
    In the event of conflicting rules and regulations or interpretations, or the absence thereof, the city manager may issue a ruling which will be in full force and effect until a revision of the rules and regulations in conflict is instituted pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1983-44,  23; SFCC 1981,  2-4-4) 
19-6 - RESERVED.[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former  19-6, Nepotism, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-38, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2011-8. See subsection 1-7.7F SFCC 1987 for the city's code regarding nepotism. 

19-7 - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Former  19-7, Competitive and Noncompetitive Service, previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  12-15. 

19-7.1 - Negotiations schedule. 
A.  Management teams and collective bargaining units shall initiate any and all collective bargaining negotiations by September 1 of each fiscal year. 
B.  Management teams and collective bargaining units shall conclude all collective bargaining negotiations by February 1 of each fiscal year. 
C.  Management teams and collective bargaining units shall have all collective bargaining agreements ready for approval by the governing body by March 1 of each fiscal year, unless impasse resolution procedures require additional time in accordance with Section 10-7E-18 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #2007-6,  2) 
19-7.2 - Contracts. 
    To the extent possible, in consultation with the collective bargaining units, contracts shall be staggered and multi-year so that each contract is not negotiated every year. 
(Ord. #2007-6,  3) 
19-8 - RESERVED.[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Former  19-8, Dismissal, Suspension, Demotion, Transfer of Employees, previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1989-20,  12-15. 

19-9 - RESERVED.[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Former  19-9, Grievance Procedure, previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ordinance #1989-20,  12-15. 

19-10 - RESERVED.[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2018-27 ,  6, adopted December 12, 2018, repealed  19-10, which pertained to Grievance Review Board and derived from Ord. No. 1989-20,  16, 17; Ord. #1983-44,  47-49; SFCC 1981,  2-9-1-2-9-3. 

19-11 - RESERVED.[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Former  19-11, Labor Management Relations, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1993-2, 1994-25 and 1999-33, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance #2006-8,  2. 

19-12 - RESERVED. [] 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
**Editor's Note- Former  19-12, Interference with Administration; Penalty, previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ordinance #1989-20,  19. 

CHAPTER XX - PUBLIC SAFETY REGULATIONS 
20-1 - RIOT CONTROL; POWERS OF MAYOR DURING AN EMERGENCY.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1968-14, Code 1973,  6-16-6-20, SFCC 1981,  5-4-1-5-4-5 and Ordinance No. 2005-7. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions,  12-10-16 through 12-10-20 NMSA 1978. 

20-1.1 - Short title; purpose. 
A.  This section may be cited as the "Riot Control Ordinance". 
B.  For the protection of life and property and for the preservation of the public peace and safety it is necessary to implement those provisions of the Riot Control Act,  12-10-16 through 12-10-20 NMSA 1978 relating to the powers of a municipality and the mayor when the mayor finds that a public disorder, riot, disaster or emergency exists in the municipality. 
(Ord. #2008-58,  2) 
20-1.2 - Proclamation of emergency; regulations. 
    When the mayor, or in the event of the mayor's inability to act, the mayor pro tem, determines that a public disorder, riot, disaster or emergency exists in the municipality, the mayor shall have the power to proclaim a state of emergency in the area affected. During the existence of a state of emergency, the mayor may, by proclamation, prohibit: 
A.  Any person being on the public streets, in the public parks or at any other public place during the hours proclaimed by the mayor to be a period of curfew; 
B.  Any designated number of persons from assembling or gathering on the public streets, public parks or other open areas, either public or private, or in any public building; 
C.  The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of any device or object designed to explode or produce uncontained combustion; 
D.  The transportation, possession or use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials in a glass or uncapped container of any kind except in connection with the normal operation of motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate commercial use; 
E.  The possession of firearms or any other deadly weapon by a person in any place other than the person's place of residence or business, except for peace officers; 
F.  The sale, purchase or dispensing of alcoholic beverages or other commodities or goods designated by the mayor; 
G.  The use of certain streets or highways by the public; and 
H.  Other activities the mayor reasonably believes should be prohibited to help maintain life, property or the public peace. 
(Ord. #2008-58,  3) 
20-1.3 - Proclamation of emergency to be effective upon issuance. 
    Any proclamation issued under this section becomes effective immediately upon its signing by the mayor, but the mayor shall give public notice of its contents through the public press and other news media. The restrictions may be imposed during times, upon conditions, with exceptions and in areas of the municipality designated by proclamation of the mayor from time to time. 
(Ord. #2008-58,  4) 
20-1.4 - Termination of emergency. 
    Any state of emergency proclaimed under the Riot Control Ordinance, Section 20-1 SFCC 1987, along with any restrictions imposed for control of that emergency, terminates automatically at noon on the third day after it becomes effective unless sooner terminated by proclamation of the mayor. 
(Ord. #2008-58,  5) 
20-1.5 - Penalty. 
    Any person who, during a state of emergency, fails to comply with restrictions imposed by proclamation of the mayor under the Riot Control Ordinance, Section 20-1 SFCC 1987, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense under this section is guilty of a fourth degree felony, and should be referred to the district attorney's office for prosecution. 
(Ord. #2008-58,  6) 
20-2 - PANHANDLING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 

20-2.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for panhandling in order to promote the safety and convenience of the city's citizens; to protect the panhandler's right to free speech; and to promote harmony among panhandlers, local businesses, residents and visitors within the city. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  3) 
20-2.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Panhandler means a person who engages in the act of panhandling. 
    Panhandling means: 
A.  Any solicitation made in person in which a person requests an immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another person and includes, without limitation, seeking donations by vocal or non-vocal appeal; or 
B.  In exchange for a donation, the person being solicited receives an item of little or no monetary value under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction is in substance a donation. 
C.  Panhandling shall not include a street performance, as regulated in Section 23-8 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  4; Ord. #2012-29,  1) 
20-2.3 - Regulations. 
    Panhandlers may engage in an act of panhandling on public property in the city provided that the panhandler complies with the following regulations. 
A.  Panhandling is prohibited on any day after sunset or before sunrise within the business-capitol district, as shown on the official zoning map of the city of Santa Fe. 
B.  Panhandling is prohibited involving any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle that is in traffic, on or entering any street, street intersection, alley or other public passageway in any manner that obstructs the operation of any vehicle by any motorist. 
C.  Panhandling is prohibited when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located at any of the following locations: 
(1)  At a bus stop; 
(2)  Within twenty feet (20') of any entrance or exit of a public transportation facility; 
(3)  In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility; 
(4)  In or on any private vehicle or conveyance; 
(5)  In a sidewalk caf; 
(6)  Within twenty feet (20') in any direction from an automatic teller machine; 
(7)  Within twenty feet (20') of an entrance to a bank when the bank is open for business; 
(8)  In off-street public parking lots or public parking structures; 
(9)  Within the median of a street; or 
(10)  On school property and within one hundred fifty feet (150') from the property line of a school. 
D.  Panhandling in an aggressive manner is prohibited, including any of the following actions: 
(1)  Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent; 
(2)  Panhandling a person while such person is standing in line and waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment; 
(3)  Blocking the path of a person being solicited or the entrance to any building or vehicle; 
(4)  Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited; 
(5)  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation, or making any statement, gesture, or other communication which would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled; or 
(6)  Panhandling in a group of two (2) or more persons. 
E.  Panhandling with a sign exceeding four (4) square feet is prohibited. 
F.  Panhandlers shall not block, or cause the blocking of, any sidewalk, passageway, street, or entrance to a building. 
G.  Panhandling at one (1) location longer than two (2) hours is prohibited and the panhandler shall stay a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') away from such location and shall not return to that same location for two (2) hours. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  5; Ord. #2012-29,  3) 
20-2.4 - Other compliance. 
    The conduct and behavior of all panhandlers shall be in compliance with the Santa Fe City Code 1987. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  6) 
20-2.5 - Penalties; enforcement. 
A.  Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute a public nuisance and a separate violation of this code. Each violation shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of Section 20-2 SFCC 1987. 
C.  Upon the first violation of the provisions of this section, the police may issue a written warning to the person violating this section. 
D.  Upon a second violation by the same person, the police may issue a citation. 
E.  Upon a third and subsequent violation the violator may be subject to arrest. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  7) 
20-2.6 - Review. 
    Section 20-2 SFCC 1987 shall be reviewed by the governing body one (1) year from the date of adoption. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  8) 
20-3 - PANHANDLING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 

20-3.1 - Panhandling prohibited on private property. 
    Panhandling on private property is prohibited unless formal written permission is granted from the property owner to the person panhandling. Any violation of this section is punishable as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  10) 
20-4 - INJURING PROPERTY; GRAFFITI.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code 1953  15-22.2, 15-25, 15-29; Code 1973,  19-16, 19-17, 19-18; SFCC 1981  5-5-12, 5-5-13, 5-5-14; Ord. No. 1992-15; and Ord. No. 2001-3. 

20-4.1 - Reserved. 
(Ord. #2003-34,  2; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  9) 
Editor's note- See Chapter XVI for general prohibitions. 
20-4.2 - Graffiti vandalism. 
A.  Short Title. This section may be cited as the "Graffiti Vandalism Ordinance." 
B.  Intent. Graffiti is a form of vandalism which injures and stains Santa Fe. It is a public purpose and the intent of this section to eradicate or minimize this visual blight. 
C.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(1)  Graffiti means unauthorized painting, writing or inscription. 
(2)  Person means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other legal entity. 
D.  Office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination. The governing body creates an office of anti-graffiti coordination within city government. The office's primary charge is graffiti eradication in Santa Fe. The office shall be a centralized source of education, advice and assistance on the removal and avoidance of graffiti as well as the place for the city to collect information on graffiti's occurrence on both public and private property. The office shall study and advise on strategies and programs to eradicate or minimize graffiti, including, but not limited to, licensing to assure responsible retailing of spray paint and markers. The director of the office shall make semi-annual reports to the governing body starting on July 1, 2006. The director of the office shall also introduce to the governing body by July 1, 2007, amendments to subsection 20-4.2 SFCC 1987 which seem appropriate. 
E.  Elimination of Graffiti. 
(1)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any real property, including structures, within the city and visible from the public right-of-way or city-owned land, the office of anti-graffiti coordination shall give or cause to be given notice that the graffiti should be removed or effectively obscured within ten (10) days of notice being conveyed by the city, removal being either by the person in charge of the property or by the city or the city's agent. A reasonable, good faith effort shall be made to deliver the notice to the owner or person in charge of the property. The owner or person in charge of the property may cause the graffiti to be removed or completely obliterated; if this is that person's intent they should so advise the office of anti-graffiti coordination within ten (10) days from the time the notice is delivered if the property owner/agent will remove the graffiti within the time specified. Within a similar period, the owner/agent may advise the office that the marking identified was authorized by the owner or person in charge of the property and thus is not graffiti as herein defined; the city will then not authorize removal. 
(2)  The director of the office of anti-graffiti coordination shall implement a program of graffiti removal. 
(a)  If the owner or person in control of the property does not notify the office of anti-graffiti coordination that they will remove the graffiti or alternatively that it is not graffiti because the installation was authorized as provided in paragraph E(1) of this section, it will be deemed to be consent to the city's entering on the property and removing or completely obliterating the graffiti; any color used shall be similar to that of the structure affected. 
(b)  The office of anti-graffiti coordination is authorized to use city employees, contractors, volunteers, and prisoners who have been duly made available for such graffiti removal work. 
(3)  The office of anti-graffiti coordination is authorized to assure that all graffiti on city-owned property is eliminated by the next business day of discovery or report, weather permitting. 
(4)  The office of anti-graffiti coordination shall ensure coordination and set standards for all graffiti removal work performed by the city or its agents. 
(5)  The city shall make all reasonable efforts to collect/recover from perpetrators of graffiti all costs associated and all damages caused by such perpetrators of graffiti vandalism. If the city is unable to collect/recover the costs to the city for removal of the graffiti from the perpetrators, the city shall make all reasonable efforts to collect/recover these costs from the property owner. 
(6)  If the graffiti is of a nature that the city is unable to easily remove or cover up including, but not limited to, irregular surfaces or glass etching, the property owner shall eliminate the graffiti. In such cases, the property owner shall be responsible for collecting from the perpetrator. 
F.  Administrative Fees: 
(1)  In an effort to remediate graffiti vandalism and maintain the beauty of Santa Fe, the city shall assess the following fees upon perpetrators of graffiti vandalism. The level of incidence shall be based upon the total extent of graffiti attributable to the perpetrator as determined by information provided by the graffiti vandalism data base maintained by the office of graffiti coordination. 
(a)  Less than sixteen (16) square feet of graffiti       $100.00 
(b)  Between sixteen (16) and sixty-four (64) square feet of graffiti       $200.00 
(c)  Over sixty-four (64) square feet of graffiti       $500.00 
(2)  The administrative fees may be appealed to the municipal court. 
(3)  The fees collected shall be used to support the office of graffiti coordination. 
(4)  The city may place a lien upon property owned by the perpetrator for any fees not paid within three (3) months of notice of the administrative fee. 
(Ord. #2003-34,  3; Ord. #2004-32,  1; Ord. #2005-7,  10; Ord. #2006-35,  2) 
20-5 - ALARM SYSTEMS.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 20-5 pertaining to regulations regarding resisting, hindering or obstructing a city officer or employee in discharge of duties and containing portions of Code 1953,  15-26; Code 1973,  19-25; SFCC 1981,  5-5-20 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-7,  11. See Chapter XVI for these regulations. 

20-5.1 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  There is increasing use of private emergency alarm systems by citizens of the city of Santa Fe; and 
B.  Ninety-nine percent (99%) of alarms generated by alarm systems are listed as false alarms by the Santa Fe police department; and 
C.  The Santa Fe police department spends more than three thousand eight hundred (3,800) hours annually, equivalent to two (2) full-time sworn officers or about one hundred sixteen thousand, four hundred eighty dollars ($116,480.00) per year responding to false alarms; and 
D.  Police and fire department responses to false alarms provide an extra public safety service that benefits only those individuals who own alarm systems; and 
E.  Alarm users and the general public are harmed by excessive numbers of false alarms because excessive false alarms divert public safety officers from other potentially critical duties and constitute a nuisance that must be abated; and 
F.  Fees to reimburse the city for the costs of responding to excessive false alarms are justified because these false alarms divert limited public safety resources; and 
G.  The fire department recognizes the value of fire and medical alarms and will respond accordingly to investigate, suppress fire propagation, address life safety issues, and provide medical treatment to fulfill the needs of the public; however, these services are not used effectively when fire personnel must respond to locations with excessive numbers of false alarms; and 
H.  Businesses with excessive false fire alarms are subject to reinspection of their fire suppression, fire alarm system and facilities by the fire marshal's office; and 
I.  Certain records are necessary to locate the persons in control of a property when the regional emergency communications center has been notified by an alarm of an actual burglary or other emergency and needs access to the property or when an audible alarm system is malfunctioning so as to cause a nuisance to the neighbors and other persons in the proximity of the alarm; and 
J.  Fees and fines may not be sufficient inducement for alarm installation companies and monitoring companies to comply with this section; therefore, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies that engage in a pattern of violations under this section should be subject to suspension and revocation of their business license. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  3) 
20-5.2 - Short title. 
    Section 20-5 SFCC 1987 may be cited as the "Alarm System Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2009-33,  4) 
20-5.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to: 
A.  Require alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms; 
B.  Establish a system of administration; 
C.  Govern alarm systems intended to summon law enforcement response; 
D.  Require alarm users to register alarm systems; 
E.  Establish fees and penalties for violations; and 
F.  Set conditions for suspension of police response or revocation of registration. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  5) 
20-5.4 - Definitions. 
    Alarm administrator means the city staff or agent for the city designated by the city of Santa Fe to administer the provisions of this section. 
    Alarm dispatch request means a notification by an alarm installation company or a monitoring company to the regional emergency communications center that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
    Alarm installation company means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. This definition shall also include individuals or firms that install and service the alarm systems that will be used in their private or proprietary facilities. This does not include persons doing installation or repair work where such work is performed without compensation of any kind (such as "do-it-yourselfers"). 
    Alarm registration means authorization granted by the alarm administrator to an alarm user to operate an alarm system. 
    Alarm response manager ("ARM") means a person designated by an alarm installation company to handle alarm issues for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the alarm administrator. 
    Alarm site means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
    Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon police or fire response, including local alarm systems. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
    Alarm user means any person that has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service from an alarm installation company or monitoring company for an alarm system, or any person that owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under contract. 
    Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
    ANSI/SIA control panels standard CP-01 means the ANSI - American National Standard Institute approved Security Industry Association - SIA CP-01 control panel standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction." 
    Arming station means a device from which the alarm system is turned on (armed) and off (disarmed). 
    Audio verification means the transfer of sounds from the protected premises to the monitoring company, as a result of activation of one (1) or more devices, to confirm or deny the validity of the alarm signal. 
    Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the regional emergency communications center. 
    Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when a monitoring company for the alarm site notifies the regional emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement agency response after an alarm dispatch request. 
    Conversion means the transaction or process by which one (1) alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing and/or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously serviced and/or monitored by another alarm company. 
    Dual technology means two (2) separate technological methods of detection in one (1) alarm system or device(s). 
    Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response. 
    Enhanced call verification ("ECV") means a monitoring procedure requiring that a minimum of two (2) calls be made prior to making an alarm dispatch request. The two (2) calls shall be made to different phone numbers where a responsible party can typically be reached. 
    False alarm means the activation of any alarm system resulting in an alarm dispatch request, for which the responding public safety officer finds no evidence of criminal activity, fire, smoke, carbon monoxide, heat or other threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice. 
    Holdup/robbery alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress or immediately after it has occurred. 
    Law enforcement authority means the chief of police, the fire chief or other authorized representative of a law enforcement agency. 
    License means a license issued by the city of Santa Fe to an alarm installation company and monitoring company to sell, install, monitor, repair, or replace alarm systems. 
    Local alarm system means any alarm system, which is not monitored, that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site. 
    Monitoring means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the regional emergency communications center for the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the alarm site. 
    Monitoring company means a person in the business of providing alarm system monitoring services. 
    One plus duress alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code at an arming station that adds one (1) to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (for example, normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235). 
    Other electronic means is the real-time audio/video surveillance of an alarm site by the monitoring company, by means of devices that permit the direct, live listening in or viewing of an alarm site or portions thereof. 
    Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
    Regional emergency communications center ("RECC") means the city/county entity that receives all police, fire, medical and animal control emergency 911 calls and non-emergency calls for the city of Santa Fe and Santa Fe county and dispatches the appropriate law enforcement personnel to the location as needed. 
    Responder means an individual capable of reaching and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system, and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system. 
    Suspension of response means the termination of police response to an alarm at a specified alarm site as a result of false alarms or other violation of the Alarm System Ordinance. 
    Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
    Video verification means the transfer of video images to the monitoring company reflecting conditions existing at the protected premises at the time an alarm was activated through the use of video technology. 
    Zones means the capability of an alarm system to separate and report incidents or alarms by area. (Example: zone 1 - front door contact; zone 2 - front entry motion detector) 
(Ord. #2009-33,  6) 
20-5.5 - Registration required; application; fee; transferability; false statements. 
A.  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site. The fine for a non-registered alarm site as set forth in subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987 shall be assessed for each alarm occurrence. 
B.  The non-refundable fee for an alarm registration or an alarm registration renewal is set forth in subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987 and shall be paid by the alarm user. The initial alarm registration fee shall be submitted to the alarm administrator within thirty (30) days after the alarm system installation or alarm system takeover. 
C.  The alarm registration application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address (including apartment/suite number), mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site; and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and the payment of fees assessed under this article. 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial. 
(3)  The classification of the alarm system (burglary, holdup, duress, panic or other) and for each classification whether such alarm is audible or silent. 
(4)  Detailed information regarding any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site. 
(5)  The names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) individuals who are able and have agreed to: 
(a)  Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time; 
(b)  Respond to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes at any time; and 
(c)  Upon request is able to grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if necessary. 
One (1) of the two (2) individuals may be the alarm response manager. 
(6)  If alarm site is commercial, the type of business conducted. 
(7)  The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system. 
(8)  The name, address, telephone number and city of Santa Fe business license number of the alarm installation company or companies performing the alarm system installation, conversion or takeover; and the name, address, telephone number and city of Santa Fe business license number of the alarm installation company responsible for providing service to the alarm system. 
(9)  The name, address, telephone number and city of Santa Fe business license number of the monitoring company if different from the alarm installation company. 
(10)  An acknowledgement from the alarm user that the alarm user has received from the alarm installation company: 
(a)  The current city of Santa Fe Alarm System Ordinance or the web-site address where the ordinance is accessible; 
(b)  Training in the proper use of the alarm system and written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms; and 
(c)  A signed statement from the alarm installation company that verifies the training. 
(11)  Acknowledgement that law enforcement response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and staffing levels. 
D.  Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall register the alarm user, unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Failed to pay a fine assessed under subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987; or 
(2)  Had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
E.  Any false statement of a material fact made by an alarm user for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. 
F.  An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any of the information listed on the alarm registration application within thirty (30) business days of such change. 
G.  All fines and fees owed by an alarm user shall be paid before an alarm registration may be issued or renewed. 
H.  Governmental entities, including federal, state, county, public schools and other political subdivisions of the state of New Mexico shall obtain an alarm registration, for tracking purposes only. Registration fees, services fees and fines shall not be required of such entities. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  7; Ord. #2012-13,  2) 
20-5.6 - Alarm registration; duration and renewal. 
    An alarm registration shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, and shall be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a registration renewal fee to the alarm administrator. The alarm administrator shall notify each alarm user of the need to renew their registration within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application for renewal prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a non-registered alarm system. For each alarm occurrence, the fine for a non-registered alarm site, as set forth in subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987, shall be assessed. A waiver shall be granted for an assessed fine for an unregistered alarm system, if the registration is completed by the alarm user within ten (10) business days upon notification of the initial fine for an unregistered alarm system. A late fee may be assessed if the renewal is more than thirty (30) days late. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  8; Ord. #2012-13,  3; Ord. #2015-15  1) 
20-5.7 - Duties of the alarm user. 
A.  An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Obtain an alarm registration for the alarm system as required in subsection 20-5.5 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms. 
(3)  Make every reasonable effort to have a responder to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes when requested by the city in order to deactivate an alarm system, provide access to the alarm site; and if necessary, provide alternative security for the alarm site. 
(4)  Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
B.  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than five (5) minutes after being activated. 
C.  After an alarm site has three (3) false alarms within a one (1) year period, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user and the alarm installation company named on the alarm registration application that the alarm user is required to attend the on-line alarm school. The alarm administrator may waive a required inspection if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. 
D.  After an alarm site has five (5) false alarms within a one (1) year period, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user and the alarm installation company named on the alarm registration application that mandatory inspection of the alarm system shall be made and additional user training shall be provided by the alarm installation company. Proof of the inspection and additional training shall be provided to the alarm administrator. 
E.  An alarm user shall not use an automatic voice dialer. 
F.  An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
G.  An alarm user who has contracted with an alarm monitoring company shall be aware of the "acclimation period" described in subsection 20-5.10 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  9; Ord. No. 2012-13,  4) 
20-5.8 - Licensing of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies. 
A.  All alarm installation companies and monitoring companies shall possess a current city of Santa Fe business license as provided for in subsection 18-1.4 SFCC 1987. Business licenses shall be renewed on an annual basis. 
B.  All alarm installation companies and monitoring companies shall possess a valid license issued by the construction industries division of the regulation and licensing department of the state of New Mexico. Said license and proof of bond shall be presented to the city at the time of licensing, renewal of the business license, or upon request by the city. 
C.  Whenever any information on the business license application changes, the license holder shall notify the alarm administrator within thirty (30) days of such change. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  10) 
20-5.9 - Duties of alarm installation company. 
A.  Upon the effective date of this section, alarm installation companies shall establish an outreach program for their customers. Such outreach shall include written notification that the Alarm System Ordinance has been adopted; and a summary of the ordinance, including the responsibilities and duties of alarm users. 
B.  The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of each alarm system(s). Such instructions shall specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and how to avoid false alarms. 
C.  Alarm installation companies shall use only ANSI/SIA CP-01 listed alarm control panels on all new installations and panel replacements or upgrades. 
D.  An alarm installation company shall not: 
(1)  Install or activate automatic voice dialers; 
(2)  Program an alarm system so that the alarm system is capable of sending one plus duress alarms. The alarm installation company shall remove the one plus duress alarm feature from alarm systems whenever an alarm technician is at the alarm site or otherwise accessing the panel for reprogramming purposes; or 
(3)  Program an alarm system to activate a holdup alarm, which is a single action, non-recessed button. 
E.  After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm installation company employee shall review with the alarm user the false alarm prevention checklist which shall be provided by the alarm installation company. The alarm installation company shall provide a copy of the checklist to the alarm administrator for review and approval and if the checklist is amended ensure that the alarm administrator has the current version for review and approval. 
F.  An alarm installation company that purchases alarm system accounts from another alarm installation company shall notify the alarm users that the alarm users need to notify the alarm administrator that the alarm registration needs to be updated with the name of the new alarm installation company. 
G.  Each alarm installation company shall designate one (1) individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company who will manage alarm related issues and act as the point of contact for the alarm administrator. The ARM shall be knowledgeable of the general provisions of the section, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the alarm administrator. The name, phone number, and email address of the designated ARM shall be provided to the alarm administrator. 
H.  Alarm installation companies shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon the effective date of this section, alarm installation companies shall provide the alarm administrator with an existing customer list in a format acceptable to the alarm administrator to assist the alarm administrator with creating tracking data. 
(2)  Alarm installation companies shall provide a monthly report to the alarm administrator by the twenty-fifth (25th) day of the month listing all new alarm systems, which the alarm installation company contracted to install during the previous month. The monthly report shall also include a listing of any cancelled or inactive alarm user accounts. Each report shall include at the minimum the name, address and phone number of the alarm user and the address of the alarm site. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of such information for legitimate public safety purposes. A fine in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987 for each monthly report that is overdue shall be assessed to any alarm installation company that fails to provide this report by this deadline. 
(3)  Alarm installation companies shall assist the alarm administrator by providing the initial alarm registration application to the alarm user and submit such registrations to the alarm administrator within thirty (30) days of the activation of an alarm system. 
I.  If an alarm installation company repairs an alarm system within thirty (30) days after a false alarm, the alarm installation company may transmit the repair invoice or other written record of the repair to the alarm administrator, in which instance the alarm administrator shall delete the false alarm from the alarm user's record. There shall be no more than two (2) repair deletions allowed per alarm user registration per year. 
J.  All alarm system installation company personnel responding to alarms, or repairing or installing alarm systems shall wear a picture identification card issued by the alarm installation company on their company uniform, which identifies the individual and the alarm installation company. The alarm system installation company personnel includes, without limitation, any person or entity that derives any pecuniary benefit from any contract for the installation of any alarm system, including any person or entity that sells a contract for the installation or monitoring of an alarm system. This identification card shall be in a standard form approved by the alarm administrator. The identification card shall be issued by the alarm installation company after a background investigation has been conducted on that individual. No identification card shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of a felony. Each alarm installation company shall pay a fine in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987 for each and every installation conducted in whole or in part by an employee who lacks the required background investigation or identification card. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  11; Ord. No. 2012-13,  5) 
20-5.10 - Duties of monitoring company. 
A.  Monitoring companies shall not make an alarm dispatch request of a law enforcement agency in response to a burglar alarm signal, excluding panic, duress and holdup signals, during the first seven (7) days ("acclimation period") following an alarm system installation. The alarm administrator may grant an alarm user's request for an exemption from this waiting period based upon a determination that special circumstances substantiate the need for the exemption. 
B.  A monitoring company shall: 
(1)  Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator; 
(2)  Use enhanced call verification for every alarm signal, except for duress or holdup alarm activation, before initiating an alarm dispatch request; 
(3)  Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the regional emergency communications center in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(4)  Communicate cancellations to the regional emergency communications center in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(5)  Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location on all alarm signals related to the alarm dispatch request; 
(6)  Communicate nature of alarm (for example: burglary, fire, robbery, panic, duress, silent, audible, interior or perimeter); 
(7)  Provide alarm user registration number when requesting law enforcement dispatch; 
(8)  After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the regional emergency communications center if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or the responder is on the way to the alarm site; 
(9)  Contact the alarm user or responder within twenty-four (24) hours via mail, fax, telephone or other electronic means when an alarm dispatch request has been made; and 
(10)  Upon the effective date of this section, monitoring companies shall maintain for a period of at least one (1) year from the date of the alarm dispatch request, records relating to alarm dispatch requests. Records shall include the name, registration number, address and telephone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of an attempt to verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. If the request is made within sixty (60) days of an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three (3) business days of receiving the request. If the records are requested between sixty (60) days to one (1) year after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within thirty (30) days of receiving the request. 
C.  A monitoring company that purchases alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the alarm users that the alarm users need to notify the alarm administrator that the alarm registration needs to be updated with the name and contact information of the new alarm installation company that is servicing the alarm site and the monitoring company. 
D.  Upon the effective date of this section, monitoring companies shall provide the alarm administrator with an existing customer list in a format acceptable to the alarm administrator to assist the alarm administrator with creating tracking data. 
E.  Monitoring companies shall provide a monthly report to the alarm administrator by the twenty-fifth (25th) day of the month listing all new alarm systems, which the monitoring company contracted to monitor during the previous month. Such monthly report shall also include the cancelled alarm systems, if any. Each report shall include at the minimum the name, address and phone number of the alarm user and the address of the alarm site. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of such information for legitimate public safety purposes. A fine in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987 for each monthly report that is overdue shall be assessed to any monitoring company that fails to provide this report by this deadline. 
F.  A fine, in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987, shall be assessed to a monitoring company that fails to establish procedures for accepting cancellations from alarm users and for promptly conveying cancellation notification to the regional emergency communications center or for failure to perform any of the duties in this section. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  12) 
20-5.11 - Duties and authority of the alarm administrator. 
A.  The alarm administrator shall obtain reports from the regional emergency communications center that include: 
(1)  Alarm dispatch requests; 
(2)  Cancellations of alarm dispatch requests; and 
(3)  Verification that the monitoring company used enhanced call verification when the alarm dispatch request was made. 
B.  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record alarm dispatch requests for the purpose of maintaining records, which shall include, without limitation the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the registration number for the alarm site; 
(2)  Address of the alarm site; 
(3)  Date and time alarm dispatch request was received; 
(4)  The time that an alarm dispatch request was cancelled to ensure that the alarm user will not be fined for a false alarm occurrence if cancellation occurred prior to law enforcement arrival at the alarm site; 
(5)  Name of the monitoring company and the monitoring operator's name or number; 
(6)  Date and time of law enforcement officer arrival at the alarm site and verification that law enforcement officer left his business card at the site; 
(7)  Zone and zone description, if available; 
(8)  Weather conditions, mass power failures or surges, or mass telephone line interruptions; 
(9)  Name of alarm user/or alarm user's representatives that were contacted by the monitoring company prior to the alarm dispatch request; 
(10)  Name of alarm user or representative that was available at the alarm site when law enforcement was present; 
(11)  Identification of the responsible alarm installation company or monitoring company; 
(12)  Whether law enforcement officer was unable to locate the address of the alarm site; and 
(13)  Cause of alarm signal, if known. 
C.  The alarm administrator shall determine whether the alarm signal was a false alarm based upon the information collected in paragraph B above. Alarms caused by acts of nature such as severe weather conditions that cause mass activations which are beyond the control of the alarm user, or signal activations caused by documented mass power failure or surges which are beyond the control of the alarm user, or mass telephone line interruptions which are beyond the control of the alarm user shall not be counted as a false alarm. 
D.  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to notify the alarm user, in writing, of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of law enforcement arrival at the false alarm address; 
(2)  The identification number of the responding law enforcement officer; 
(3)  A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and resulting fines; 
(4)  The amount of the fine, in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987; 
(5)  A statement that city response to a false alarm shall be suspended after the tenth (10th) false alarm (excluding duress, holdup and panic alarms) in a twelve-month period; and 
(6)  A description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user. 
E.  The alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company responsible for the repair or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. For these purposes, the alarm installation company shall have contact information for the alarm response manager for each alarm site on record with the alarm administrator. 
F.  The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false alarms. 
G.  The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a holdup alarm device that is a single action, non-recessed button, or have it replaced with an acceptable dual-action or recessed device after the occurrence of a false holdup alarm. 
H.  The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove the duress or panic alarm capability from the alarm user's alarm system after the occurrence of a false duress or panic alarm. 
I.  The alarm administrator shall make available to the alarm user this section and/or a section summary sheet. 
J.  If the alarm administrator identifies an alarm installation company that is operating within the municipal boundaries of the city of Santa Fe without a license from the construction industries division of the New Mexico regulation and licensing department or without a valid city of Santa Fe business license, the alarm administrator shall report that business to the city business license administrator. 
K.  The alarm administrator and all employees or representatives of the city of Santa Fe shall, in the interest of public safety, hold in confidence: 
(1)  All information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications; 
(2)  Records relating to alarm dispatch requests; 
(3)  Applications for appeals; 
(4)  Customer lists obtained from alarm installation companies; and 
(5)  Customer lists obtained from monitoring companies. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  13; Ord. No. 2012-13,  6) 
20-5.12 - Suspension of response. 
A.  The alarm administrator may suspend law enforcement response to an alarm site by revoking the alarm registration if it is determined that: 
(1)  The alarm user has eleven (11) or more false alarms in a twelve-month period; 
(2)  There is a statement of a material fact known to be false in the application for a registration; 
(3)  The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of a fee or fine assessed under subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987; or 
(4)  The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an alarm installation company, that complies with the requirements of this section, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) and/or additional training has been conducted by the alarm installation company. 
B.  The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm installation company and the alarm monitoring company listed on the alarm registration application of the determination to revoke an alarm registration and suspend response to alarm site. 
C.  A person commits an offense if the person operates an alarm system during the period in which the alarm registration is revoked and is subject to enforcement and penalties set in subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987. 
D.  A monitoring company commits an offense if it continues alarm dispatch requests to an alarm site after notification by the alarm administrator that the registration has been revoked and is subject to enforcement and penalties set forth in subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987. 
E.  Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the city police department shall refuse response to an alarm dispatch request at an alarm site for which the alarm registration is revoked. 
F.  If the alarm registration is reinstated pursuant to subsection 20-5.13 SFCC 1987, the alarm administrator may again suspend law enforcement response to the alarm site by again revoking the alarm registration if it is determined that two (2) false alarms have occurred within one (1) year period after the reinstatement date. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  14; Ord. #2012-13,  7) 
20-5.13 - Reinstatement. 
A.  An alarm user whose alarm registration has been revoked may, at the discretion of the city, have the alarm registration reinstated by the alarm administrator if the alarm user: 
(1)  Pays a reinstatement fee in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987; 
(2)  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations and fines; and 
(3)  Provides satisfactory evidence to the alarm administrator that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company; and/or that additional training in the proper use of the alarm system was provided by the alarm installation company for all alarm users. 
B.  Additionally, the alarm administrator may require one (1) or more of the following as a condition to reinstatement: 
(1)  Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company or monitoring company caused the false alarm; 
(2)  A certificate showing that the alarm user has successfully completed the alarm user awareness class as provided under subsection 20-5.11 SFCC 1987; 
(3)  Proof that an upgrade to the alarm control panel was made to meet ANSI/SIN Control Panel Standard CP-01; 
(4)  A written statement from an independent inspector designated by the city that the alarm system has been inspected and is in good working order; 
(5)  Confirmation that all motion detectors are dual technology type; 
(6)  Confirmation that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by audio or video verification; or 
(7)  Confirmation that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a person at the alarm site. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  15) 
20-5.14 - Fees and fines. 
    Unless otherwise permitted by the Alarm System Ordinance, the following non-refundable fees and fines shall be assessed, as applicable, to alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies: 
Non-Refundable 
Fees and/or Fines Santa Fe 
City Code 
Section Alarm 
User Alarm 
Installation 
Company Alarm 
Monitoring 
Company Fee - registration of alarm system 20-5.5B $25.00 Fee - renewal of registration 20-5.5B $25.00 Fee - late registration 20-5.6 $10.00 Fee - reinstatement 20-5.13A(1) $50.00 Fee - appeal* 20-5.16D $50.00 Fine - first false alarm 20-5.11D(4) $0.00 Fine - second false alarm 20-5.11D(4) $0.00 Fine - third false alarm 20-5.11D(4) $100.00 Fine - fourth false alarm 20-5.11D(4) $100.00 Fine - fifth false alarm 20-5.11D(4) $150.00 Fine - sixth or more false alarm(s) 20-5.11D(4) $300.00 per infraction Penalty - for 11 or more false alarms in a 12 month period 20-5.12A Suspend response and revoke registration Fine - operating an alarm system during period of revocation 20-5.12C $100.00 Fine - non-registered alarm system, per alarm occurrence 20-5.5A 
20-5.6 $100.00 Fee - license 18-8.10A(3) $75.00 $75.00 Fine - no employee background check 20-5.9J $300.00 Fine - Late report (names and addresses of users) 20-5.9H(2) $100.00, after five business day grace period   20-5.10E $100.00, after five business day grace period Fine - failure to establish procedures for accepting cancellations of alarms and conveying cancellations of alarms 20-5.10F $50.00 Fine - Continuation of alarm dispatch requests to an alarm site after notification by the alarm administrator that the registration has been revoked 20-5.12C $50.00 Fine - failure to use enhanced call verification 20-5.10B(2) $300.00  
*Paid only if appeal is decided in favor of the city. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  16; Ord. #2012-33,  8; Ord. #2015-15,  2) 
20-5.15 - Poverty exemption. 
A.  Qualified alarm users shall be exempt from the alarm system registration and renewal fees. 
B.  Alarm users who qualify for a poverty exemption shall be required to pay fines. 
C.  To qualify for the exemption, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The alarm user shall file an affidavit setting out the following facts: 
(a)  The customer is the head of the household and residing at the alarm site; and 
(b)  The household's gross annual income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the most recent federal poverty guidelines issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
(c)  The alarm user shall submit documents as required by city policy in order to verify income. 
(2)  The alarm user shall consent to any reasonable investigation and substantiation by the city of the facts stated in the affidavit. 
(3)  The filing of a false statement or otherwise fraudulently obtaining the benefits of this section is a violation of the Santa Fe City Code and is punishable pursuant to Section 1-3 of this Code and shall entitle the city to recover any fraudulently exempted amount and applicable interest penalties. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  17) 
20-5.16 - Appeals. 
A.  Any alarm user, unregistered alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company that receives a notice of a false alarm or a notice of fees or fines due under this section may file an appeal with the alarm administrator setting forth the reasons for the appeal within thirty (30) days from the date the notice was mailed by the alarm administrator. 
B.  A hearing officer appointed by the city manager shall conduct a formal hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal by the alarm administrator. The alarm administrator shall give written notice by certified mail to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
C.  The hearing officer shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer shall affirm or reverse the decision of the alarm administrator. The hearing officer shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the date of the hearing and shall forward the decision to the alarm administrator and the appellant. 
D.  A filing fee in accordance with subsection 20-5.14 shall be paid if the hearing officer does not find in favor of the appellant. 
E.  The failure of an appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall extinguish the appeal. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  18; Ord. #2012-13,  9) 
20-5.17 - Designation of revenue. 
    The revenue generated through the Alarm System Ordinance shall be placed in a special revenue fund to be designated for contracted services of a third party alarm administrator, if applicable, to implement and maintain this section and for funding alarm user classes. Excess revenue received through this section shall be used for use by the city of Santa Fe police department for service enhancement and public safety. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  19) 
20-5.18 - Public education. 
    The alarm administrator shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of the Alarm System Ordinance to citizens affected by it, including alarm users, alarm installation companies and alarm monitoring companies. Such a program may include publication of a brochure explaining the provisions of the section. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  20) 
20-5.19 - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of Section 20-5 SFCC 1987 or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held as invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this section. The section can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  21) 
20-5.20 - General penalty. 
    In lieu of the fines specified in subsection 20-5.14 SFCC 1987, the city may file a complaint against any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity that violates any provision of the Alarm System Ordinance, in accordance with subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  22) 
20-5.21 - Effective date. 
    Section 20-5 SFCC 1987 adopted by Ordinance No. 2009-33 shall be effective October 6, 2009, ninety (90) days from the date of its adoption. Upon the effective date of this section alarm users shall have a grace period of ninety (90) days to procure an alarm user registration. During this grace period, no fine for operation of an alarm system without a registration shall be charged, provided that, after this grace period expires, alarm users shall be subject to the fees, fines and penalties provided for in this section. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  23) 
20-5.22 - Review of section. 
    Section 20-5 SFCC 1987 shall be reviewed eighteen (18) months from the date of adoption. 
(Ord. #2009-33,  24) 
20-6 - MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA PARAPHERNALIA POSSESSION. 

20-6.1 - Possession prohibited; lowest law enforcement priority; civil fine. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person intentionally to possess one (1) ounce or less of marijuana or paraphernalia intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
B.  It is the duty of the police department to make possession of one (1) ounce or less of marijuana the lowest law enforcement priority. 
C.  A person who possesses one (1) ounce or less of marijuana may be fined no more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). It is not a violation of this section for a person to possess marijuana obtained pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his professional practice or as authorized by the Controlled Substances Act, Section 30-31-1 NMSA 1978. 
D.  A person possessing paraphernalia intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body may be fined no more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. #2014-29  3; Ord. #2014-35  1) 
20-7 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Code 1953,  15-22.1; Code 1973,  19-21; SFCC 1981,  5-5-15; Ord. #2002-36,  1; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  13. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding larceny. 
20-8 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Ord. #1970-14,  1; Code 1973,  19-3; SFCC 1981,  5-5-1; Ord. #1988-12,  1; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  14. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for curfews for parks and recreation areas. 
20-9 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Code 1953,  15-2; Ord. #1955-13,  1; Ord. #1964-26,  1; Ord. #1970-21,  1; Ord. #1973-5,  1; Code 1973,  19-4; SFCC 1981,  5-5-2; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  15. 
20-10 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- SFCC 1981,  5-5-10; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  16. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for restrictions regarding saloon owners permitting the loitering of minors. 
20-11 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- SFCC 1981,  5-5-7; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  17 and derived from Sec. 30-6-1 NMSA 1978. 
20-12 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- SFCC 1981,  5-5-21-5-5-24; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  18. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding shoplifting. 
20-13 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- SFCC 1981,  5-5-9; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  19. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding falsely representing self as incapacitated. 
20-14 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- SFCC 1981,  5-5-16; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  20. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding falsely obtaining services or accommodations. 
20-15 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Code 1953,  15-23, 15-24; Code 1973,  19-23, 19-24; SFCC 1981,  5-5-17, 5-5-18; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  21. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding prostitution, lewdness and assignation. 
20-16 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Code 1953,  15-19; Code 1973,  19-14; SFCC 1981,  5-5-6; Ord. #2000-11,  1; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  22. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding indecent exposure. 
20-17 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Code 1953,  15-7; Code 1973,  19-9; SFCC 1981,  5-5-5; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  23. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding possession of marijuana. 
20-18 - RESTRICTIONS REGARDING THE SALE OF GLUE, SPRAY PAINT, PERMANENT GLASS ETCHERS AND AEROSOLIZED COMPUTER KEYBOARD CLEANERS.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of prior SFCC 1981,  5-5-11; Ord. #1989-4,  1. Ordinance No. 2004-32,  2 amended the title of Section 20-18 by adding the words "AND PERMANENT GLASS ETCHERS." 
Cross reference- For restrictions regarding sniffing glue or aerosol spray products, see subsection 16-15.3 SFCC 1987. 

20-18.1 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 20-18.1, Short Title, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1994-54 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-34. 
20-18.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Aerosolized computer keyboard cleaner means an aerosol product, containing a Freon type of gas or fluorinated hydrocarbon, manufactured generally for the purpose of cleaning computer keyboards or similar products. 
    Glue means plastic or model airplane cement and includes any cement containing hexane, benzene, toluene, xylene, carbon tetrachloride, ethylene dichloride, acetone, cyclo-hexanone, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone, amyl acetate, butyl acetate, ethyl acetate, tricresol phosphate, beryl alcohol, ethyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol or methyl cellosolve acetate. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Permanent glass etcher means a product purposely sold to permanently etch glass such as Armour Etch and etchall&reg; dip 'n etch. 
    Spray paint means paint in an aerosol container. 
(Ord. #1994-54,  2; Ord. #2004-32,  3; Ord. #2006-56,  2) 
20-18.3 - Sale of glue, spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners. 
A.  No person shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, barter or give any glue, spray paint, permanent glass etcher or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaner to any minor. 
B.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged in the retail sale of spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners shall store or cause such spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners to be stored as follows: 
(1)  In the line of sight, either directly or through use of electronic or mechanical surveillance devices, of one (1) or more work stations that are normally continuously occupied during business hours; or 
(2)  In an area viewable by the public, but not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such spray paint, permanent glass etcher or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaner. 
C.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged in the retail sale of glue or spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners shall prominently display in the place where glue, spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners are sold, a printed sign or decal that reads as follows: 
CITY ORDINANCE PROHIBITS THE SALE OF GLUE, SPRAY PAINT, PERMANENT GLASS ETCHERS OR aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18. THE MISUSE OF THESE PRODUCTS FOR GRAFFITI, VANDALISM OR INHALATION MAY RESULT IN PENALTIES OF A $500 FINE, AND/OR 90 DAYS IMPRISONMENT, AND/OR COMMUNITY SERVICE, AND/OR THE COST OF PROPERTY DAMAGE. 
D.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged in the retail sale of glue, spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners shall either: 
(1)  Prominently display at the point at which customers pay for purchase a printed sign or decal that reads as follows: 
NO GLUE, SPRAY PAINT, PERMANENT GLASS ETCHERS OR aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners SOLD TO MINORS. CITY ORDINANCE PROHIBITS THE SALE OF GLUE, SPRAY PAINT, PERMANENT GLASS ETCHERS OR aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE. GOVERNMENT ISSUED PROOF OF AGE REQUIRED; or 
(2)  Program the electronic checkout system to read the universal product code of each glue, spray paint, permanent glass etching product or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaner, stop the checkout process upon identifying such code and prompt the employee to confirm the legal age of the purchaser prior to proceeding with the sale. 
E.  Any person convicted of selling spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection 20-4.2 SFCC 1987. 
F.  Paragraphs B, C, and D of this section shall become effective January 1, 2004, for spray paint and glue products, September 1, 2004, for permanent glass etching products and January 1, 2007, for aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners. 
(Ord. #1994-54,  3; Ord. #2003-34,  7; Ord. #2004-32,  4; Ord. #2006-56,  3) 
20-18.4 - Documentary evidence of age and identity. 
    Evidence of the age and identity of the person may be shown by any document that contains a picture of the person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, including a motor vehicle driver's license or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
(Ord. #1994-54,  4) 
20-18.5 - Refusal to sell glue, spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners to person unable to produce identity card. 
    Any person selling goods at retail or wholesale may refuse to sell glue, spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners to any person who is unable to produce an identity card as evidence that the person is eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
(Ord. #1994-54,  5; Ord. #2003-34,  8; Ord. #2004-32,  5; Ord. #2006-56,  4) 
20-18.6 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 20-18.6, Presenting False Evidence of Age or Identity, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1994-54, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-34. 
20-18.7 - Inspections. 
    The city shall conduct random, unannounced inspections of facilities where glue, spray paint, permanent glass etchers or aerosolized computer keyboard cleaners are sold to ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 20-18 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1994-54,  7; Ord. #2003-34,  10; Ord. #2004-32,  6; Ord. #2006-56,  5) 
20-18.8 - Education. 
A.  The city of Santa Fe shall notify the Santa Fe public schools, in writing, of the adoption of this section and encourage that the public schools provide inhalation abuse training to teachers and counselors. 
B.  The city of Santa Fe shall perform a city-wide public information effort to notify the community about the adoption of this section. 
(Ord. #2006-56,  6) 
Editor's note- Former subsection 20-18.8, Sniffing Glue or Aerosol Spray Product Prohibited, previously codified 2003-34, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-07. See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding sniffing glue or aerosol spray products. 
20-18.9 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates Section 20-18 SFCC 1987 is guilty of a code violation and shall be sentenced pursuant to the provisions of subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. #1994-54,  9; Ord. #2003-34,  12) 
20-18.10 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 20-18.10, Reward, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1994-54 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-34. 
20-19 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- 1953 Code,  15-33; Code 1973,  19-32; SFCC 1981,  5-5-25; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  26. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding deadly weapons. 
20-20 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- SFCC 1981,  5-5-8; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  27. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding negligent use of explosives. 
20-21 - TOWING SERVICES.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1986-65. 

20-21.1 - Short title. 
    Section 20-2 shall be cited as the "Towing Services Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2011-21,  3) 
20-21.2 - Legislative findings; purpose. 
A.  The governing body finds it necessary to register and regulate businesses engaged in vehicle towing services when such services are performed for the city of Santa Fe. 
B.  The purpose of this section is to protect persons who operate motor vehicles within the city limits; insure that the streets, public ways and public property of the city of Santa Fe remain open and free of hazard to the public; and cause the efficient information of the city's traffic, parking, snow removal and other regulatory ordinances. 
(Ord. #2011-21  4) 
20-21.3 - Definitions. 
    Chief of police means the chief of the Santa Fe police department, or the chief's designee. 
    Principal place of business means the one (1) location where the main business activities of the wrecker company, also known as "the wrecker" are located as evidenced by its office space, auto storage space, towing vehicle storage space, payment of related taxes and identification as such on official business filings with the New Mexico taxation and revenue department and the internal revenue service. 
    Towing list means a list maintained by the Santa Fe police department containing the names of those wrecker companies registered by the city to respond to requests for the towing of vehicles made by the Santa Fe police department. 
    Wrecker or wrecker company means a business engaged in, or offering towing services, whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one (1) place to another by the use of a towing vehicle specifically adapted to and designed for that purpose. 
(Ord. #2011-21,  5) 
20-21.4 - Requirements. 
    Each wrecker company registered with the city police department shall continuously comply with the following minimum requirements: 
A.  The wrecker company shall be a legally organized business, having its principal place of business within Santa Fe county but not more than ten (10) miles of the Santa Fe city limits. 
B.  The wrecker company shall own and operate its own towing vehicles and shall supply to the chief of police satisfactory evidence of such ownership, including vehicle registration, title and insurance. 
C.  The wrecker company shall maintain satisfactory and secure storage facilities within Santa Fe county but not more than ten (10) miles of the Santa Fe city limits for those vehicles towed. 
D.  The wrecker company shall maintain public liability insurance, on-the-hook and garage keepers' liability insurance and any other insurance required by the New Mexico public regulation commission. A copy of the certificate of insurance shall be submitted to the city of Santa Fe; and each policy shall have the city of Santa Fe listed as an additional insured. The intent of this section is that the minimum amount of insurance required shall at a minimum equal the limitation of damages as required by the New Mexico public regulations commission. 
E.  The wrecker company shall hold the city of Santa Fe harmless from all claims for damages to property and injuries to persons resulting from wrecker company's negligence in the towing of or storage of vehicles. 
F.  The wrecker company shall agree to use the tariff schedule provided by the New Mexico public regulation commission when called out by the police department to tow privately owned vehicles not impounded by the city of Santa Fe, and contracted fees for vehicles impounded to any of the Santa Fe police impound lots. 
G.  The wrecker company shall maintain such records as required by the chief of police and shall permit inspection of such records during normal business hours. Among such records will be receipts for towing and storage of vehicles towed at the request of the Santa Fe police department. All receipts shall indicate the place of vehicle storage and any damage sustained during or after the towing operation. 
H.  The wrecker company shall permit the chief of police to conduct inspections of each towing vehicle and of each storage area during normal business hours. 
I.  The wrecker company shall arrive on the scene within thirty (30) minutes of receipt of a request for service from the Santa Fe police department. 
J.  The wrecker company shall tow or carry vehicles, not drive, to storage sites. 
K.  A vehicle shall not be towed outside of Santa Fe county and not more than ten (10) miles of the city of Santa Fe limits, unless requested by the vehicle owner or a Santa Fe police officer. 
L.  The driver of the towing vehicle shall clean the accident area of any debris resulting from the accident. 
M.  The wrecker company shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day to respond to police requests. 
N.  Three (3) refusals to respond to a police department request to remove a vehicle shall constitute elimination from the towing list for the remainder of the current contract period, at which time application can be made to resume towing services for the city of Santa Fe. 
O.  Each towing vehicle shall have equipment on board which would enable the removal of a vehicle regardless of the amount of damage sustained during or after the towing operation. 
P.  Each towing vehicle shall have flashing blue, amber or combination of both light(s), which are visible at three hundred sixty degrees (360). 
(Ord. #2011-21,  6) 
20-21.5 - Wrecker company selection procedure. 
A.  A wrecker company that desires to be on the towing list shall complete a registration form at the Santa Fe police department and shall submit required documents to the satisfaction of the chief of police. 
B.  Upon satisfactorily meeting the registration requirements set forth in this section, the wrecker company and the city shall enter into a contract for towing services. Thereafter, the wrecker company name and phone number shall be placed on the towing list. For the duration of the contract, the towing list shall be used in all cases in which a vehicle is to be towed from a public way or public property or from any private property at the request or direction of the Santa Fe police department. 
C.  When a request for towing services is made by the Santa Fe police department, the dispatcher or supervisor shall select the name of a wrecker company from the towing list. Names shall be selected on a rotating basis; that is, the name shall be selected which next succeeds the last wrecker company called for towing services. The selections shall proceed in a manner until the end of the towing list is reached, at which point a wrecker company shall be selected from the top of the towing list, consecutively. 
D.  In the event that a wrecker company does not respond to a phone call from the Santa Fe police department or if it does not respond to the scene in the prescribed thirty-minute time span, the next name on the towing list shall be called and the non-responding wrecker company will not be reused until its name next appears in the rotation. 
E.  Those wrecker companies maintaining more than one (1) towing vehicle shall be selected only once during each rotation of the towing list. 
F.  Preference calls shall have no impact on the towing list. A separate list will be kept by the dispatcher when a preference call is indicated. 
G.  When a request for AAA towing service is received by the Santa Fe police department, the dispatcher, or his supervisor shall contact the local AAA office and request such service. 
(Ord. #2011-21,  7) 
20-21.6 - Other wrecker selection. 
A.  A wrecker company shall not respond to the scene of an accident or other emergency unless specifically called there by the police or the person involved in the accident or emergency. A wrecker company owner, his agent, or employee shall not solicit towing contracts at the scene. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a towing service from privately contracting with any person. 
B.  The chief of police may select a wrecker company that does not appear on the towing list sequence when warranted by the requirement for special equipment and procedures or when due to the location or unusual circumstances surround vehicle removal. 
(Ord. #2011-21,  8) 
20-21.7 - Non-discrimination. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed as creating vested exclusive rights of a towing list wrecker company to be called, or selected for towing services requested by an employee or official of the city of Santa Fe. The provisions contained herein are not designed or intended to restrain the course of free trade nor restrict the number of qualified registrants on the towing list. 
(Ord. #2011-21,  9) 
20-21.8 - Removal. 
    The chief of police may remove or suspend any registrant from the towing list when the chief finds that: 
A.  The towing list registration was secured by fraud or by concealment of a material fact by the wrecker company and such fact, if known, would have caused disqualification; or 
B.  The wrecker company owner has violated any of the requirements or regulations established herein; or 
C.  The chief of police is not satisfied with general services of the wrecker company or its employees or with the cooperation it has received when services are rendered. 
(Ord. #2011-21,  10) 
20-21.9 - Effective date. 
    This section shall become effective July 1, 2011. 
(Ord. #2011-21,  11) 
20-22 - RESERVED.[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. #1986-21,  1; Ord. #1986-40,  1-8; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  28. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI regulations regarding possession of open containers in motor vehicles. 

20-23 - RESERVED.[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. #1986-59,  1-4; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  29. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for regulations regarding mandatory sentencing of persons under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 

20-24 - SPECIAL POLICE AND PRIVATE DETECTIVES.[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- For license fees, see Chapter XVIII, Licenses and Taxes, subsection 18-8.10 SFCC 1987. 

20-24.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Private detective means a person, not in uniform, who, within the city, engages in the detective business for hire and does not employ or use any employees, assistants, clerks, bookkeepers or operatives. 
    Private detective agency means any person engaged in the detective business, for hire, who employs one (1) or more persons, not in uniform, as his employees, assistants, clerks, bookkeepers or operatives in his business. 
    Special police agency means any person who, within the city, engages in police service for hire and who employs one (1) or more persons, in uniform, to give such police service. 
    Special policeman means any person in uniform who, for hire or reward, shall guard or protect any building, premises, person or property within the city; provided, that this shall not apply to the regular appointed police officers of the city, any sheriff or deputy sheriff of the county, or state or federal officers. A special policeman shall include all private guards, private patrols, patrol system and services. 
(Ord. #1957-1,  1; Code 1973,  25-32; SFCC 1981,  5-2-1) 
20-24.2 - Regulations. 
    All special policemen and private detectives shall obey and comply with all rules and regulations of the police department of the city, so far as they may be applicable. 
(Ord. #1957-1,  8; Code 1973,  25-34; SFCC 1981,  5-2-2) 
20-24.3 - Quarterly reports; prior notice of stakeouts. 
    Any licensee or officer, director, partner or manager of a licensee licensed pursuant to the Private Investigators Act shall file reports with the chief of police at least every ninety (90) days. The reports shall list the names and addresses of clients to which the licensee is providing service and a description and license number of all vehicles used by the licensee. All such reports shall be confidential except with permission of the police chief they may be made available to other law enforcement agencies. Any licensee planning a "stakeout" shall report such plans to the chief of police at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance. 
(SFCC 1981,  5-2-3) 
State Law reference- Private Investigators Act,  61-27-1 through 61-27-49 NMSA 1978. 
20-24.4 - Exemption from licensure. 
    No license, as provided for in Section 18-1, Business Licenses, shall be required of any person while protecting persons, passengers or property being transferred in interstate or intrastate common carriers; provided, that special policemen or private detectives whose employment is limited to only one (1) corporation, company or person for the exclusive protection of its or their own property or product, and whose activities are strictly confined to its or their own property, shall be exempt from payment of the fee provided for in Section 18-1, Business Licenses, but shall be subject to all other provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #1957-1,  4; Code 1973,  25-53; Ord. #1981-64,  25; SFCC 1981,  5-2-4) 
20-24.5 - Revocation of license. 
    The governing body, on recommendation of the city manager or on its own motion, may, for cause, revoke any license issued under the provisions of Section 18-1, Business Licenses, after notice and opportunity to be heard before the governing body pursuant to the procedures established by Section 18-1, Business Licenses. The following shall be considered as just causes: 
A.  If the licensee has willfully violated any of the provisions of subsections 20-24.1 through 20-24.5 or Business Licenses; 
B.  If any employee of the licensee violates any of the provisions of subsections 20-24.1 through 20-24.5 or Section 18-1, Business Licenses, with the permission or instructions of the licensee to do so; 
C.  Conviction of any felony or any offense involving moral turpitude, except minor traffic violations; or 
D.  Violation of the rules and regulations of the police department of the city so far as they are applicable. 
(Ord. #1957-1,  7; Code 1973,  25-54; Ord. #1981-64,  26; SFCC 1981,  5-2-5) 
20-25 - RESERVED.[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 20-25, Maintenance and Installation of Alarm Devices and Systems, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1988-31,  1-16 and 1998-10,  1-16, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2009-33,  1. 
Cross reference- See Section 20-5, Alarm Systems. 

20-26 - SCAVENGING AT THE CITY LANDFILL. 

20-26.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to protect the public health and safety by prohibiting the unauthorized searching for, gathering or removal of materials at the city landfill because such acts pose substantial danger and health risks. The presence of scavengers and the act of scavenging can lead to the spread of disease as well as accidents involving bodily injury and death. In addition, such acts also disrupt disposal operations of the city. 
(Ord. #1990-27,  1) 
20-26.2 - Scavenging at landfill prohibited. 
A.  No person shall, without written authorization from the city, search for, gather, separate or remove any materials delivered to or located on city property designated for landfill disposal purposes. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1990-27,  2) 
20-27 - TOBACCO PRODUCT PLACEMENT.[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1994-41 and 2002-16. 
Cross reference- For additional restrictions regarding tobacco products, see subsection 16-15.4 SFCC 1987. 

20-27.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Tobacco Product Placement Ordinance". 
(Ord. #2005-7,  32) 
20-27.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Minor means an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm or corporation and any of the preceding in both the singular and the plural. 
    Self-service display means a display to which the public has access without the assistance of the seller or the seller's employee. 
    Tobacco product means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion. 
(Ord. #2007-7,  33) 
20-27.3 - Vending machines; restrictions on sales of tobacco products. 
A.  Except as provided in paragraphs B and C of this section: 
(1)  A person shall not sell tobacco products at a retail location by means other than a direct, face-to-face exchange between the customer and seller or the seller's employee; and 
(2)  A person selling goods at a retail location shall not use a self-service display for tobacco products. 
B.  Tobacco products may be sold by vending machines in the following locations only: 
(1)  In locations not held open to the public, including controlled areas within factories, businesses and offices; 
(2)  In locations in which the vending machine is equipped with a remote-controlled lock-out device; or; 
(3)  In age-controlled locations where minors are not permitted unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
C.  The provisions of this section do not apply to written, telephonic or electronic sales. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  34) 
20-27.4 - Signs; point of sale. 
    A person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged in the sale at retail of tobacco products shall prominently display in the place where tobacco products are sold and where a tobacco product vending machine is located, a printed sign or decal that reads as follows: 
 "A PERSON LESS THAN 18 YEARS OF AGE WHO PURCHASES A TOBACCO PRODUCT IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $1,000. 
 A PERSON WHO SELLS A TOBACCO PRODUCT TO A PERSON LESS THAN 18 YEARS OF AGE IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $1,000." 
(Ord. #2005-7,  35) 
20-27.5 - Monitored compliance; inspections. 
    The appropriate city staff as designated by the city manager shall conduct random, unannounced inspections of facilities where tobacco products are sold to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  36) 
20-27.6 - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be sentenced pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. #2005-7,  37) 
20-28 - RESERVED.[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. #1999-2,  1-3; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  38. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for provisions regarding hate crimes. 

20-29 - RESERVED.[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. #1999-37,  2-6; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  39. 
Cross reference- See Chapter XVI for provisions regarding crimes against household members. 

20-30 - LASER POINTERS.[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1999-43, codified herein, was originally adopted as Section 20-29. It was renumbered for codification to avoid duplication of numbers. 

20-30.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Laser Pointer Restriction Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1999-43,  1) 
20-30.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Laser pointer means either: 
A.  A helium neon (HeNe) laser which typically operates at a wavelength of 632.8 nMe with the mandated power limit of 5 mW of power. Such type of laser is considered a class 2 laser. 
B.  A diode laser which typically operates at a wavelength of 670 nMe (although others are possible) with a power source providing 5 mW. Such type of laser is considered a class 3a laser. 
    Minor means a person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  2) 
20-30.3 - Purpose. 
    The misuse of a laser pointer has the potential for causing severe eye injury and endangering the public through the mistaken apprehension that a laser is being used to aim a firearm. The purpose of this section is to: 
A.  Prohibit the transfer or sale of laser pointers to minors; and 
B.  Prohibit the use of laser pointers by minors, unless the minor is in the presence of and under the direct supervision of a parent or legal guardian; and 
C.  Prohibit the pointing of laser pointers at persons. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  3) 
20-30.4 - Laser pointers; prohibited sales. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, barter or give a laser pointer to a minor. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  4) 
20-30.5 - Documentary evidence of age and identity. 
    Each person selling or transferring a laser pointer shall require that the recipient provide evidence of their age. Evidence of the age and identity of a person may be shown by any document that contains a picture of the person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, including a motor vehicle driver's license or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  5) 
20-30.6 - Refusal to sell a laser pointer to person unable to produce identity card. 
    Any person selling goods, at retail or wholesale, shall refuse to sell a laser pointer to any person who is unable to produce an identity card as evidence that the person is eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  6) 
20-30.7 - Presenting false evidence of age or identity. 
    No minor shall present any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or identity that is false for the purpose of procuring or attempting to procure a laser pointer. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  7) 
20-30.8 - Signs; point of sale. 
    A person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged in the sale, retail or wholesale, of laser pointers shall prominently display, in the place where laser pointers are sold, a printed sign or decal that reads as follows: 
A PERSON WHO SELLS A LASER POINTER TO A PERSON LESS THAN 18 YEARS OF AGE IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $500. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  8) 
20-30.9 - Laser pointers; prohibited use. 
A.  The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be subject to those liabilities enumerated and imposed by Section 32A-2-27 NMSA (1978) for any violation of the Laser Pointer Restriction Ordinance by the minor. 
B.  A minor shall not possess or utilize a laser pointer, unless the minor is in the presence of and under the direct supervision of a parent or legal guardian. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for anyone to direct a laser pointer at any individual, including without limitation, into the eye or eyes of any individual. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  9) 
20-30.10 - Monitored compliance; inspections. 
    The code enforcement division of the city of Santa Fe and the appropriate law enforcement authorities in the city of Santa Fe shall conduct random, unannounced inspections of facilities where laser pointers are sold to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Laser Pointer Restriction Ordinance. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  10) 
20-30.11 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity who violates any provision of the Laser Pointer Restriction Ordinance shall be guilty of a code violation and shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense. 
B.  Any parent or legal guardian of a minor who violates any provision of the Laser Pointer Restriction Ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or forty-eight (48) hours of community service. 
(Ord. #1999-43,  11) 
20-31 - RESERVED. 
20-32 - RESERVED.[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. #2002-4,  1-4; Ord. #2004-3,  1; repealed by Ord. #2005-7,  40. 
Cross reference- See subsection 1-3.2 for Municipal Court Fees. 

CHAPTER XXI - ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES 
21-1 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code 1953,  10-1-10-12; Code 1973,  10-1-10-15; SFCC 1981  4-1-2-4-1-6, 4-2-1-4-2-11; Ord. No. 1955-16, 1956-25, 1956-32, 1959-19, 1959-29, 1966-23, 1973-39, 1974-43, 1977-52, 1979-8, 1980-38, 1980-40, 1980-56, 1980-57, 1980-62, 1981-59, 1982-40, 1983-65, 1985-24, 1987-21, 1988-17, 1990-22, 1990-23, 1991-25, 1992-34, 1994-33, 1995-18, 1996-11, 1996-23. Ord. No. 2007-19,  1, amended the title of this chapter to be Solid Waste; Ordinance No. 2012-24,  1, amended the title of this chapter to be Environmental Services. 

21-1.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Solid Waste Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1996-46,  2) 
21-1.2 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to define complementary practices for an integrated solid waste management system for the city of Santa Fe including but not limited to waste reduction and diversion, collection, transport and disposal. Such system and practices are set forth to protect the environment, health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Santa Fe. 
B.  Minimum standards and requirements for the collection, transport and disposal of solid waste generated within the service area are established and hereby declared to be regulatory. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  2; Ord. #2006-17,  2) 
21-2 - DEFINITIONS. 

21-2.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Ashes means residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible materials. 
    Automated means refuse or recycled material collection by a truck with a hydraulically operated, articulated arm, or cart tipper. 
    Backyard composting means composting household solid waste in a confined space within personal property boundaries. 
    Burning means any form of incineration of solid waste. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe County, New Mexico. 
    Collection means the systematic and regular removal of solid waste or recycling from property and its transport to a designated solid waste facility. 
    Commercial recycling (see "nonresidential recycling"). 
    Commercial solid waste (see "nonresidential solid waste"). 
    Compost means organic matter produced from solid waste which has undergone a controlled process of decomposition and pathogen reduction, and has been stabilized to a degree which is potentially beneficial to plant growth and which is used as a soil amendment, growing medium amendment or other similar uses. 
    Composting means the process by which compost is created. 
    Construction and demolition debris (C & D) means non-hazardous, uncontaminated materials resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of structures, utilities, and roads. C & D materials are generally considered water insoluble and non-hazardous and include, but are not limited to: bricks, concrete, and other masonry materials, asphalt, roofing materials, steel, glass, pipe, gypsum wallboard and lumber. C & D debris does not include asbestos, garbage, corrugated container board, electrical fixtures containing hazardous liquids such as fluorescent light ballasts or transformers, fluorescent lights, furniture, appliances, tires, drums, containers greater than ten (10) gallons in size, any containers having more than one inch (1") of residue remaining on the bottom, fuel tanks, brush and tree remains or other vegetative material from land clearing, uncontaminated soil, rocks, liquids including, but not limited to, waste paints, solvents, sealers, adhesives or potentially hazardous materials. If C & D debris is mixed with any other types of solid waste, whether or not originating from the construction project, it loses its classification as C & D debris. 
    Container means: 
A.  City-provided or customer-owned receptacle that is designed for intermediate storage of solid waste and has a secure closing so as to prohibit animal destruction until such time refuse is collected; and 
B.  City-provided or customer-owned receptacles designed for the intermediate storage of recyclable materials. 
    Corrugated cardboard (OCC) means wood pulp based Kraft paper material which has two (2) usually smooth exterior layers, with one (1) wavy corrugated interior core, used to make cardboard boxes, shipping containers and packing liners. Also includes brown Kraft paper bags, and paper. Does not include wax-coated cardboard, cardboard with permanently attached packing materials, or cardboard contaminated with food or oils. 
    Customer, also user means residential or nonresidential persons who receive solid waste or recycling collection service from the city of Santa Fe. 
    Day means calendar day unless otherwise described. 
    Debris means the unwanted or unusable remains of something broken down or destroyed. 
    Dumping means: 
A.  Disposing of solid waste or any other discarded material on property within the city which is private including but not limited to privately owned or controlled containers, parking lots and vacant lots; 
B.  Disposing of solid waste or discarding any other items on a public place or on public property or facility which shall include, but is not limited to, the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purpose of vehicular travel or in public containers not intended for that purpose; or 
C.  Allowing refuse to collect or accumulate on any privately-owned lot or other premises within the city of Santa Fe. 
    Facility means real estate or buildings used for a particular function. 
    Finance committee means the designated standing committee of the governing body. 
    Garbage means unwanted or unusable waste products or unused materials to include, but not limited to, food, offal, ashes, waste paper, trash, rubbish, and waste or unwholesome materials generated during the consumption of resources. 
    Governing body means the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
    Green waste, including yard waste, means vegetative or green organic matter resulting from landscaping, land maintenance and land clearing operations, but does not include dirt, rocks, asphalt or concrete chips. 
    Hazardous waste means waste which because of its concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
    Hot waste means any waste which is on fire or smoldering. 
    Household hazardous waste (HHW) means a wide range of household products, including pesticides and herbicides, oil based paints, liquid latex paints, stains and varnishes, automobile fluids (antifreeze, motor oil, transmission, steering and brake fluids, gasoline), batteries (automotive and household), pool chemicals, hobby chemicals, darkroom chemicals, which have the characteristics of hazardous waste when discarded. Federal law specifically exempts household hazardous waste from regulation as hazardous waste because of the point of generation. Because of the hazards posed by these wastes, they should not be placed in with solid waste for disposal. See special waste. 
    Household medical waste means household solid waste which, but for its point of generation, would be a regulated medical waste (i.e. used sharps including hypodermic needles, bloody/soiled bandages and dressings, disposable sheets and clothing, medical gloves, dialysis machine filters, etc.). 
    Infectious waste means regulated medical waste. A limited class of substances that carry a probability risk of transmitting disease to humans, including but not limited to: 
A.  Microbiological laboratory wastes, including cultures and stocks of infectious agents from clinic research and industrial laboratories, and disposable culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures; 
B.  Pathological wastes, including human or animal tissues, organs and body parts removed during surgery, autopsy or biopsy; 
C.  Disposable equipment, instruments, utensils, and other disposable materials which require special precautions because of contamination by highly contagious diseases; 
D.  Human blood and blood products, including waste blood, blood serum, and plasma; 
E.  Used sharps, including used hypodermic needles, syringes, scalpel blades, Pasteur pipettes; and 
F.  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts and bedding, especially those intentionally exposed to pathogens in research, in the production of biological or in the "in vivo" testing of pharmaceuticals. 
    Multi-family residential means sixteen (16) or more dwelling units on one (1) lot. A dwelling unit is defined as one (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    Non-recyclable material means items that are not recyclable or recyclables that are not accepted within the city's recycling program including, but not limited to, ceramics, pyrex, plate glass, light bulbs, drinking glasses, clothing, electronics, green waste, styrofoam, food waste, food contaminated materials, or plastic bags, municipal solid waste, sharps, hazardous containers or construction and demolition waste. The city reserves the right to modify this list as part of the city's recycling program. 
    Nonresidential recyclables, also commercial recyclables means recyclables generated by stores, offices, restaurants, hotels or motels, warehouses, and other manufacturing and non-manufacturing activities; multi-family residential units; places of religious assembly; schools; and government facilities. 
    Nonresidential solid waste, also commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by, but not limited to: businesses including stores, offices, restaurants, hotels or motels, warehouses, and other manufacturing and non-manufacturing activities; multi-family residential units; places of religious assembly; schools and governmental facilities, excluding household and hazardous solid wastes. 
    Ordinance means Chapter XXI of the Santa Fe City Code. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, limited partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assignees. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental entities. 
    Processing means techniques to change the physical, chemical or biological character or components of solid waste, which does not include composting. 
    Prohibited materials means solid wastes listed as special waste by New Mexico Solid Waste Management Regulations 20 NMAC 9.1 700-711; or any items listed herein that can cause operational problems, damage to equipment, health risks to workers, adverse impacts to the environment, or any other solid waste that is listed that are not deemed acceptable for disposal or recycling 
A.  Asbestos wastes, solid or friable; 
B.  Ammunition or any items that have the ability to explode or cause injury when run over by heavy equipment and/or when exposed to an ignition source; 
C.  Animal wastes - horse, cattle and large animal manures and animal bedding mixed with large animal wastes; 
D.  Automobiles and large automobile parts, automobile or equipment lead-acid batteries, automobile parts containing or that contained fluids or liquids (gasoline tanks). Does not include tire rims that have been removed from tires; 
E.  Dead animals; 
F.  Explosives, fireworks, ammunition or any items that have the ability to explode or ignite when exposed to an ignition source; 
G.  Hazardous waste, as defined in this section; 
H.  Hot ashes, as defined in this section; 
I.  Regulated medical waste (infectious waste) from hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, health maintenance organizations, doctor and dentist offices, blood plasma centers, laboratories, veterinary practices and hospitals or as specified in 20 NMAC 9.1 (706); 
J.  Concrete, roofing materials, asphalt or rock; 
K.  Liquids including sewage and septage and large quantities of frying fats and oils; 
L.  Petroleum or chemically contaminated soils; 
M.  Pressurized cylinders; 
N.  Radioactive waste; 
O.  Sewage, septage and holding tank pumping; 
P.  Sludges; or 
Q.  Any other item as specified by federal, state or local regulation. 
    Putrescible means organic material subject to decomposition by microorganisms. 
    Recyclable materials means materials that would otherwise be solid waste and which can be collected, separated and/or processed, treated, reclaimed, and placed back in use in the form of raw materials, or that can beneficially be used or reused, including: 
    Corrugated cardboard and brown Kraft paper bags; 
    Mixed papers (newspapers as delivered, magazines, glossy catalogs, glossy paper, office paper, junk mail); 
    Mixed containers (steel food containers, aluminum cans, aluminum pie plates and used foil balls, and plastics 1 through 7, (excluding styrofoam and plastic bags); 
    Glass food and beverage containers all colors; 
    Other containers, materials and papers not listed herein that may be determined to be recyclable in the future, or for which economically viable markets exist or that are created. 
    Recycling means any process by which recyclable materials are collected, separated and processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
    Refuse (see "solid waste"). 
    Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule means the listing of fees and charges for solid waste and recycling collection, transport and disposal services provided by the city and which is incorporated as part of this chapter as Exhibit B. (Editor's Note: Exhibit B may be found at the end of this chapter.) 
    Refuse bag means a city provided or customer owned disposable plastic bag used for the intermediate storage of solid waste which shall be 1.5 mil thick and thirty-three (33) gallon capacity. 
    Residential solid waste means any solid waste or garbage derived from households not defined as multi-family residential and home occupations, as set forth in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 and licensed by the city. 
    Residential unit means a dwelling unit. Where nonresidential and residential uses occur in a single unit, that unit shall be considered nonresidential. 
    Scavenging means the removal of any solid waste or recyclables from privately or publicly owned solid waste containers, refuse bags, solid waste facility, transfer station or recycling container in a manner not authorized by the city. 
    Service area means that area within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe and any additional area beyond those limits within which the governing body authorizes the collection of solid waste. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, litter, yard waste, white goods, construction and demolition debris and other discarded solid materials, including those from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from community activities but does not include prohibited materials, solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flow nor materials which the city is prohibited by law from accepting. 
    Solid waste enterprise fund means the fund created by the city of Santa Fe to manage the revenues and expenses associated with the collection, diversion, transport and disposal of solid waste and recycled materials including but not limited to operations, capital improvements and debt service. 
    Solid waste facility means a facility that is permitted or registered by the state of New Mexico and appropriately zoned and approved by the city to accept solid waste or recyclables. Solid waste facilities include convenience centers, transfer stations, material recovery facilities, composting facilities and landfills. 
    Trash (see "solid waste"). 
    User (see "customer"). 
    White goods means large household appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, air conditioners, swamp coolers and the like that are received as waste by the city. 
    Yard waste (see "green waste"). 
(Ord. #1996-46,  3; Ord. #1999-7,  1; Ord. #2001-21  1; Ord. #2006-17,  3; Ord. #2007-19,  2; Ord. #2009-5,  1, 2; Ord. #2015-35  1) 
21-3 - COLLECTION AUTHORITY; ENTERPRISE FUND ESTABLISHED. 

21-3.1 - Refuse collection authority. 
A.  The city and its duly authorized agents or employees shall have the exclusive right within the service area to collect or gather solid waste, with the exception of nonresidential recyclables, dead animals, construction and demolition debris, hazardous wastes and other such materials which the city is prohibited by law from collecting or disposing. No person or organization may sell within the service area any services for the systematic and routine collection, transportation or disposal of garbage, trash or refuse except for nonresidential recyclables, dead animals, construction and demolition debris, hazardous wastes and other such materials which the city is prohibited by law from collecting or disposing. 
B.  The city and its duly authorized agents shall have the exclusive right to collect or gather residential curbside recyclables. 
C.  The city reserves the right at any time to refuse to collect or receive waste, if, in the judgment of the city, such collection is deemed to be harmful, hazardous or in violation of city or state regulations governing type of waste, weight or waste constituents. The city shall inform the person responsible for such waste and shall require compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  4; Ord. #2007-19,  3; Ord. #2015-35  2) 
21-3.2 - Establishment of solid waste enterprise fund. 
    For the purpose of defraying all expenses of collection, diversion, transport and disposal of refuse, the solid waste enterprise fund is established. The governing body shall establish and periodically amend service rates and charges which recover the full costs for each class of service rendered. The revenue received from these rates shall be credited to the solid waste enterprise fund. Money from this fund shall pay all direct, indirect and bond service expenses of the solid waste management operation. All refuse services provided by the city are subject to the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  4; Ord. #2006-17,  4; Ord. #2015-35  2) 
21-3.3 - Repealed. 
Editor's note- Subsection 21-3.3 was repealed by Ord. No. 2015-35. 
21-4 - REFUSE COLLECTION. 

21-4.1 - General prohibitions. 
    The following actions with regard to solid waste are hereby prohibited: 
A.  Burning. 
B.  Dumping. 
C.  Placing solid waste in any container or areas other than those specifically designated or approved by the city for collection or disposal. 
D.  Transporting solid waste to a solid waste facility without securing or covering the load so as to prevent leakage, littering, blowing, or other form of loss while in transit. 
E.  Scavenging. 
F.  Depositing of hot waste into any container, or enclosure designated for refuse collection. 
G.  Presenting to the city for disposal infectious waste, hazardous waste, flammable or explosive refuse, radioactive waste or other contaminated materials which by law or regulation shall be properly disposed by a specially licensed or equipped person or requires a solid waste facility specifically authorized for this purpose. 
H.  Placing prohibited materials, furniture, mattresses, large tree limbs, tires, engine parts, white goods, or other large items at the curbside, in residential or commercial containers, or in container enclosures for routine weekly collection. 
I.  Using container enclosures for storage. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  5; Ord. #2006-17,  5; Ord. #2007-19,  4; Ord. #2009-5,  4) 
21-4.2 - Residential collection. 
    Collection of residential solid waste and related recyclable materials shall be provided at curbside except where the city's solid waste division determines that physical conditions of the site limit curbside collection. In such cases collection shall occur at a location designated by the city and as set forth in 21-4.5 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  5; Ord. #2009-5,  5) 
21-4.3 - Conditions of service-Residential collection. 
A.  For residential collection tag service the customer shall use commercially available plastic refuse bags which are no greater than 33 gallons and have a maximum weight of 50 pounds. The customer shall place bags by the curb between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the day designated for collection. 
B.  For residential automated collection service, the size and mil of the bags in the container are not mandated. 
C.  For residential automated recycling collection service, the customer shall place all acceptable recycling materials within the automated container, with the exception of food and beverage glass and all non-recyclable materials. (ceramics, Pyrex, plate glass, light bulbs, drinking glasses, clothing, electronics, green waste, Styrofoam, food waste, food contaminated materials, or plastic bags, municipal solid waste, sharps, hazardous containers or construction and demolition waste). All food and beverage glass shall be recycled at designated drop off locations. 
D.  Customer shall keep all refuse and recycling within private property away from public view until the time when containers are placed at the curbside for city collection. In order to minimize garbage falling out upon collection and to keep containers clean, the city recommends that all garbage be bagged inside a customer owned or city provided container. Bags inside such containers are not required to meet any standard. Bags placed outside of a container shall meet requirements in paragraph A. above. 
E.  Customers shall place city provided refuse containers and recycling containers by curbside between the hours of 6:00 p.m. the night before the designated day of collection and 8:00 a.m. on the day designated for collection. Refuse containers and recycling containers shall be removed from the curbside by 8:00 a.m. the day following the designated collection day. 
F.  Customers who receive automated collection shall place containers at a minimum of three feet (3') from any other object (mailboxes, walls, parked vehicles, etc.), including refuse bags, and recycling containers so that personal property or city equipment do not get damaged, or city collection personnel do not get injured. The customer shall place the container in an area which does not have any overhead obstacles (trees, utility lines). 
G.  Where a curb does not exist, refuse containers shall be placed on the property side, outside the traffic boundaries of the road. Carts shall be placed on a flat level surface. In other special situations outside of those described herein, the location in which refuse is placed for collection shall be determined by the city. 
H.  Bags shall be securely tied to avoid spillage. Cleaning of any spillage that occurs within public right-of-way as a result of improperly bagged or secured refuse or due to entry by animals shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
I.  Each refuse bag placed for collection shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds and shall not exceed thirty-three (33) gallon capacity. City provided containers shall not exceed two hundred (200) pounds in capacity. 
J.  Hypodermic needles shall be placed in a puncture proof container with a screw top lid. 
K.  Items which do meet the conditions of this section shall remain the sole responsibility of the customer to dispose in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  5; Ord. #2006-17,  7; Ord. #2009-5,  6; Ord. #2012-24,  2; Ord. #2015-35  3) 
21-4.4 - Special residential curbside collection service. 
    Special residential curbside collection service shall be provided for customers with disabilities. Special service may include the entry onto the property or into residential units to remove containerized waste from porches, portals, garages or other similar locations. Eligible persons are those having disabilities which restrict mobility or otherwise affect the ability to place solid waste at the curbside. Persons requiring this service shall verify the disability with the city prior to obtaining this service and provide authorization to access private property. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  5; Ord. #2006-17,  7) 
21-4.5 - Collection from containers not at curbside. 
    Collection from containers not at curbside shall include, but not be limited to, service to front-loading, rear-loading and roll-off containers and carts. The use of containers not owned by the city shall be approved by the city prior to use. The placement shall be approved by the city prior to use. Maintenance of containers not owned by the city shall be sole responsibility of the owner of the container. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  5; Ord. #2009-5,  7) 
21-4.6 - Conditions of service-Commercial and multi-family residential. 
A.  Customer service requests shall include the size and type of container to be used as well as the frequency of service. Request shall be made in writing on forms specified by the city. 
B.  The specific site and enclosure for the placement of any refuse container shall be consistent with the standards hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this chapter as Exhibits A.1 and A-2.* 
C.  Enclosures and containers shall be kept free of any blockage or obstruction. 
D.  Enclosures shall be used exclusively for the purpose of storing solid waste or recycling containers. 
E.  Locked enclosure gates shall be unlocked by driver and/or customer by prior agreement on the day designated for collection. 
F.  In the event a container or access to the container is blocked and the container cannot be emptied, a special service fee shall be assessed for a subsequent service visit. 
G.  During winter months, the area leading to the enclosure or container shall be kept clear of snow and ice at the customer's expense. The city shall, at its discretion, determine whether the snow and ice have been cleared sufficiently or service may be suspended. 
H.  The city shall not be responsible for damage to enclosures or containers that are not designed or constructed in accordance with standards in Exhibits A.1 and A.2* of this chapter. Service may be suspended for enclosures or containers that are in a state of disrepair which may cause unsafe conditions for the collection personnel. The city may relocate the container, or place an alternate type of container, without prior approval from the customer, if the city deems that the location of the container is unsafe and risks damage to private property, city property or injury to city collection personnel. Maintenance of the enclosure and privately-owned containers shall be the responsibility of the owner. Enclosures built after the date of adoption of this chapter shall fully comply with standards in Exhibit A.1 or A.2* of this chapter. 
I.  Containers shall be loaded so that the closed lid shall be level with the container's rim. Refuse spills around the container shall be cleaned by the customer. The city may require an increase in service frequency and/or container capacity as a condition of service where containers are routinely overfilled. 
J.  City-owned containers in need of repairs due to normal wear and tear shall be repaired or replaced at the city's discretion upon request of the customer. 
K.  Privately owned containers shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. Repairs of such containers shall be made within fifteen (15) days upon customer being notified by the city of the needed repairs. In the event that the needed repairs present endangerment to city employees or agents in the collection of waste, the city may suspend service until the container is repaired or replaced. 
L.  Front loading and rear loading service shall be provided Monday through Friday including holidays. Saturday service will be available for customers requiring six (6) days of service. 
M.  Roll-off service shall be provided Monday through Friday including holidays. Requests for temporary changes in collection scheduling shall be submitted to the city not less than one (1) week in advance of the requested change. 
N.  The customer or customer's representative shall complete a written request to the city for cancellations of service or to request long term or permanent changes in service. 
O.  Requests for additional special service may be made by phone to the city during normal business hours, within two (2) city working days of the requested date of service. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  5; Ord. #2006-17,  8; Ord. #2007-19,  6; Ord. #2009-5,  8) 
Editor's note- *Exhibits A.1 and A.2, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
21-4.7 - Conditions of service-Large item pickup. 
A.  Service for large item pickup is restricted to one (1) customer per call. The customer shall only place items for pickup from that customer's household. 
B.  Any and all containers, including boxes and bags, shall be secured to avoid spillage, including leaves, grass clippings, etc. Containers and/or bundles shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. 
C.  Tree limbs and other vegetative cuttings shall be tied in bundles no longer than four feet (4') and shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Furniture items (couches, chairs, tables, desks, beds, mattresses, etc.) may be placed out for pickup. 
D.  Construction debris shall be contained or bundled (plywood, boards, sheet rock, etc.). Containers shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Rocks, concrete, broken tile, etc. shall be containerized and not exceed fifty (50) pounds. 
E.  Broken glass, cactus plants and other sharp objects shall be placed in separate cardboard boxes and labeled accordingly. 
F.  Syringes shall be placed in a puncture proof container with a screw top lid. 
G.  Appliances (refrigerators, stoves, freezers, washers, dryers, furnaces, swamp coolers, etc.) may be placed out for pickup. 
H.  A maximum of two (2) passenger car tires may be collected per residence per call. 
I.  Items shall be placed at the curb, free of obstructions, by 7:00 a.m. on the day designated for collection. 
J.  In the event the service is no longer required, the customer shall provide the city with advance notice of not less than one (1) city working day. Failure to notify the city shall result in charges to the customer as if collection took place. 
K.  Customers whose account is delinquent for more than thirty (30) days shall not be eligible for large item pickup service. 
L.  All items set out for collection shall be placed at a reasonable distance from all obstacles, including overhanging trees, wires, automobiles, fences, walls or mailboxes to prevent damage to personal property or city equipment, and to prevent injury to city collection personnel. 
(Ord. #2001-15,  1; Ord. #2006-17,  9; Ord. #2007-19,  7) 
21-5 - REFUSE TRANSFER AND DISPOSAL. 

21-5.1 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 21-5.1, Eligible Users of Waste Transfer Facilities, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-46, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-17,  10. 
21-5.2 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 21-5.2, Conditions of Service - Waste Transfer Facilities, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-46 and 2001-15, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-17,  11. 
21-6 - REFUSE DIVERSION AND RECYCLING. 

21-6.1 - Waste reduction and recycling. 
    The city shall promote the waste reduction and diversion to the maximum extent possible. It shall implement diversion practices where feasible including but not limited to the collection of recyclable materials from residential and nonresidential sources and safe disposal of household waste which could include hazardous waste. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  7; Ord. No. 2015-35  4) 
21-6.2 - Conditions of service-Waste reduction and recycling. 
A.  A list of materials recommended for recycling and recommended methods of recycling shall be periodically updated by the city and the list shall be broadly distributed. 
B.  All food glass and beverage glass shall be recycled at designated drop off locations. Locations for drop off shall be clearly identified, broadly publicized, and periodically updated by the city. 
C.  Containers for recyclable materials shall be clearly identified and distinguishable from containers used for waste collection. 
D.  Storage of recyclable materials prior to collection shall not create a nuisance or condition which may adversely affect public health. 
E.  Recycling containers shall be placed on the curb at least three feet (3') from refuse containers and refuse bags. 
F.  Backyard composting and related forms of biological waste diversion or reduction shall be conducted in a manner that does not violate state or city laws or regulations and does not create a nuisance or condition which may adversely affect public health. 
G.  For commercial recycling collection services, the business shall place all acceptable recycling materials within either the rolling automated container or the recycling dumpster, all acceptable materials may be mixed with the exception of food glass and beverage glass and all non-recyclable materials (ceramics, Pyrex, plate glass, light bulbs, drinking glasses, clothing, electronics, green waste, Styrofoam, food waste, food contaminated materials, or plastic bags, municipal solid waste, sharps, hazardous containers, or construction and demolition waste). 
H.  For commercial glass recycling collection services, the business shall place only food and beverage glass within a 64 gallon rolling container. The storage of recyclable materials prior to collection shall not create a nuisance or condition which may adversely affect public health. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  7; Ord. #2007-19,  8; Ord. #2015-35  4) 
21-7 - SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES. 

21-7.1 - Service fees and charges. 
A.  There is assessed against every person owning or controlling any developed property in the city, monthly and other special refuse collection and disposal fees payable to the city in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule, hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this chapter as Exhibit B, and in accordance with service rate classes described herein. (Editor's Note: Exhibit B may be found at the end of this chapter.) 
(1)  There is a residential curbside service rate which shall apply to those residential units having refuse collection at the curb. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. 
(2)  There is a non-compacting rear-loading commercial service rate which shall apply to nonresidential establishments having refuse collection at non-compacting rear-loading bins or carts. The city shall provide and maintain non-compacting rear-loading bins or carts at an indicated rental charge which shall be provided for in the service rate. Bins and carts shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. 
(3)  There is a non-compacting rear-loading light commercial service rate which shall apply to nonresidential establishments having refuse collection from not larger than one (1) ninety (90) gallon cart and not more than one (1) service visit per week. The city shall provide and maintain non-compacting rear-loading carts which shall be provided for in the service rate. Carts shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. 
(4)  There is a non-compacting front-loading commercial service rate which shall apply to nonresidential establishments having refuse collection at non-compacting front-loading bins. The city shall provide and maintain non-compacting front-loading bins at an indicated rental charge which shall be provided for in the service rate. Bins shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. 
(5)  There is a compacting front-loading commercial service rate which shall apply to nonresidential establishments having refuse collection at compacting front-loading bins. Such bins shall be provided, installed and maintained at customer expense and shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. 
(6)  There is a non-compacting open top roll-off commercial service rate which shall apply to any establishment having refuse collection from non-compacting, open top roll-off bins. The non-compacting open top roll-off container shall be serviced a minimum of one (1) time per month. Bins shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. The gross weight including the weight of the bin and its contents may not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds and the external dimensions of the bin shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to the commencement of service. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. Persons wishing to substitute special on-call service in lieu of scheduled service for a period of thirty (30) days or more shall be assessed on the basis of each special service call provided by the city for each bin. 
(7)  There is a non-compacting, open top roll-off special event commercial service rate which shall apply to any establishment requiring refuse collection at non-compacting, open top roll-off bins for a special event or other use having a duration of less than thirty (30) days. The service rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule for special service under the commercial non-compacting roll-off class of service. Bins shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. 
(8)  There is a compacting roll-off commercial service rate which shall apply to nonresidential establishments having refuse collection at compacting roll-off bins. Bins shall be provided and maintained at customer expense and shall be placed for service in a manner and location acceptable to the city. If the compacting roll-off bin is in disrepair, city collection personnel shall give notice to the customer informing customer of the need to repair the bin within fifteen (15) calendar days. If the repairs are not made, the city may suspend collection. The gross weight including the weight of the bin and its contents may not routinely exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds and the external dimensions of the bin shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to the commencement of service. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. 
(9)  There is a service rate which shall apply to commercial recycling for nonresidential establishments and charged as a separate service. Such charges will be in addition to the regular commercial service. The city shall provide and maintain non-compacting bins and carts at an indicated rental charge which shall be provided for in the service rate. The city shall approve the placement site of the container. The monthly rate shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule, Exhibit B of this chapter. 
(10)  There is a residential, curbside, large-item collection rate which will apply to on-call collection at curbside of items/materials that cannot be collected as residential curbside collection due to weight or size restrictions. The fee for this service shall be in accordance with the Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule. This collection fee includes the disposal cost of all items collected. 
B.  The city reserves the right at any time to refuse to remove materials placed for city collection and disposal if, in the judgment of the city, the removal from the premises may be harmful or hazardous or in violation of state or city regulations governing weight or contents. The city shall inform the person responsible for the materials and shall allow the person to correct the problem so as to allow removal by the city. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  8; Ord. #1999-9,  2; Ord. #2000-15,  3; Ord. #2001-25,  1; Ord. #2003-21,  1; Ord. #2003-25,  2; Ord. #2006-17,  12; Ord. #2007-19,  9; Ord. #2009-5,  9; Ord. #2012-24,  4; Ord. #2015-35  5) 
21-8 - SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAGS. 

21-8.1 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the City of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  The majority of single-use plastic carryout bags used for shopping do not easily biodegrade but rather persist in the environment for hundreds of years, slowly breaking down through abrasion, tearing and photo degradation into toxic plastic bits that then contaminate the soil and water. 
B.  It is the city's desire to protect the environment, while reducing waste, litter, and pollution in order to help improve the public's health and welfare. 
C.  The litter problem resulting from single-use plastic carryout bags is becoming increasingly difficult to manage and has costly negative implications for tourism, wildlife and aesthetics. 
D.  Single-use paper grocery bags require more resources to manufacture, transport, recycle, or dispose of than single-use plastic carryout bags, and although many of them are made from renewable resources and are less of a litter problem than single-use plastic carryout bags, and are also recyclable, studies have shown that they have a limited number of times they can be recycled, require more energy to recycle, and take up more space in landfills than plastic bags. 
E.  To encourage the public to use reusable bags, the Single-Use Carryout Bag Ordinance will eliminate the use of single-use plastic carryout bags and require all retail establishments within the jurisdiction of the City of Santa Fe to assess an environmental service fee for each paper grocery bag they provide to customers. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  2; Ord. #2014-13,  1; Ord. #2015-12  1) 
21-8.2 - Short title; purpose. 
A.  Section 21-8 SFCC 1987 shall be cited as the "Single-Use Carryout Bag Ordinance." 
B.  The production and disposal of single-use carryout bags causes significant environmental impacts including contamination of the environment, the death of animals through ingestion and entanglement and widespread litter. The purpose of this section is to protect, conserve and enhance the city's unique natural beauty and irreplaceable natural resources through the reduction of single-use carryout bags by encouraging the use of reusable bags. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  3; Ord. #2015-12  2) 
21-8.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 21-8 SFCC 1987: 
    Single-use plastic carryout bag means any carryout bag made from plastic, or any material except paper marketed or labeled as "biodegradable" or "compostable", that is neither intended nor suitable for continuous reuse as a carryout bag or that is less than 2.25 mils thick. 
    Paper grocery bag means a paper carryout bag that has a manufacturer's stated capacity of one-eighth barrel (typical grocery store bag - 882 cubic inches) or larger. 
    Retail establishment means any retail business including, without limitation, clothing, household goods, or personal items of any kind that sells directly to a customer. Examples include but are not limited to department stores, clothing stores, jewelry stores, grocery stores, pharmacies, home improvement stores, liquor stores, convenience stores, gas stations, and farmers markets. 
    Reusable bag means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either: 
A.  Made of cloth or other machine washable fabric; 
B.  Made of durable plastic that is at least 2.25 mils thick; or 
C.  Other durable material suitable for reuse. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  4) 
21-8.4 - Applicability. 
A.  A retail establishment shall not provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to any customer. 
B.  For every paper grocery bag provided by a retail establishment, an environmental service fee of ten cents ($.10) shall be charged to the customer for each paper grocery bag provided, except that retail establishments shall not collect the environmental service fee from any person with a voucher or electronic benefits card issued under Women, Infants and Children Program(WIC), the Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP), Temporary Assistance to Needy Families Program (TANF), or the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, also known as Basic Food Stamps). 
(1)  Retail establishments shall indicate on the customer transaction receipt the number of paper grocery bags provided and the total amount of the environmental service fees charged. 
(2)  Ten percent (10%) of the environmental service fee collected by a retail establishment shall be retained for administrative costs incurred by the collection and reporting of the environmental service fee to the city. The remainder of the environmental service fee collected shall be transmitted to the City of Santa Fe. The city shall dedicate the environmental service fees towards environmental educational programs and services provided to the public, and also towards the purchase of reusable bags to be provided to the public, free of charge. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this section for any retail establishment to pay or otherwise reimburse a customer for any portion of the environmental service fee. 
C.  To further promote the use of reusable bags and reduce the quantity of single-use carryout bags entering the city's waste stream, retail establishments are encouraged to make reusable bags free or for sale at checkout counters and/or provide boxes for use at checkout counters free of charge. The environmental services division is authorized to provide reusable bags for the public at low-cost or free of charge, with specific emphasis on reaching out to low-income households to the greatest degree possible. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  5; Ord. #2014-13,  2; Ord. #2015-12  3) 
21-8.5 - Exemptions. 
    Section 21-8 SFCC 1987 does not apply to: 
A.  Laundry dry cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags, or packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or yard waste; 
B.  Bags provided by pharmacists or veterinarians to contain prescription drugs or other medical necessities; 
C.  Bags used by restaurants to take away prepared food; and 
D.  Bags used by a consumer inside a retail establishment to: 
(1)  Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or small hardware items; 
(2)  Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or not prepackaged, 
(3)  Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to prevent moisture damage to other purchases, or 
(4)  Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; and 
E.  Bags used by a nonprofit corporation or other hunger relief charity to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other household items. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  6) 
21-8.6 - Effective dates. 
A.  The Single-Use Carryout Bag Ordinance shall become effective on February 27, 2014. To facilitate the transition to reusable bags, there shall be a thirty (30) day implementation period from the effective date of this Ordinance. (February 26, 2014 to March 28, 2014). 
B.  The environmental services division shall conduct an educational campaign in both English and Spanish on this section. 
C.  The environmental services division shall conduct a sample survey of retail establishments impacted by this section and shall review, evaluate and assess the survey results, to then be compiled into a report that shall also contain the following: 
(1)  An estimation of the financial impact to retail establishments of implementing this section; and 
(2)  An estimation of the financial impact on the public. 
D.  The environmental services division shall present the report to the city council with recommendations for any changes in this section, or other provisions that are needed to improve its effectiveness. The report to the city council shall be submitted no later than one year after the approved date of this Ordinance. (Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2015-12 was adopted April 29, 2015.) 
E.  There shall be a sixty (60) day implementation period to facilitate the implementation of a ten cent ($.10) environmental service fee by retail establishments, pursuant to subsection 21-8.4B. Therefore, retail establishments shall begin charging the environmental service fee no later than June 28, 2015. 
(Ord. #2013-29  7; Ord. #2014-13,  3; Ord. #2015-12  4) 
21-8.7 - Enforcement; violations and penalty. 
A.  The city manager shall assign primary responsibility for enforcement of Section 21-8 SFCC 1987 and that department/division assigned shall be authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this section, including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines and entering the premises of any store during business hours. 
B.  If the assigned department/division director determines that a violation of Section 21-8 has occurred, a written warning notice shall be issued to the operator of a store that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties that will apply for future violations. 
C.  Any store that violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements of Section 21- 8, after a written warning notice is issued for that violation shall be guilty of an infraction. 
D.  If a store has subsequent violations of Section 21-8 that are similar in kind to the violation addressed in a written warning notice, the following fine shall be imposed and shall be payable by the operator of the store: a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, after the written warning notice is given. 
E.  A fine shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue. 
F.  All fines collected pursuant to Section 21-8 shall be deposited in the enforcement department/divisions' services fund to assist the department/division with its costs of implementing and enforcing the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  8) 
21-8.8 - Appeals. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of the date of a notice of violation of this section or a notice of a fine due under this section, a store may file an appeal with the enforcing department director setting forth the reasons for the appeal. 
B.  A hearing officer appointed by the city manager shall conduct a formal hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal by the public utilities director. The public utilities department director shall give written notice by certified mail to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
C.  The hearing officer shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer shall affirm or reverse the decision of the enforcement department director. The hearing officer shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the date of the hearing and shall forward the decision to the public utilities department director and the appellant. 
D.  A filing fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid if the hearing officer does not find in favor of the appellant. 
E.  An appellant may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the first judicial district court pursuant to 1-074 NMRA. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  9) 
21-8.9 - Severability. 
    If any subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, that decision will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the section. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this section and each and every subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of this section would be subsequently declared invalid. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  10) 
21-8.10 - No conflict with federal or state law. 
    Nothing in this section is intended to create any requirement, power or duty that is in conflict with any federal or state law. 
(Ord. #2013-29,  11) 
21-9 - PENALTIES. 

21-9.1 - Enforcement. 
A.  The environmental services division director and/or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. The director may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations to carry out the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
B.  For violations that do not create an immediate public health threat, the city will issue a formal warning notice prior to taking enforcement action as follows: 
(1)  Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of this notice, the user shall provide to the city a written response and a plan for specific corrective actions. 
(2)  If, at the end of the fifteen (15) day period, the violation has not been corrected or a written plan for corrective actions has not been submitted to the city, the city may assess an administrative fee or issue a citation to the municipal court. Such citation shall carry penalties equal to that of a misdemeanor. 
(3)  Subsequent violations of a similar nature shall be subject to assessment of an administrative fee or a citation without prior notice. 
C.  Depending upon the specific circumstances of the violation, the city may choose any of the following methods of enforcement of violations of this chapter. Every day that any violation of this chapter continues, constitutes a separate offense except where otherwise provided. The responsibility and liability for compliance with Chapter XXI shall be held jointly and severally by the property owner and by the resident of the property. 
(1)  Administrative Fees. Administrative fees may be assessed on the customer's utility bill. The fees within a calendar year shall be: 
(a)  Equal to the monthly fee, listed on Exhibit B, for the first violation at a given customer's address; 
(b)  Equal to double the monthly fee, listed on Exhibit B, for the second violation at the same customer address; 
(c)  Equal to triple the monthly fee, listed on Exhibit B, for the third violation at the same customer address; and 
(d)  Equal to four (4) times the monthly fee, listed on Exhibit B, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.) for the fourth and each additional violation. Note: Exhibit B, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
(2)  Appeals of administrative fees shall comply with subsection 15-1.8 SFCC 1987. 
(3)  Municipal Court. Violations shall be subject to Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
(4)  Injunctive Relief. In addition to any other relief, the city may seek injunctive relief in the district court and shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(5)  Public Nuisance. The city may, in addition to any other relief, seek to abate any violation that constitutes a public nuisance as set forth in Section 10-9 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  10; Ord. #2007-19,  11; Ord. #2012-24,  3) 
21-9.2 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 21-9.2, Judicial Enforcement of Penalties, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-46, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2007-19. 
21-9.3 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 21-9.3, Appeals, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-46, 2003-25 and 2006-17 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2007-19. 
21-10 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 

21-10.1 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be in full force and effect on June 11, 2007. 
(Ord. #1996-46,  11; Ord. #1997-7,  1; Ord. #2007-19,  14) 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY DESIGN STANDARDS 
(Subsection 21-4.6) 
Amended May 30, 2007 
1. PURPOSE 
    The intent of these standards is to establish requirements for the design and construction of enclosures and other facilities associated with the placement of solid waste and recycling containers. Compliance with these standards shall be required by all persons using privately owned or city-owned containers for the collection of solid waste. 
2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
A.  For new development or redevelopment projects, compliance with these standards shall be confirmed in the city's development review process. 
B.  For remodeling projects, compliance with these standards shall be confirmed during the building permit review and shall be a condition of the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Access to locked facilities shall be agreed upon with the city prior to the commencement of service. 
D.  Containers, except for compaction, which are not owned by the city shall meet or exceed the city's most recent purchasing specifications for the type and size of container. 
3. ACCESS 
A.  Unencumbered access to containers shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet wide. Unless otherwise provided herein, the centerline curvature radius of any curve shall be not less than six hundred (600) feet. 
B.  Access for enclosures or containers located at the end of a driveway shall be as straight as possible and not less than twenty (20) feet wide. 
C.  Access for roll-off containers shall be not less than fifty-eight (58) feet in a straight line measured from the front of the container. 
D.  Access to all containers shall have a grade no more than five percent (5%). 
E.  The access driveway shall be improved with not less than six (6) inches of compacted base course. 
F.  Asphalt shall meet design condition appropriate for a gross vehicle weight of 65,000 pounds. 
G.  The plane of enclosure gates shall be perpendicular to the primary access or to the driveway centerline or its tangent, and provide gables to hold enclosure door in open position. 
H.  Access to all containers shall be approved by the city. If in the opinion of the city, access to the container presents a safety or traffic hazard, the city reserves the right to require the enclosure and container be moved to an alternate location. 
4. REFUSE CONTAINER ENCLOSURES 
A.  Enclosures shall be located completely outside of rights-of-way, driveways, and utility easements. 
B.  Whenever feasible, enclosures shall not be placed directly under any overhead utilities. If this is not practical, the nearest utility pole shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from the enclosure wall or fence and the base of the enclosure shall be not less than twenty (20) feet below the nearest overhead line. 
C.  Enclosure shall not be placed within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, water valves, or public sanitary sewer manholes. 
D.  Primary access to enclosures shall be such that a standard refuse collection truck can approach them perpendicularly to the alignment of the gate, unless otherwise provided for herein. 
E.  Enclosure Design Standards 
 1. Dimensions shall be as shown on Exhibits A.1 and A.2 of this chapter. 
 2. Foundation shall be reinforced 3,000 psi concrete slab, with a twelve inch by eighteen inch (12"x18") footer. A minimum two percent (2%) grade shall be provided toward the enclosure's gate. 
 3. Enclosure walls may be constructed of cemented brick, cemented and core-filled concrete block, treated wood fencing, or any combination as may be approved by the city. 
 4. Gates may be constructed of treated wood, chainlink, wrought iron, fiberglass, or other weather resistant material that can support locking hardware installation. 
 5. Gates shall have gables to ensure the doors to the enclosure are left open on the designated day of collection. 
 6. Gates shall be designed to allow the installation of city-approved locking devices such as chains and padlocks. 
5. ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS 
A.  The foundation shall be reinforced 3,000 psi concrete slab that is not less than twelve (12) feet wide, by twenty-eight (28) feet in length, with a twelve inch by eighteen inch (12"x18") footer. 
B.  The foundation for the temporary placement of a roll-off container may consist of compacted dry earth, concrete slab or asphalt with monolithic pour. 


CITY OF SANTA FE 
REFUSE AND RECYCLING RATE AND FEE SCHEDULE 
(Section 21-7) 
Adopted: December 11, 1996 Amended: June 25, 1997 March 10, 1999 September 24, 2001 June 25, 2003 April 26, 2006 February 11, 2009 July 11, 2012 December 9, 2015  
    The following rate and fee schedule shall apply for refuse and recycling collection and disposal services provided by the city of Santa Fe in accordance with the conditions of service as listed in Chapter 21 SFCC 1987. The rates described below shall be assessed by the city in accordance with the rate classes described in subsection 21-7.1 SFCC 1987. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Residential Curbside 
    CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1 A (1) 
    FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at the curbside. 
    DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Residential as limited by Section 21-4.2. 
Monthly ChargesEffective DateOne city
provided container
level fullAdditional
96 gallon
container provided by
the cityAdditional
64 gallon
container provided by
the cityJuly 1, 2015 $13.80 $9.07 $6.80 July 1, 2016 $15.75 $10.35 $7.76  
Collection tags are available at city approved designated areas for $1.50 per tag, for city provided or customer owned disposable plastic bag used for the intermediate storage of solid waste. The customer may request a change in container one time without an extra charge. Subsequent changes in container are $25 each. All prices are subject to applicable tax. 
SPECIAL SERVICE: Special collection at the door for qualified elderly and disabled households. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Commercial Non-Compacting Rear-Loading 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1A(2) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service of rear-loading bins or carts owned and maintained by the city. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Nonresidential establishments. 
MONTHLY CHARGE: The collection fee is inclusive of the bin rental charge in accordance with the following monthly rate schedules listing size of bin or cart and frequency of service plus applicable tax. 
SPECIAL SERVICE: Special service charge plus applicable tax shall apply for each bin or cart and each time service is requested beyond that normally scheduled. 
MONTHLY BIN RATE SCHEDULES A 
(Effective: July 1, 2015)BIN
SIZE
(CUBIC
YARDS)BIN 
RENTAL B 1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials C 3 $9.06 $110.79 $221.54 $332.33 $443.09 $553.87 $664.61 $40.45 4 $11.14 $121.38 $242.81 $364.18 $485.61 $606.99 $728.42 $43.24 6 $14.64 $142.65 $285.32 $427.97 $570.63 $713.28 $855.94 $51.60  
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Bin rental shall be added to the monthly rate for each city-owned and maintained bin. 
C Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
(Effective: July 1, 2016)BIN
SIZE
(CUBIC
YARDS)1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials B 3 $122.25 $235.24 $348.25 $461.24 $574.25 $687.25 $41.26 4 $135.17 $258.98 $382.80 $506.60 $630.41 $754.23 $44.10 6 $160.45 $305.95 $451.45 $596.97 $742.47 $887.97 $52.63  
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
MONTHLY CART RATE SCHEDULES A, B 
(Effective Date: July 1, 2015)Cart
Size
(Gallons) Cart 
Rental C 1
Service
Visit
Per
Week2
Service
Visits
Per
Week3
Service
Visits
Per
Week4
Service
Visits
Per
Week5
Service
Visits
Per
Week6
Service
Visits
Per
WeekSpecial D Monthly Service Charge 60 $1.96 $78.90 $157.77 $236.67 $315.54 $394.44 $473.33 $27.89 Plus
Per Cart Service $3.20 $6.39 $9.59 $12.78 $15.97 $19.17 $4.77 Monthly Service Charge 90 $2.09 $78.90 $157.77 $236.67 $315.54 $394.44 $473.33 $27.89 Plus
Per Cart Service $4.77 $9.58 $14.34 $19.15 $23.92 $28.70 $4.77  
A All rates and fees in this schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Monthly charges for Cart Service shall consist of the sum of the fixed charge related to the frequency of weekly service visits plus a rental charge for each city-owned cart plus a variable charge based on the number of carts served per visit. 
C Cart rental shall be added to the monthly rate for each city-owned and maintained cart. 
D Special service rate shall be the sum of the Special Service Charge plus the charge per cart served. This special service fee shall be charged for each service visit in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
(Effective: July 1, 2016) Cart
Size
(Gallons) 1
Service
Visit
Per
Week2
Service
Visits
Per
Week3
Service
Visits
Per
Week4
Service
Visits
Per
Week5
Service
Visits
Per
Week6
Service
Visits
Per
WeekSpecial C 60 $80.48 $160.93 $241.40 $321.85 $402.33 $482.80 $28.45 Per Cart Charge $5.26 $8.52 $11.78 $14.99 $18.29 $21.55 $3.26 90 $80.48 $160.93 $241.40 $321.85 $402.33 $482.80 $28.45 Per Cart Charge $9.13 $11.90 $16.76 $21.66 $26.53 $31.41 $4.87 202 $80.48 $160.93 $241.40 $321.85 $402.33 $482.80 $28.45 Per Cart Charge $22.93 $33.77 $44.60 $55.45 $66.29 $77.12 $12.09  
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Monthly charges for Cart Service shall consist of the sum of the fixed charge related to the frequency of weekly service visits plus a variable charge based on the number of carts served per visit. 
C Special service rate shall be the sum of the Special Service Charge plus the charge per cart served. This special service fee shall be charged for each service visit in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Light Commercial Non-Compacting Rear-Loading 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1 A (3) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service of rear-loading carts owned and maintained by the city. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Nonresidential establishments requiring no larger than one (1) ninety (90) gallon cart and one (1) service visit per week. 
Effective Date Monthly Charge
(includes monthly cart rental, plus applicable tax) July 1, 2015 $34.76 July 1, 2016 $35.46  
CLASS OF SERVICE: Commercial Non-Compacting Front-Loading 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1A (4) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service of front-loading bins owned and maintained by the city. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Nonresidential establishments. 
MONTHLY CHARGE: The charge shall be per bin and in accordance with the following monthly rate schedules listing size of bin and frequency of service plus the indicated rental for each bin plus applicable tax. 
SPECIAL SERVICE: Special service charge plus applicable tax shall apply to each bin and each time service is requested beyond that normally scheduled. 
MONTHLY RATE SCHEDULES A 
Effective: July 1, 2015Bin
Size
(Cubic
Yards)Bin 
Rental B 1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials C 3 $9.06 $87.51 $175.01 $262.51 $350.02 $437.53 $525.03 $33.48 4 $11.14 $96.45 $192.89 $289.32 $385.76 $482.21 $578.65 $36.26 6 $14.64 $114.34 $228.64 $342.96 $457.28 $571.58 $685.92 $43.24 8 $16.74 $132.20 $264.39 $396.60 $528.80 $660.98 $793.17 $50.21  
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Bin rental shall be added to the monthly rate for each city-owned and maintained bin. 
C Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
Effective: July 1, 2016Bin
Size
(Cubic
Yards)1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials B 3 $98.50 $187.75 $277.00 $366.26 $455.52 $544.77 $34.15 4 $109.74 $208.11 $306.47 $404.84 $503.22 $601.59 $36.99 6 $131.56 $248.15 $364.76 $481.36 $597.95 $714.57 $44.10 8 $151.92 $286.75 $421.61 $556.45 $691.26 $826.11 $51.21  
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Commercial Compacting Front-Loading 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1A(5) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at customer-owned, compacting front-loading bins. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Nonresidential establishments. 
MONTHLY CHARGE: The charge shall be per bin and in accordance with the following rate schedules listing size of bin and frequency of service plus applicable tax but shall exclude any bin rental fee. 
SPECIAL SERVICE: Special service charge plus applicable tax shall apply for each bin and each time service is requested beyond that normally scheduled. 
MONTHLY RATE SCHEDULES A 
Effective: July 1, 2015Bin
Size
(Cubic
Yards)1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials B 3 $111.23 $222.48 $333.72 $444.95 $556.19 $667.43 $43.24 4 $128.08 $256.18 $384.27 $512.36 $640.44 $768.53 $48.82 6 $161.79 $323.57 $485.36 $647.16 $808.94 $970.73 $61.37 8 $195.49 $390.97 $586.46 $781.95 $977.45 $1,172.93 $75.33  
Effective: July 1, 2016Bin
Size
(Cubic
Yards)1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials B 3 $113.45 $226.93 $340.39 $453.85 $567.31 $680.78 $44.10 4 $130.64 $261.30 $391.96 $522.61 $653.25 $783.90 $49.80 6 $165.03 $330.04 $495.07 $660.10 $825.12 $990.14 $62.60 8 $199.40 $398.79 $598.19 $797.59 $997.00 $1,196.39 $76.84  
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly schedule. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Commercial Non-Compacting Roll-Off 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1 A (6) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at roll-off bins owned and maintained by the city for a period of more than thirty (30) days. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Any establishment. 
Fee ScheduleEffective Date Scheduled Service A Call-In Service B Monthly Rental Fee for Non-Service C July 1, 2015 $193.96 $243.87 $193.96 July 1, 2016 $197.84 $248.75 $197.84  
A Per service visit, plus tip fee assessed by the regional landfill plus applicable tax. 
B Per call-in service visit plus the tip fee assessed by the regional landfill plus applicable tax. Call-in service charge plus applicable tax shall apply for each bin and each time service is requested beyond that normally scheduled. Persons substituting special on-call service in lieu of scheduled service shall be assessed at the special service rate plus the indicated rental for each bin plus applicable tax. The bin rental in such situations shall be based on each thirty (30) day period or fraction thereof. 
C Customers shall have the roll-off container serviced a minimum of one time per month. If the customer has the container for more than 30 days without calling for service, the monthly rental charge shall be assessed plus applicable tax. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Commercial Special Event Non-Compacting Roll-Off 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1 A (7) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at roll-off bins owned and maintained by the city for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Any establishment. 
MONTHLY CHARGE: The charge shall be in accordance with the applicable amount established for special service in the non-compacting roll-off bin schedule (subsection 21-7.1A(6) SFCC 1987) plus applicable tax. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 2003 
Fee ScheduleEffective Date Scheduled Service A Call-In Service B Monthly Rental Fee for Non-Service C July 1, 2015 $193.96 $243.87 $193.96 July 1, 2016 $197.84 $248.75 $197.84  
A Per service visit, plus tip fee assessed by the regional landfill plus applicable tax. 
B Per call-in service visit plus the tip fee assessed by the regional landfill plus applicable tax. Call-in service charge plus applicable tax shall apply for each bin and each time service is requested beyond that normally scheduled. Persons substituting special on-call service in lieu of scheduled service shall be assessed at the special service rate plus the indicated rental for each bin plus applicable tax. The bin rental in such situations shall be based on each thirty (30) day period or fraction thereof. 
C Customers shall have the roll-off container serviced a minimum of one time per month. If the customer has the container for more than 30 days without calling for service, the monthly rental charge shall be assessed plus applicable tax. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Commercial Compacting Roll-Off 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1 A (8) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at customer-owned, compacting roll-off bins. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Nonresidential establishments. 
Fee ScheduleEffective Date Scheduled Service A Call-In Service B July 1, 2015 $193.96 $243.87 July 1, 2016 $197.84 $248.75  
A Per service visit, plus tip fee assessed by the regional landfill plus applicable tax. 
B Per call-in service visit plus the tip fee assessed by the regional landfill plus applicable tax. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Recycling Non-Compacting Rear-Loading 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: Subsection 21-7.1 A (9) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at rear-loading bins or carts owned and maintained by the city. 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Nonresidential establishments. 
MONTHLY CHARGE: The charge shall be per bin or cart and in accordance with the following rate schedules listing size of bin and cart and frequency of service plus the indicated rental for each bin plus applicable tax. 
SPECIAL SERVICE: Special service charge plus applicable tax shall apply for each bin or cart and each time service is requested beyond that normally scheduled. 
MONTHLY RECYCLING CART RATE SCHEDULE A, B 
(Effective: February 24, 2009) 
Cart
Size
(Gallons) Cart 
Rental C 1
Service
Visit
Per
Week2
Service
Visits
Per
Week3
Service
Visits
Per
Week4
Service
Visits
Per
Week5
Service
Visits
Per
Week6
Service
Visits
Per
Week7
Service
Visits
Per
WeekSpecial D Monthly Service Charge Plus Per Cart Charge $28.28 $56.56 $84.84 $113.12 $141.40 $169.68 $197.96 $10.00 90 $1.50 $3.43 $6.86 $10.29 $13.72 $17.15 $20.58 $24.01 $3.43  
If the cart contains more than 10% non-recyclable materials, an additional $56.00 per cart per service will be charged 
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Monthly charges for Cart Service shall consist of the sum of the fixed charge related to the frequency of weekly service visits plus a rental charge for each city-owned cart plus a variable charge based on the number of carts served per visit. 
C Cart rental shall be added to the monthly rate for each city-owned and maintained cart. 
D Special service rate shall be the sum of the Special Service Charge plus the charge per cart served. This special service fee shall be charged for each service visit in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
(Effective July 1, 2016) Cart Size
(Gallons) 1
Service
Visit
Per Week 2
Service
Visits
Per Week 3
Service
Visits
Per Week 4
Service
Visits
Per Week 5
Service
Visits
Per Week 6
Service
Visits
Per Week Special C 60 $26.83 $53.64 $80.47 $107.28 $134.11 $160.94 $14.23 Fee per Cart $3.51 $5.68 $7.85 $10.00 $12.19 $14.37 $3.26 90 $40.24 $80.47 $120.70 $160.93 $201.16 $241.39 $14.23 Fee per Cart $6.09 $7.94 $11.17 $14.44 $17.69 $20.94 $4.87  
If the cart contains more than 10% non-recyclable materials, an additional $56.00 per cart per service will be charged. 
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Monthly charges for Cart Service shall consist of the sum of the fixed charge related to the frequency of weekly service visits plus a variable charge based on the number of carts served per visit. 
C Special service rate shall be the sum of the Special Service Charge plus the charge per cart served. This special service fee shall be charged for each service visit in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
MONTHLY RECYCLING BIN RATE SCHEDULE A 
(Effective: February 24, 2009) 
Bin
Size
(Cubic
Yards)Bin 
Rental B 1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
Week7
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials C 3 $6.50 $39.71 $79.42 $119.13 $158.84 $198.55 $238.25 $277.97 $14.50 4 $8.00 $43.52 $87.04 $130.56 $174.08 $217.60 $261.12 $304.64 $15.50 6 $10.50 $51.14 $102.28 $153.42 $204.56 $255.70 $306.84 $357.98 $18.50  
If the cart contains more than 10% of non-recyclable materials, an additional $79.00 per cart per service will be charged. 
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Bin rental shall be added to the monthly rate for each city-owned and maintained bin. 
C Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
(Effective: July 1, 2016) 
Commercial Rear Loading RecyclingCart Size
(Cubic
Yards1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials B 3 $61.12 $117.63 $174.12 $230.62 $287.12 $343.63 $20.63 4 $67.51 $129.49 $191.39 $253.31 $315.21 $377.11 $22.05 6 $80.22 $152.98 $225.73 $298.48 $371.24 $443.99 $26.32  
(Effective: July 1, 2016) 
Commercial Front Loading Recycling Cart Size
(Cubic
Yards1
Pickup
Per
Week2
Pickups
Per
Week3
Pickups
Per
Week4
Pickups
Per
Week5
Pickups
Per
Week6
Pickups
Per
WeekSpecials B 3 $49.26 $93.87 $138.51 $183.13 $227.76 $272.39 $17.07 4 $54.87 $104.05 $153.23 $202.42 $251.60 $300.79 $18.49 6 $65.78 $124.07 $182.38 $240.68 $298.97 $357.29 $22.05 8 $75.96 $143.37 $210.80 $278.23 $345.64 $413.06 $25.60  
If the cart contains more than 10% of non-recyclable materials, an additional $79.00 per cart per service will be charged. 
A All rates and fees in this Schedule are subject to applicable tax. 
B Special service rate shall be charged for each service call made in excess of those regularly scheduled. 
CLASS OF SERVICE: Large Item Pick-Up Fees. 
CITY CODE REFERENCE: 21-7.1A(14) 
FORM OF REFUSE COLLECTION: Service at Curbside-Large item 
DESCRIPTION OF CLASS: Applicable to residential customers that desire large item collection curbside on an on-call basis. 
ChargeEffective DatePer Service Visit July 1, 2015 $29.21 July 1, 2016 $33.33  
This charge does not include disposal costs of all items collected. An additional cost for disposal shall be charged at the current rate set forth by the Solid Waste Management Agency. All charges are subject to applicable tax. 
CHAPTER XXII - SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1953 Code  22-1-22-6, 22-8-22-10, 22-12-22-34, 22-36, 22-37, 22-39, 22-40, 22-46, 22-47, 22-50-22-54, 22-57, 22-58; 1973 Code  28-1-28-14, 28-16-28-34, 28-36-28-39, 28-44, 28-45, 28-48-28-52, 28-55-28-70; 1981 Code  4-4-1-4-5-8, 4-5-10-4-10-13; and Ordinance Nos. 10-24-41, 1954-6, 1956-22, 1966-23, 1974-39, 1974-44, 1978-55, 1979-13, 1979-17, 1980-38, 1980-63, 1981-64, 1982-39, 1984-33, 1985-36, 1986-23, 1988-16, 1989-22, 1990-21, 1991-25, 1992-35, 1993-9, 1993-23, 1996-22. 

22-1 - SANITARY SEWERS AND WASTEWATER COLLECTION, DISPOSAL AND POTENTIAL REUSE. 

22-1.1 - Short title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the "Wastewater Utility Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1997-3,  2) 
22-1.2 - Purpose and service area. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to set uniform requirements for the users of the city of Santa Fe's wastewater collection system and treatment works, to enable the city to comply with the provisions of the Clean Water Act and with other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, to provide for the public health and welfare and to protect the city's economic interests in the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and its waste treatment by-products by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into the city's wastewater collection system and treatment works, and to otherwise ensure protection of public health, public resources and the environment. This chapter provides a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, and the issuance of permits to certain users. This chapter also establishes effluent limitations and other discharge criteria and provides that certain users shall prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which may potentially interfere with the operation of the POTW or contaminate the sewage sludge, and shall also prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which may pass through the treatment works into the receiving waters or may otherwise be incompatible with the treatment works. This ordinance is also designed to improve opportunities to protect the city's potential options to beneficially reuse, market, reclaim or dispose of wastewater treatment by-products, and to improve the city's ability to minimize the quantity of a user's wastewater discharge. 
B.  The service area is defined by the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, plus those areas outside the city limits where service has been extended or may be extended upon approval by the governing body. 
C.  Violation of any local, state or federal regulation or law which affects the functioning of the city POTW or the city's beneficial use of the by-products of its wastewater treatment shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  3) 
22-2 - DEFINITIONS.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The exhibits referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 

22-2.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in Sections 22-1, 22-2, 22-3, 22-4, 22-5, 22-6, 22-7, 22-8, 22-10, 22-11, 22-12, 22-13. Definitions for Section 22-9 are located in subsection 22-9.1. 
    Abbreviations: 
BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
CWA means Clean Water Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-21 7, et seq.). 
EPA means United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
gpd means gallons per day. 
l means liter. 
LEL means lower explosive limit. 
MGD means million gallons per day. 
mg means milligrams. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
NPDES means national pollutant discharge elimination system. 
O&M means operation and maintenance. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
RCRA means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC means standard industrial classification. 
SWDA means Solid Waste Disposal Act (43 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.). 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
USC means United States Code. 
WPCA means Federal Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 92-500). 
UPC means Uniform Plumbing Code. 
    Acceptance means the final written approval by the city of the construction of sanitary sewers and acceptance of the sewers for public maintenance. Letters indicating acceptance shall not be issued unless adequate evidence has been provided to the city that the sanitary sewer was built in accordance with plans, specifications and applicable standards. Upon issuance of a letter of acceptance, funds or financial guarantees retained by the city to ensure proper completion of the sewer may be released. 
    Accessible to city sanitary sewer system means a property: 
(1)  Which abuts or is within two hundred feet (200') of the city sewer system or is within two hundred feet (200') of the boundaries of a public street or sanitary sewer utility easement which contains the city sanitary sewer system; and 
(2)  Which may physically connect to the city sewer by means of either a gravity or pressure sewer line. 
    Act or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Base period means the consecutive calendar month of metered water use which is the basis for monthly sewer service charges. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)]. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of organic and inorganic matter present in wastewater as milligrams per liter (mg/l) under standard laboratory procedures. COD is used as a measure of the wastewater strength. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe and its employees and its authorized agents. 
    City representative means the city manager or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means a codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. 
    Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, which intervals are based on either an increment of flow or time. 
    Constructed wetlands means a wetland that is purposely constructed by humans in a nonwetland area for wastewater treatment. 
    Control manhole means a manhole installed to allow access to the wastewater discharge of a facility for purposes of sample collection and flow measurement. The manhole shall be constructed in a manner and in a location as may be required by the city. 
    Control sanitary clean-out means a device installed to allow access to the wastewater discharge of a facility for purposes of sample collection. This will normally be a tee of an appropriate size inserted into the sanitary sewer service line and constructed in a manner and in a location as may be required by the city. 
    Customer means individual or business that purchases a commodity or service from the city. 
    Department means the public utilities department or its director or the director's designated representatives. 
    Department director means the director of the city public utilities department. 
    Developer means a private individual, corporation or public entity that invests capital in the development of real estate. 
    Dilution means the additional use of potable water for the purposes of reducing the concentration of pollutants in the wastewater before discharging to the POTW. The normal use of potable water for sanitary facilities and food preparation shall not be considered dilution. 
    Director means the wastewater management division director or the director's designated representative. 
    Discharge means the introduction into the POTW of a pollutant or wastewater, treated or untreated, or of holding tank waste from any source. The term includes the introduction of either a single pollutant or of multiple pollutants. 
    Division means the wastewater management division of the city public utilities department. 
    Domestic sewage or wastewater means liquid waste which contains constituents and has characteristics similar to that from a residential connection and which for the purpose of this chapter does not contain COD, or BOD and TSS in excess of the following concentrations: COD = 500 mg/L; BOD = 250 mg/L; TSS = 330 mg/L. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or U.S. E.P.A. means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Fixture Unit Equivalent (FUE) means the measure of the wastewater load produced by a plumbing fixture, as described in Section 402 of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
    Governing body means the city council and the mayor, or the city council and a mayor pro tempore, meeting in a session which has been duly called in accordance with the state Open Meetings Act. 
    Grab sample means a sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to volume of flow of the waste stream or the time of day of the sampling and which sample is taken over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Gray water means a liquid waste that is discharged from any fixture, appliance, or appurtenance of a plumbing system which does not include fecal matter. 
    Grease trap means a flotation chamber used to remove grease or oil from wastewater discharge prior to discharge to the public sewer system. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste derived from holding tanks associated with but not limited to vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Interceptor pipe means a sanitary sewer system with flows exceeding three (3) MGD or with a diameter of twelve inches (12") or larger. 
    Lot or legal lot means a real estate parcel which has been created, defined or acknowledged by means of the land subdivision authorities of the city or county of Santa Fe. 
    Manifold connection means one (1) service connection to the POTW which is shared by more than one (1) legal lot. 
    May means permissive. 
    Municipal wastewater system or municipal system means a "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyance which conveys wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the system. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    Nondomestic pollutants means any substances other than human excrement and household gray water. 
    Nonresidential connection means a connection to the POTW whose assumed wastewater flow is based, for the purpose of sewer service rates, on metered water use for a base period consisting of the most recent April through March period preceding the fiscal year of fee assessment and for which water use records are available. 
    Owner means a person who has legal control over property. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, limited partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental entities. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units; neutral wastewater is numerically equal to seven (7) while the number increases with increasing alkalinity and decreases with increasing acidity. 
    Pollutant means a manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of a water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to the wastewater. 
    Pretreatment or treatments mean the reduction of the quantity of a user's wastewater discharge or in the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater thereby rendering them less harmful to the POTW prior to discharge into the system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants as prohibited by 40 CFR Part 403.6 (d). 
    Private sewer means a sanitary sewer which is privately constructed and privately maintained by the owner or resident and which is constructed in accordance with city standards and to which individual structures may be connected. This definition does not include plumbing installations regulated by the UPC. 
    Process wastewater means wastewater produced as a product or by-product of an industrial or regulated process. Such wastewater normally would not reflect characteristics of typical domestic wastewater. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means the city treatment works including any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant but excluding pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to the POTW treatment works. POTW includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment works from persons outside the city who are users of the city POTW. If the context so dictates, POTW may refer to the city, as herein defined. 
    Public sewer means a sanitary sewer that is owned, controlled and maintained by the city. 
    Receiving stream or waters of the United States means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, arroyos, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the United States or any portion thereof. 
    Residential connection means a connection to the POTW whose assumed wastewater flow is based, for the purpose of sewer service rates, on metered water use for the most recent December through February period preceding the fiscal year of fee assessment. A residential connection shall include single and multi-family residences, mobile home parks, commercial greenhouses, churches, properties owned and operated by the U.S. Government, the state of New Mexico, the city of Santa Fe, the county of Santa Fe and the Santa Fe School Board of Education and state-accredited private elementary and secondary schools and colleges. 
    Residential development means a residential district created by subdivision or condominium documents wherein the proprietary interest in each single family dwelling is held in fee simple, condominium, or cooperative ownership. 
    Residential users mean persons discharging domestic wastewater to the POTW. 
    Sanitary sewer means any system of pipes or conduits used to convey wastewater from its point of origin to a treatment facility. 
    Sanitary sewer mainline extension means an extension of the city sanitary sewer with an eight inch (8") or greater diameter sewer line designed as per city standards. 
    Sanitary sewer design standards means the criteria, standards and regulations related to the design of public sanitary sewer systems, which are hereinafter referred to as Exhibit B.* 
    Sanitary sewer rate, fee and penalty schedule means the information regarding sanitary sewer rates, fees and penalties including formulas and procedures used to arrive at the rates, fees, and penalty figures assessed by the city, hereinafter referred to as Exhibit A.* 
    Sanitary sewer service area means the incorporated boundaries of the city of Santa Fe plus areas outside the incorporated boundaries accessible to city sanitary sewer system. 
    Sanitary sewer service line means the length of gravity flow or low pressure flow pipe extending from the public sanitary sewer to the private property line or to the edge of the right-of-way or sanitary sewer easement, the purpose of which line is to connect the plumbing of any structure to the public sanitary sewer. 
    Septage means the mixture of domestic sludge and wastewater removed during the pumping of a septic tank, cesspool or other wastewater holding or on-site treatment facilities. Sand, grit, and grease from traps or industrial waste from holding tanks are not considered septage. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, designed and constructed so as to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open joint piping or a seepage pit meeting the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the regulations of the state of New Mexico. 
    Sewage. See definition for Wastewater . 
    Sewage sludge or wastewater sludge means by-product of wastewater treatment involving chemical or biological processes or a combination of these. 
    Sewer interceptor. See definition for Interceptor. 
    Sewer service connection or service connection means the physical connection of a property to the city POTW by means of a sanitary sewer service line. 
    Shall means mandatory. 
    Sludge means the solids separated from liquids during processing pretreatment of industrial wastes, with or without the addition of chemical agents. 
    Soluble means the maximum amount of the solute (materials) that will be dissolved in a definite amount of solvent, water (at 25 degrees (25)C and a pH of 7) and produce a stable system. 
    Standard details means the standard detail sheets issued by the wastewater management division. The sheets contain detailed standardized technical references and drawings with specifications for sanitary sewer construction in the city of Santa Fe. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code means a classification pursuant to the most recent standard industrial classification manual issued by the Executive Office of the President of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
    Standard methods means the standard methods for examination of water and wastewater as contained in the most recent edition issued by American Public Health Association. 
    State means the state of New Mexico. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including rainfall and snowmelts. 
    Total suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. Total suspended solids shall be determined in accordance with standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater or 40 CFR 136, or as determined by the Division. 
    Total toxic organic (TTO) means the sum of concentrations of the organic compounds from a priority pollutant scan. Categorical standards list any toxic organic compounds that are to be included in the summation of TTO for a specific category in the respective 40 CFR. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the environmental protection agency under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act, or listed by the division, or other pollutants or combination of pollutants which may result in interference or pass through of the system or otherwise may potentially cause a violation of the city's NPDES permit, New Mexico water quality standards or which may potentially restrict and/or impair the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products. 
    Treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of wastewater. 
    Treatment plant effluent means any discharge of treated wastewater, made in accordance with the NPDES permit from the POTW into waters of the United States. 
    Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) means the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the city of Santa Fe. 
    User or customer means any person who contributes, or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the POTW. 
    Waste treatment by-product means any sludge, reuse water, scum or other product resulting from wastewater treatment processes. 
    Wastewater or sewage means the liquid and water-carried wastes, or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is released to the POTW. 
    Water service means arrangement in which water is piped to a property from the public supply. 
    Wetlands. See Constructed wetlands . 
(Ord. #1997-3,  4; Ord. #2006-43,  1; Ord. #2006-60,  1) 
22-3 - GENERAL PROVISIONS. 

22-3.1 - Connection to the public system; requirements. 
    Connection to the public system is mandatory when the property being developed or improved is accessible to the city sanitary sewer system and is in the city limits or located entirely within the areas to be annexed, as defined in the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county and other parties dated May 19, 2008. Prior to making such a connection, owners and developers of such property shall obtain information from the division concerning specifications, standards, procedures and other requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  5; Ord. #1999-42,  9; Ord. #2003-25,  12; Ord. #2005-30(A),  26; Ord. #2006-60,  2; Ord. #2008-53,  1) 
22-3.2 - Extension of sanitary sewer system. 
    Where an extension of the sanitary sewer system is required in order to provide service to a property, the nearest adequately sized and serviceable public sanitary sewer shall be extended, at the owner's expense, to the furthest limit of the property to be served. The furthest limit shall mean that point at which the public sanitary sewer extends beyond the property or the property frontage as the sewer continues its planned course. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  6) 
22-3.3 - Replacement of sanitary sewer service lines. 
    Replacement of sanitary sewer service lines between the point of connection and the point when the service line crosses the property line shall be the responsibility of the city, whenever the public sewer segment which includes the point of connection is reconstructed or replaced. The city shall own such service line and all service line segments installed by customer after July 1, 1997; but all work for purposes of preventive or corrective maintenance of these lines shall remain the sole responsibility of the owner of the property receiving wastewater service. All preventive or corrective maintenance work on these service line segments shall be performed by a licensed plumber or plumbing contractor and in accordance with the city ordinances including the obtaining of permits for excavation within public rights of way. Persons performing preventive or corrective maintenance work on any service line, whether privately or publicly owned, shall report such work in a manner to be established by the division. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  7) 
22-3.4 - Manifold connections. 
    Manifold connections are prohibited. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  8) 
22-3.5 - Requirement to connect with sewer. 
A.  When the city determines that a service connection is necessary in accordance with this chapter, the owner shall be given written notice by the division to complete the required work within ninety (90) days and at the owner's expense. If the owner is not a resident of the city, notice shall be sent to the owner through United States registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the owner and such notice shall also be posted on the premises where the work is required. 
B.  When a property owner connects into the sanitary sewer, any existing on-site disposal system shall be abandoned in accordance with the requirements of the UPC. 
C.  It is unlawful to fail or refuse to make the sewer connection, installation or construction required pursuant to Section 3-18-22B NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  9) 
22-3.6 - Disposition of human waste. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on the ground or bury within the city any human waste, solid or liquid, or otherwise dispose of such substances in any manner other than into a properly sewered water closet, properly maintained portable toilet, or other approved on-site disposal system constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
B.  The owner, agent in charge or occupant of any structure on a lot that is connected to the public sanitary sewer shall, at the owner's expense, maintain the connecting lines in good working condition and free of obstructions that might cause clogging or any damage which could impair the flow of sewage to the main line. 
C.  Pluvial or stormwater drains from roofs, yards, and other surfaces shall not, under any circumstances, be connected to the sanitary sewer plumbing or sanitary sewer collectors. Any such connections are unlawful and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement in accordance with Section 22-12. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  10) 
22-3.7 - Trailer and motor home parks. 
    Trailer parks and motor home parks shall be connected to the sanitary sewer and have sufficient number of connections to service each trailer or motor home space within the park. No license of any kind shall be issued by the city for any trailer park or motor home park which is not connected to a public or to a city approved private sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  11) 
22-3.8 - Combined sewers. 
    Combined sewers which are conduits carrying both stormwater and wastewater shall not be permitted. The owner of a combined sewer shall remedy such situation within sixty (60) days from issuance of notice by the city. Failure to comply with such notice shall result in penalties and enforcement action in accordance with Section 22-12. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  12) 
22-4 - SEPTIC TANKS, CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS OR OTHER ON-SITE PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS. 

22-4.1 - On-site private sewage disposal systems. 
    On-site private sewage disposal systems may be installed where connection to the city sanitary sewer system is not feasible under subsection 22-3.1. On-site disposal systems shall be constructed and installed along with proper plumbing as required by the UPC. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  13) 
22-4.2 - Septic tank; private sewage disposal system; permit for construction required. 
    No septic tank or other on-site private sewage disposal system shall be constructed within the city limits unless a permit is issued to the prospective builder, owner or agent by the city's building inspection division. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  14) 
22-4.3 - Construction of septic tanks and private sewage disposal systems. 
    All septic tanks or private sewage disposal systems constructed in the city shall be constructed in accordance with the current guidelines and requirements of the division and shall be in compliance with any regulations promulgated by the city and the state of New Mexico. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  15) 
22-4.4 - Location of septic tank, private sewage disposal system. 
    Location of septic tanks or private sewage disposal systems shall be in accordance with applicable state and city guidelines and standards. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  16) 
22-4.5 - Nuisance. 
    No owner, tenant, subtenant, agent, occupant, lessor, lessee or other person in possession of any premises in the city shall permit, keep or allow to exist any trap, septic tank, cesspool or other conduit or receptacle of waste plumbing, or sanitary sewage sewer line connection, which is deemed detrimental to the public health by the division director or his/her designated enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  17) 
22-4.6 - Abatement of nuisance. 
A.  Every person, whether owner, lessee or agent of any premises or vacant lots or abutting owner, lessee or agent on any alley responsible for a nuisance as provided for in Section 22-10, shall abate or remedy the nuisance within forty-eight (48) hours after notice to do so from the city. 
B.  It is unlawful to fail to correct a condition after having been given notice. Every five (5) days after notification that the notified person or party fails to remedy the nuisance shall be considered an additional violation subject to the penalties outlined in the penalties and enforcement section of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  18) 
22-4.7 - Waste discharges causing obstructions. 
    Waste discharges, including but not limited to rags, solid waste and grease, proven to have caused an obstruction of flow, and/or damage or any other impairment to the public sanitary sewer collection system or wastewater treatment plant, are unlawful. Obstructions of the public sewers caused by such discharges shall be cleaned and cleared by the city. Any expenses incurred by the city to clear such obstructions, repair any damages to the sanitary sewer, sewer collection system or wastewater plant and any other expenses incurred by the city shall be determined and shall result in the city filing claim against the user or any other person causing or permitting said damages to occur and seeking reimbursement for any and all expenses suffered by the city. Failure to reimburse the city for such expenses shall result in penalties and enforcement action in accordance with Section 22-12. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  19) 
22-4.8 - Abandonment of cesspool or septic tank. 
    When the use of any septic tank or other on-site treatment system is discontinued or abandoned, the required work shall be done in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. Waste material collected as a result of cleaning shall be disposed of in accordance with law and applicable regulations. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  20) 
22-4.9 - Septic tank cleaning; septic tank waste hauling; license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of septic tank cleaning or septage hauling without first having obtained a business license from the city under the provisions of the Business License Ordinance and the provisions of this chapter. All activities concerning septage hauling and disposal shall comply with the city's regulations establishing administrative policies and fees pertaining to all septic tank and chemical toilet waste transported in and around the city, as well as other applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  21) 
22-4.10 - Fees. 
A.  Persons or companies licensed to perform septic tank cleaning and hauling, discharging septage at the city's septage discharge site shall pay to the city treasurer a user fee as established and required by the city and specified in Exhibit A of this chapter.* In accordance with the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act, Section 7-9-4.1 NMSA 1978, a surcharge of up to five percent (5%) shall be imposed on each billing rendered in accordance with this section. 
B.  The city's assessments division shall keep an account of all user and discharge fees from records supplied by the building inspections division and the wastewater management division. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  22; Ord. #2014-34  1, 2) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-4.11 - Septic tank cleaner; equipment. 
    A person seeking to do business as a septic hauler shall equip the vehicle used for this purpose with an airtight suction tank and a sheet steel holding tank. The following information shall be stenciled on each side and the back of the truck in letters at least two inches (2") in height and one inch (1") in width. 
A.  The business name of the septage hauler. 
B.  The permit number as provided by the city, followed by the last two (2) digits of the calendar year in which the permit was last issued. 
C.  The net capacity of the holding tank. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  23) 
22-4.12 - Transportation and discharge of septage. 
    Transportation and discharge of septic tank and chemical toilet waste shall be in accordance with written regulations issued by the city, including the city's regulation establishing administrative policies and fees pertaining to all septic tank and chemical toilet waste transported in and around the city of Santa Fe. All discharge permit requirements shall meet all applicable state and federal regulations. It is unlawful to discharge septage anywhere but at a properly equipped septage discharge site designated by the city. Discharge of septage at any location other than the approved site as designated by the city is a violation of the septage discharge permit. The first violation shall be subject to fine in accordance with the provisions of Exhibit A to this chapter. A second violation shall be subject to revocation of the septic hauler's license for a period of thirty (30) days, and a third violation shall be subject to a permanent revocation of the license. Discharges shall be accepted during established working hours as established by the division, unless emergency conditions warrant special, after hours, discharges as arranged with the division. Such discharges are subject to the special fee contained in Exhibit A.* 
(Ord. #1997-3,  24) 
Editor's note- *The exhibits referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-4.13 - Septic tank cleaner. 
    All tools, appliances and vehicles used in cleaning or evacuation of septic tanks shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, subject to the inspection by the city. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  25) 
22-4.14 - Penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated the conditions of a septage discharge permit or any portion of this chapter, shall be subject to an administrative action, and may be fined, as established by Exhibit A* of this chapter. Fines may be assessed for each violation. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  26; Ord. #2006-43,  2) 
Editor's note- *The exhibit referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-5 - CONSTRUCTION OF SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS. 

22-5.1 - Determination of necessity. 
    Prior to the development or improvement of any property which may cause the generation of wastewater, the owner shall request a review by the division. The division shall provide a written response which shall establish the necessity for connection to the POTW, assess the availability of sanitary sewer service in the area and cite the conditions under which wastewater collection and treatment service may be provided by the city. This city's written response shall be obtained by the owner prior to the commencement of the design of any sanitary sewer improvements affecting the property. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  27) 
22-5.2 - Construction and maintenance of pressure sanitary sewer. 
A.  Construction, operation and maintenance of pressure sanitary sewer systems serving private developments, with the exception of small diameter collection lines as described below, shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. Small diameter low pressure sewer lines which serve one (1) or more individual lots and are installed in accordance with these standards and other relevant provisions of the city code shall be accepted for maintenance by the city, upon verification by the division that all conditions for such an acceptance have been met. 
B.  Whenever the installation of a high pressure system is deemed by the division to be either in full compliance with the sanitary sewer master plan or in the best interest of the city, the operation and maintenance of such a system may be performed by the city at the owner's request, and if all other conditions regarding the transfer of ownership of private sewers are met. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  28) 
22-5.3 - Standards and sanitary sewer master plan. 
    Sewers referred to in this section shall be constructed in accordance with the sanitary sewer master plan, and design standards for sanitary sewer construction adopted herein as Exhibit B.* 
(Ord. #1997-3,  29) 
Editor's note- *The exhibit referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-5.4 - Permit required; application. 
    Persons may construct sanitary sewers on and within the city public rights-of-way and dedicated public and private easements, provided that a New Mexico licensed contractor makes an application to the city which sets forth the design, specifications and cost estimate for the work to be accomplished and receives an appropriate permit. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  30) 
22-5.5 - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a permit for the construction of sanitary sewers under this section is as stated in Exhibit A of this chapter.* 
(Ord. #1997-3,  31) 
Editor's note- *The exhibit referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-5.6 - Contractor bond. 
    As a condition of receiving a permit from the city for the construction of sanitary sewer improvements, the permittee shall provide proof of an approved current New Mexico utility contractor's license and a bond or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city for the completion of the improvements, the amount of which bond shall be not less than the cost estimate for the construction of the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  32) 
22-5.7 - Compliance with specifications; acceptance by city. 
    Upon completion of construction satisfactory to the city, the improvements shall be formally accepted by the city. Completion of construction satisfactory to the city shall not be established until the division has received the following: 
A.  As-built drawings, television logs and tapes which have been reviewed and found acceptable by the division; and 
B.  The engineer whose design supported the construction permit has certified in writing that the constructed improvements have been properly inspected during construction and were installed in conformance with the original specifications or with approved written change orders. 
    If the construction of the sanitary sewers does not meet the specifications, the improvements shall not be accepted by the city and the contractor shall be required to make the corrections necessary for the work to conform to such specifications. All corrective work shall be accomplished within sixty (60) calendar days from notice of non-compliance by the division. Failure of the contractor to perform corrective work, or complete the requirements for acceptance by the city shall entitle the city to execute the bond and complete the work as designed. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  33) 
22-5.8 - Inspection. 
    The construction activities of all sanitary sewers must be inspected by an engineer registered in the state of New Mexico. The engineer certification required in subsection 22-5.7 must include that such inspection was conducted. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  34) 
22-5.9 - Reimbursement of construction costs. 
    The total actual construction cost for the sewer extension shall be paid in full by the developer and documentation of such a payment shall be provided to the city. The developer shall be entitled to reimbursement of a portion of the construction costs if sewer service is provided to a new developer within ten (10) years from the date of the original sewer extension, provided the new developer's property abuts the sewer extension. The amount of reimbursement to be made to the applicant on account of a new customer's sewer service shall be determined by the city, based on a front foot basis for individual lots or on an acreage basis for the probable total parcels already connected and to be connected to the applicant's line extension. If a reimbursement is determined to be required, pursuant to the foregoing provisions, the city shall bill the new customer for the appropriate amount and, upon receipt thereof, shall refund said amount to applicant if it can be determined that the applicant still exists and can be readily located. Reimbursements made under this provision shall not exceed the amount of the applicant's contribution in aid of construction less that portion needed to serve applicant. The provisions of this paragraph apply to connections to all line extensions installed after the effective date of this rule. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  35) 
22-5.10 - Additions to existing private sanitary sewer systems. 
    Private additions to existing private sanitary sewer systems, that are required for provision of service to a development or proposed development will be allowed, provided that the following conditions are met: 
A.  The private system meets all specifications, design, construction and inspection requirements and applicable health standards as established by the city or otherwise required by law; 
B.  The total system design and construction costs shall be the responsibility of the petitioner; 
C.  Maintenance of the new sanitary sewer shall be the sole responsibility of the owner; 
D.  Developers of new private sewers or services that connect to existing private systems, shall provide proof of permission to connect to and/or expand the existing system. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  36) 
22-5.11 - Private sanitary sewer system desiring to become part of the public system. 
    The owners of private sanitary sewer systems constructed to city standards may request that the city accept dedication of the private system for public ownership and maintenance. In this event, the owner must meet the requirements for acceptance of new sanitary sewers in subsection 22-5.7 SFCC 1987 and provide appropriate easements and rights-of-way in accordance with Exhibit B* of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  37) 
Editor's note- *The exhibit referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-6 - SEWER SERVICE CONNECTIONS. 

22-6.1 - Permits required. 
    A sewer connection permit shall be obtained from the city before any connections are made to the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  38) 
22-6.2 - Properties outside city limits. 
A.  Purpose. The governing body has determined that connections to the city's sewer system should be allowed outside the city limits under certain conditions. The wastewater treatment plant has the capacity for such connections, the effluent is a benefit to the city, and protection of the groundwater is important. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Presumptive city limits is defined in the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe County and other parties dated May 19, 2008. 
C.  Connection Prohibited. Sanitary sewer service line connections and sanitary sewer mainline extensions are prohibited outside the presumptive city limits except as set forth in this section. 
D.  Existing Agreements. Sanitary sewer service line connections and sanitary sewer mainline extensions for which there is a valid, written agreement obligating the city to allow connection to the city's sewer system shall be reviewed by the city attorney and may be implemented by the wastewater management division director. 
E.  Property Owners. This section shall apply to properties owned by private property owners as well as to properties owned by county, state or federal agencies to the extent allowed by law. 
F.  Areas of Sanitary Sewer Service. 
(1)  Requests for sanitary sewer service line connections and sanitary sewer mainline extensions submitted after October 29, 2008, (date of adoption of Ordinance No. 2008-53) for properties located entirely within the areas to be annexed, as defined in the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county and other parties dated May 19, 2008, shall be processed in the same manner as requests for properties within the current city limits. This paragraph shall not apply to those requests described in paragraph D. above. 
(2)  Requests for sanitary sewer service line connections and sanitary sewer mainline extensions for properties outside the presumptive city limits including the Aqua Fria traditional historic community and the county of Santa Fe fairgrounds shall be processed pursuant to paragraph I. below. 
G.  Affordable Housing. The Santa Fe County Housing Assistance Ordinance, Section 151.01, Santa Fe County Code of Ordinances shall apply. 
H.  Conditions of Service. The property owner and all future owners of the property obtaining city sewer service under this section shall be required to pay all applicable rates, charges and fees for city sewer service. Requirements set forth in Chapters XIV and XXII SFCC 1987 and all other rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the city's sewer service are also a condition of service. 
I.  Water/Wastewater Review Team. 
(1)  All applications for city sewer service connections for properties outside the presumptive city limits shall be reviewed by the water/wastewater review team (WWRT). The team shall meet regularly and shall be made up of city and county staff from the water division, the wastewater division, the city attorney's office, the county attorney's office, the land use departments and the office of affordable housing. The team shall evaluate the completeness of the application and the feasibility of implementing the connection. Applications shall include the following: 
(a)  A map of the proposed project in relation to the existing city limits and the presumptive city limits; 
(b)  A detailed description of the proposed development including the type and size of proposed land uses; 
(c)  The health, safety, public welfare or other legal reason for the connection; 
(d)  Documentation from the county of Santa Fe that county sewer service is not available; and 
(e)  A certified Santa Fe Homes Proposal as set forth in subsection 14-8.11 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  If the WWRT finds the connection feasible and the legal reasons compelling, it shall submit a report to the public utilities committee of the city, the governing body and the board of county commissioners for consideration of an agreement between the city of Santa Fe and Santa Fe county pursuant to Section 2.m. of the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county and other parties dated May 19, 2008. 
J.  Wastewater Service Agreement. The property owner obtaining city sewer service under paragraph F(1) of this section shall enter into a wastewater service agreement with the city. The applicant shall agree to not oppose the annexation of the property upon the request of the city and in accordance with the applicable regulations regarding such annexations. The agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney's office and the wastewater management division director. The document, which includes a legal description of the property, shall apply to the property and all future owners and shall be recorded at the county clerk's office and retained at the city clerk's office. No connection to the city's sewer system shall be provided until a copy of the recorded document is provided to the wastewater management division director. The requirement to agree to not oppose the annexation of the property shall not apply to property located entirely within the boundary of the Agua Fria traditional historic community. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  39; Ord. #2006-60  3, 4; Ord. #2007-45,  30; Ord. #2008-53,  2; Ord. #2014-1,  1) 
22-6.3 - Plans to be filed; issuance of permit. 
    When an application for a permit to connect to the existing city sewer system is made, the person, company or corporation making the application shall submit for the city's approval adequate plans, drawings, specifications or descriptions of the proposed work. If these submittals meet with the appropriate standards for approval by the city, a permit for the construction shall be issued by the building inspection division. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  40) 
22-6.4 - Service connections to be made by licensed plumber. 
    All connections to the city sewers shall be made by a licensed plumber authorized to do business in the city, in accordance with Section 7-9, Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  41) 
22-6.5 - Inspections. 
A.  The city's building inspection division shall be notified when a sewer connection is completed and ready for inspection. All work shall be left uncovered for examination until inspected and approved by the building inspection division staff inspector or his duly authorized representative. 
B.  For each sewer line connection inspection made by the inspector, an inspection fee shall be charged as described in Exhibit A of this chapter. The inspector shall be the sole judge of the total number of inspections necessary. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  42) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-6.6 - Utility expansion charge. 
    A utility expansion charge shall be paid as described in Exhibit A*. The charge shall be assessed in addition to special assessments set out in subsection 22-6.7 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  43; Ord. #2003-26,  1; Ord. #2007-40,  14; Ord. No. 2016-39  10) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-6.7 - special sewer construction and assessments; authorization. 
    When the city pays for construction of a new sewer main, the governing body shall establish a special sewer connection assessment district by ordinance. The connection district shall not be applied to sewer line replacements or to lines funded out of an improvement district under Sections 3-33-3 through 3-33-24 NMSA 1978. The ordinance shall: 
A.  Define the geographic area to be benefited by the sewer main; 
B.  State the projected number of residential units and describe projected commercial development within the defined service area, based on the city's plans and zoning. The potential number of commercial outlets shall be estimated based on comparable existing structures and applicable code requirements; 
C.  Project the "residential unit equivalents" within the service area. This figure shall be calculated by dividing the estimated number of commercial outlets by four (4) and adding the projected number of residential units to be served by the new sewer main; 
D.  State the projected cost of the sewer main, based on accepted construction bids, design costs and bonding costs and shall state the percentage of this cost which directly benefits the service area; 
E.  Set a base year special sewer connection assessment, based on total projected cost which directly benefits the service area divided by the number of "residential unit equivalents" projected within the service area; 
F.  Set an annual interest rate to be applied to the base year assessment. This interest shall be compounded each twelve (12) months following the effective date of the ordinance. The interest rate shall be equal to the interest rate paid by the city on bonds issued to pay for the sewer main construction. If no bonds are issued for the project, the interest rate shall be equal to the rate paid by the city for the most recent bond issued before the effective date of the ordinance; and 
G.  Assess each property owner who is required to connect or voluntarily connects with sewers within the service area a fee equal to the base year special sewer connection plus interest compounded as set out above. This fee shall be assessed for each residential unit and for every four (4) outlets or fraction thereof in a commercial structure connecting to the sewer. This fee shall be assessed in addition to the sewer service connection fee set out in subsection 22-4.6 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  44) 
22-6.8 - Service connections for commercial establishments. 
A.  New commercial establishments or existing buildings being remodeled into commercial establishments, in which the existing sewer service is adequately sized and in good condition, and where grease traps or sand and grease interceptors are not required by this chapter or by the Uniform Plumbing Code, and which can be classified as either commercial retail businesses, or office buildings, shall not be required to construct a city standard monitoring manhole, provided the establishment has no more than one hundred sixty (160) fixture unit equivalents (FUEs) connected, as determined in the Uniform Plumbing Code. Sewer connections pursuant to this paragraph, shall be made with clean-out or sampling ports approved by the city. 
B.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relax or modify the building requirements of the UPC. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  45) 
22-6.9 - Illegal service connections prohibited. 
    Service connections to the city sanitary sewer system which are found to be constructed without city permit or otherwise have been undertaken without city authorization or have not been billed for service in accordance with rates established in this section are deemed illegal and are hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  46) 
22-6.10 - Illegal service connections; correction. 
A.  Upon discovery of an illegal connection, the city shall inform the owner in writing of the property being served by such a connection that: 
(1)  The property is served by an illegal connection; and 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the city's letter, the owner shall remove the illegal connection and shall be billed in arrears for twenty-four (24) months of service charges at the current authorized rates; or 
(3)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the city's letter, the connection shall be excavated and a reconnection made in accordance with the provisions of this section and the owner shall be billed in arrears for twenty-four (24) months of service charges at the current authorized rates for one (1) year of service charges at the current authorized rates; or 
(4)  At the city's discretion, the city may not require reconnection provided the owner is billed in arrears for a period of service that is greater than twenty-four (24) months, such period agreed upon by the city and the owner. 
B.  In the event that the owner can demonstrate to the city's satisfaction the time period of illegal connection, the city may adjust the billing in arrears for service charges to the period of actual connection. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  47) 
22-7 - SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 

22-7.1 - Levy established; schedule of fees. 
    There are hereby fixed, established, levied and assessed against all properties using or abutting on or accessible to the sanitary sewer and disposal system of the city for the service rendered or made available to such properties by and through the sanitary sewer and disposal system the charges as set forth in Exhibit A. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  13; Ord. #2009-14,  1; Ord. #2009-41,  1; Ord. #2011-22,  1; Ord. No. 2012-17) 
22-7.2-22-7.3 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsections 22-7.2 and 22-7.3, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1997-3 and 2001-22 were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  14 and 15. 
22-7.4 - New installations. 
    For new connections to the city sanitary sewer system, the sewer service charge shall begin and be effective for the first full calendar month following the date of the connection. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  51) 
22-7.5-22-7.10 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsections 22-7.5 through 22-7.10, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1997-3 and 2001-22, were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  16 through 21. 
22-7.11 - Disposition of money collected. 
    All funds collected under this section shall be deposited in a separate fund, which shall pay all bond service expenses and all direct and indirect expenses incurred in the maintenance, operation, extension, improvement, repair or construction or reconstruction of the city wastewater collection and treatment system. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  58) 
22-7.12 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 22-7.12, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2001-22 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  22. 
22-8 - SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENT FUNDS. 

22-8.1 - Creation of funds. 
    Separate funds, as may be required to meet statutory requirements, shall be created to receive and disburse all monies arising from any source intended to be used in the construction, reconstruction and enlargement of the sanitary sewer system of the city. Such funds shall be paid out by the city upon warrants specifically mentioning the fund out of which the same are to be paid. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  59) 
22-9 - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1997-3. 

22-9.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Abbreviations: 
BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
CWA means Clean Water Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-217 et seq.). 
EPA means United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
gpd means gallons per day. 
l means liter. 
LEL means lower explosive limit. 
MGD means million gallons per day. 
mg means milligrams. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
O&M means operation and maintenance. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
RCRA means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC means standard industrial classification. 
SWDA means Solid Waste Disposal Act (43 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.). 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
USC means United States Code. 
WPCA means federal Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 92-500). 
UPC means Uniform Plumbing Code. 
Act or "the Act" means the federal Water Pollution Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency Administrator. 
    ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) means the requirement that an industrial user make every reasonable effort to maintain quantity of discharge and the amounts and toxicity of pollutants in discharge as far below the regulatory limits as is practical, consistent with the purpose for which the permit is issued, taking into account the state of technology, the economics of improvements in relation to state of technology, the economics of improvements in relation to benefits to the public health and safety, the limited resources available, and the public interest in protecting the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of the waste treatment by-products as well as other societal and socioeconomic considerations. 
    Approval authority means the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Authorized representative of the industrial user means one (1) of the following: 
A.  If the industrial user is a corporation: 
(1)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. The manager may designate another authorized representative if: 
(a)  The authorization is in writing; and 
(b)  The authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or has overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(c)  The authorization is submitted to the city. 
B.  If the industrial user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship, a general partner or the proprietor. 
C.  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local government, or an agent thereof, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility. 
    BMPs means best management practices. 
    Base period means the consecutive calendar month of metered water use which is the basis for monthly sewer service charges. 
    Best management practices means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in CFR 40 Section 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) calendar days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, and incorporated herein by reference. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of organic and inorganic matter present in wastewater as milligrams per liter (mg/l) under standard laboratory procedures. COD is used as a measure of the wastewater strength. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe and its employees and its authorized agents. 
    City representative means the city manager or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Code of federal regulations (CFR) means a codification of the general and permanent rules published in the federal register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. 
    Color means the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density. 
    Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, which intervals are based on either an increment of flow or time. The sampling procedures for composite method is defined in CFR 40 Part 403 Appendix E. 
    Control authority means the POTW. 
    Control manhole means a manhole installed to allow access to the wastewater discharge of a facility for purposes of sample collection and flow measurement. The manhole shall be constructed in a manner and in a location as may be required by the city. 
    Control sanitary clean-out means a device installed to allow access to the wastewater discharge of a facility for purposes of sample collection. This will normally be a tee of an appropriate size inserted into the sanitary sewer service line and constructed in a manner and in a location as may be required by the city. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Department means the public utilities department or its director or the director's designated representatives. 
    Department director means the director of the city public utilities department. 
    Dilution means the additional use of potable water for the purposes of reducing the concentration of pollutants in the wastewater before discharging to the POTW. The normal use of potable water for sanitary facilities and food preparation shall not be considered dilution. 
    Discharge means the introduction into the POTW of a pollutant or wastewater, treated or untreated, or of holding tank waste from any source. The term includes the introduction of either a single pollutant or of multiple pollutants. 
    Division means the wastewater management division of the city public utilities department. 
    Division director means the wastewater management division director or the division director's designated representative. 
    Environmental protection agency or U.S. E.P.A. means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Sections 307(b) and (c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act and which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Governing body means the city council and the mayor meeting in a session which has been duly called in accordance with the state Open Meetings Act. 
    Grab sample means a sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to volume of flow of the waste stream or the time of day of the sampling and which sample is taken over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. The sampling procedures for grab method is defined in 40 CFR Part 403 Appendix E. 
    Gray water means a liquid waste that is discharged from any fixture, appliance, or appurtenance of a plumbing system which does not include fecal matter. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste derived from holding tanks associated with but not limited to vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Sections 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user or user means any person who is source of nondomestic wastewater discharge. 
    Industrial wastewater means a wastewater originating from sources other than domestic or which exhibit characteristics other than domestic wastewater. 
    Industrial wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the city in accordance with this section. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of any regulated parameter in any type of sample, either grab or composite. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibit or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    May means permissive or discretionary. 
    Medical waste means wastes including, but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood by-products, pathological wastes, needles, syringes, scalpels or other sharp implements, body parts, fetal tissue, fomites, etiological agents, contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    Municipal wastewater system or municipal system means a "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyance which conveys wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the system. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307 (b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
    In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
    Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Nondomestic pollutants means any substances other than human excrement and household gray water. 
    Nonresidential connection means a connection to the POTW whose assumed wastewater flow is based, for the purpose of sewer service rates, on metered water use for a base period consisting of the most recent April through March period preceding the fiscal year of fee assessment and for which water use records are available. 
    Owner means a person who has legal control over property. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation or of the New Mexico water quality standards applicable to the reach of the Santa Fe river to which the POTW discharges. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, limited partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal state or local governmental entities. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units; neutral wastewater is numerically equal to seven (7) while the number increases with increasing alkalinity and decreases with increasing acidity. 
    Pollutant means a manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, or biological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Pretreatment or treatments mean the reduction of the quantity of a user's wastewater discharge or in the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater thereby rendering them less harmful to the POTW prior to discharge into the system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants as prohibited by 40 CFR Part 403.6 (d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standard, or standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5. 
    Process wastewater means wastewater produced as a product or by-product of an industrial or regulated process. Such wastewater normally would not reflect characteristics of typical domestic wastewater. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by Section 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
    Receiving stream or "waters of the U.S." means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, arroyos, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the U.S. or any portion thereof. 
    Shall means mandatory. 
    Significant industrial user. (a) all industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Section 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and (b) any other industrial user that: discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR Section 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.8(f)(6)). 
    Sludge means the solids separated from liquids during processing pretreatment of industrial wastes, with or without the addition of chemical agents. 
    Slug discharge means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Soluble means the maximum amount of the solute (materials) that will be dissolved in a definite amount of solvent, water (at 25 degrees (25) C and a pH of seven (7)) and produce a stable system. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the most recent standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive office of the president of the U.S office of management and budget. 
    Standard methods means the standard methods for examination of water and wastewater as contained in the most recent edition issued by American Public Health Association. 
    State means the state of New Mexico. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including rainfall and snowmelts. 
    Total suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. Total suspended solids shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR Section 136. 
    Total toxic organic (TTO) means the sum of concentrations of the organic compounds from a priority pollutant scan. Categorical standards list any toxic organic compounds that are to be included in the summation of TTO for a specific category in the respective 40 CFR. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the environmental protection agency under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C.1317) of the Act, or listed by the division, or other pollutants or combination of pollutants which may result in interference or pass through of the system or otherwise may potentially cause a violation of the city's NPDES permit, New Mexico water quality standards or which may potentially restrict and/or impair the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products. 
    Treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of wastewater. 
    Treatment plant effluent means any discharge from the POTW of treated wastewater, made in accordance with the NPDES permit into waters of the U.S. 
    User or customer means any person who contributes, or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the POTW. 
    Waste treatment by-product means any sludge, reuse water, scum or other product resulting from wastewater treatment processes. 
    Wastewater or sewage means the liquid and water-carried wastes, or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is released to the POTW. 
    Water service means arrangement in which water is piped to a property from the public supply. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  3; Ord. #2008-30,  1) 
22-9.2 - General provisions. 
A.  This section establishes uniform requirements for the direct and indirect waste contribution to the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city of Santa Fe and enables the city to comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this section include: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) which will interfere with the operation of the system; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city of Santa Fe's wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To ensure that the quality of the waste treatment by-products are maintained at a level which promotes the city's potential options for beneficial reuse, marketability, reclamation or disposal; 
(4)  To protect city personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as to protect the general public; 
(5)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, inspection of users, maintenance, and improvement of the city's wastewater system as it relates to the industrial pretreatment program; 
(6)  To improve the potential to minimize the quantity of wastewater discharged by users, and to improve the potential to beneficially reuse, market, reclaim or dispose of waste treatment by-products; 
(7)  To ensure that the city of Santa Fe complies with its national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use, and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system may be subject; and 
(8)  To protect the city's economic interests in its wastewater treatment system and its potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products. 
B.  This section provides for the regulation of discharges in the municipal wastewater collection system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
C.  This section shall apply to all users of the sanitary sewer collection system and the POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the division shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. By discharging wastewater into the city's POTW, industrial users located beyond the municipal limits shall comply with terms and conditions established in this section, as well as any permits or orders issued hereunder as if they were located within the boundaries of the city of Santa Fe and subject to the jurisdiction of the city and the courts in the same manner as any discharger located within the city limits. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  4) 
22-9.3 - General sewer use requirements. 
A.  Limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of wastewater which may be lawfully discharged into the POTW are hereby established. Pretreatment of some wastewater discharges shall be required to achieve compliance with this section and the Act. The specific limitations set forth herein are necessary to enable the city to meet requirements contained in its NPDES permit, to protect the public health and the environment, to protect the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products, and to provide efficient wastewater treatment and protect the health and safety of wastewater personnel. No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. 
B.  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against potential pass through or potential interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. These limits are the highest allowable concentration in any type of sample, either a grab or composite collected over any time interval and are as follows: 
TABLE 22-1 
Constituent Local Discharge Limits pH 5-11 oil & grease 200 mg/l (animal or vegetable) oil & grease 100 mg/l (petroleum) aluminum 97 mg/l arsenic 1.35 mg/l boron 182 mg/l cadmium 0.49 mg/l chromium 3.19 mg/l copper 7.11 mg/l cyanide 0.17 mg/l lead 0.54 mg/l mercury 0.01 mg/l molybdenum 84 mg/1 nickel 10.93 mg/l selenium 1.35 mg/l silver 3.19 mg/l zinc 8.26 mg/l temperature 104 F @ Headworks temperature 140F to POTW total toxic organics 2 mg/l  
    Total toxic organics (TTO) is the sum of all concentrations of organic compounds from a priority pollutant scan that are above the detection limit. TTO monitoring shall be required where applicable under specific industries per 40 CFR or where the city division determines the necessity for a priority pollutant scan to be performed to determine pollutant concentrations discharged. 
C.  Concentrations and the general prohibitions below in paragraph D below apply at the point where the industrial wastewater is monitored or as determined by the division. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal. The division may impose mass for limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration based limitations above except categorical standards. Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a single grab sample. Exceedance of any continuous or instantaneous pollutant limits listed above constitutes a violation of this section. 
D.  These general prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. The following pollutants shall not be introduced into the city's sanitary sewer system and/or the POTW: 
(1)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
(2)  Any pollutant or wastewater which may potentially interfere with the operation of the POTW, or with the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products; 
(3)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140F) or sixty degrees Centigrade (60C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(4)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than five (5) or greater than eleven (11); 
(5)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW; 
(6)  Any wastewater containing pollutants in such quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants as to potentially cause pass through or interfere with the POTW, any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals or otherwise to potentially impair the city's economic interests or the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products; 
(7)  Any liquids, gases or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or property or are sufficient to hinder entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
(8)  Any substance which will cause the waste treatment by-products to be unsuitable for the city's potential plans for the beneficial reuse, marketability, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the city to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or other state or local requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices being used by the city; 
(9)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the current treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant effluent; 
(10)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds forty degrees (40) C (one hundred four degrees (104) F) unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits; 
(11)  Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes which are not in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized in writing by the division; 
(13)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Any material which, in the judgment of the city, contains ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which may potentially produce metallic complexes that may interfere with the POTW; 
(15)  Any material considered hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261; 
(16)  Portions of the human anatomy including but not limited to whole blood and blood products discharged by medical facilities as waste; 
(17)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW's wastewater treatment system; 
(18)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(19)  Any substance which may cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, or any other federal, state or local permits or requirements, including any receiving water quality standards; or 
(20)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(21)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
E.  Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these materials could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to an industrial user's pretreatment facilities before connecting with the POTW or be adequately protected to prevent accidental releases. 
F.  Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein by this reference, and any applicable local limits. 
G.  The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance or resolution or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed reasonably necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this Ordinance or the general and specific prohibitions in this section, or with any other reasonable objective of the city. 
H.  Dilution Prohibited as Substitute for Treatment. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  5) 
22-9.4 - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
A.  Industrial users shall provide, at their own expense, necessary wastewater treatment to comply with this section and with all permit conditions and shall achieve compliance with categorical standards, local limits and prohibitions, as defined by subsection 22-9.3 SFCC 1987. Facilities and equipment to be installed, operated, and maintained by the industrial user. 
B.  Industrial users shall provide detailed plans showing all pretreatment facilities along with a wastewater plumbing schematic of facility and operating procedures and date of construction schedule shall be approved by the division before construction of the facility. The approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge under the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Within a time period specified by the division, but in no case more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the enactment of this section, [5] those existing users required to by the division must complete and submit such a plan. 
(2)  No user required by this section to install pretreatment facilities will commence discharging industrial or commercial waste into the POTW until those required pretreatment facilities have been installed and approved by the division. 
(3)  Any significant changes in pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported to the division prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
C.  Those significant industrial users required to by the division shall provide and operate, at the user's expense, monitoring facilities for inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and internal drainage system. Said monitoring facilities may consist of, but need not be limited to, instrumentation, control manholes, control sanitary sewer clean-outs and flow monitoring devices. 
(1)  Any such monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises unless the division determines that such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, in which case, the city may allow the monitoring facility to be constructed in a public street or sidewalk area in a manner such that it will not be obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles or otherwise. No user shall construct such a monitoring facility unless there will be adequate room in or near the sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. 
(2)  Any such monitoring facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be constructed so as to be protected from vandalism and shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. It is the responsibility of the user to clear graffiti or other visual nuisances. 
(3)  Wherever constructed, the sampling and monitoring facility shall comply with all city requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Monitoring facility designs shall follow the standard detail of the city of Santa Fe. Any exceptions or changes must be approved by the division. 
(4)  Construction of any such monitoring facility shall be completed within the time limit specified by the division. 
D.  Users shall ensure that they or whoever occupies the premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the division, or its representative, upon presentation of proper credentials, ready access at all times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of surveillance, inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, or in the performance of any other duty. Users shall grant the city, state, and EPA the right to set up on the user's property, such devices as are reasonably necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, metering, or any other functions related to enforcement of this section. Users shall, where applicable, make necessary arrangements with their security guards or other security system so that personnel from the city, state, and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, to perform their responsibilities. 
E.  The division director may impose temporary restrictions on industrial discharges, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, require relocation and/or consolidation of points of discharge, require separation of domestic quality and commercial wastestreams, or other such conditions as may be reasonable to protect the POTW or to evaluate the industrial or commercial user's compliance with the requirements of this section. Such restrictions may be reviewed and amended periodically by the division director. 
(1)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)  Industrial or commercial users with the potential to discharge volatile substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
F.  When required by the division, industrial users shall prepare a plan to control slug discharges. The results of such activities shall be available to the approval authority upon request. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) calendar days; and 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
G.  The city will accept into the POTW, septage waste only at the city designated discharge in accordance with this section. 
H.  Any person who shall occupy or operate the industrial user's facilities as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, oral or written, shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this section in the same manner as the facility owner. 
I.  Every applicant for a permit under this section, and every new owner upon approved transfer of a permit, at the time of application or transfer of permit, shall submit plans in accordance with the ALARA principle (as low as reasonably achievable), including implementation timetables, setting forth a detailed description of the available alternative technologies or processes which would reduce the quantity of the user's discharge or the quantity of the pollutants in such discharge, as well as the cost and feasibility of such alternatives, together with a detailed description of the methods and timetable by which the user intends to reduce the amount and concentration of the pollutants in its discharge and the quantity of its discharges. Such ALARA plans and implementation schedule shall require approval by the division and when so approved shall become part of the permit conditions. Failure to submit or to comply with such plans and implementation schedules shall be considered a permit violation. 
J.  The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this section shall be subject to: 
(1)  The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements; 
(2)  The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation or certification; and 
(3)  The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act regarding responsible corporate officers. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  6) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2006-42, codified herein as Section 22-9, was adopted July 26, 2006. 

22-9.5 - Wastewater permit eligibility. 
A.  When requested by the division, users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater questionnaire. The division is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to respond to the questionnaire. Failure to accurately complete this questionnaire within thirty (30) calendar days shall be grounds for disallowing or terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this section. Additional information may be requested and/or a facility inspection performed by the division to assist in determining the need to permit an industrial user. 
B.  The POTW may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
C.  The POTW by permit, or similar means, will control the contribution to the POTW by each industrial user to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. In the case of industrial users identified as significant under 40 CFR 403.3(t), this control shall be achieved through permits or equivalent individual control mechanisms issued to each such user. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater into the city's sanitary sewer system without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the division. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater permit shall be deemed a violation of this section and subjects the industrial user to the sanctions set out in this section. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, local or other applicable laws. Under special conditions, at the division directors discretion, may require other industrial users, including septage waste haulers, to obtain discharge permits as reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
E.  Upon notice from the division, any significant industrial user who is currently not permitted by the division and who discharges industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of this section [6] and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall within ninety (90) calendar days after said notice, apply to the division for a discharge permit in accordance with this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the system to continue after one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the effective date of this section except in accordance with a permit issued by the division. 
F.  Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the POTW shall be required to obtain a discharge permit prior to beginning such discharge. Any industrial user who has ceased discharge for any reason for a period of six (6) months or longer shall be considered a new source. 
G.  All industrial users required to have a permit must submit the following information on an application form provided by the division. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(1)  Name, mailing address, and business location (if different from the mailing address); 
(2)  Environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
(3)  Material safety data sheets; 
(4)  Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes for the facility and any facility processes for which categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated; 
(5)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility; 
(6)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system; 
(7)  Each product and by-product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(8)  Type and amount of raw materials process (average and maximum per day); 
(9)  The site plans, floor plans, and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(10)  Time and duration of the discharge; 
(11)  Measured or estimated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the municipal system from categorical and other permitted process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined wastewater formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e); 
(12)  Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any; 
(13)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state, or local standards, pretreatment standards applicable to each categorical and other permitted process; and nature and concentration (or mass if pretreatment is required) of pollutants in each process (daily maximum and average concentration or mass when required by a pretreatment standard). Sampling and analysis will be undertaken in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 and with any local rule or regulation and shall demonstrate compliance with all local, state and federal discharge regulations; 
(14)  A statement by an authorized representative of the user and by a qualified professional as determined by the division verifying that the pretreatment standards listed in this section are not being violated, and if they are, what additional pretreatment is reasonably necessary. The statement shall contain certification by the authorized representative of the user and by the qualified professional in the form set forth in subsection 22-9.5H; 
(15)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be reasonably required to meet the pretreatment standards, the industrial user shall indicate the shortest practicable time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or implementation of such additional treatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed eighteen (18) months; and 
(b)  No later than seven (7) calendar days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the division including, as a minimum, whether or not it has complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the division. 
(16)  Any other information as may be deemed by the division to be reasonably necessary to evaluate the permit application; and 
(17)  ALARA plans as set forth in Section 22-9.4 I SFCC 1987. 
H.  All permit applications, ALARA plans as set forth in subsection 22-9.4I and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
 "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment." 
(Ord. #2006-42,  7) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2006-42, codified herein as Section 22-9, was adopted July 26, 2006. 

22-9.6 - Discharge permit issuance process. 
A.  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. Each permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. Standard permit lengths are three (3) years for industries subject to categorical standards per the definition in subsection 22-9.1 and up to five (5) years for all other significant industries. At the division's discretion, permits may be issued for periods of lesser duration. 
B.  Wastewater permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the division to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate and improve the city's potential options for beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of the waste treatment by-products, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Discharge permits must contain the following: 
(a)  A statement that indicates permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
(b)  A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the division and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit; 
(c)  Effluent limits applicable based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR part 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(d)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include, but are not limited to, an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR part 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(e)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines; 
(f)  Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) calendar days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s); 
(g)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by this section and affording the division access thereto; 
(h)  Requirements for prior notification and approval by the division of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or any significant change in the volume character of the wastewater prior or introduction in the POTW; 
(i)  Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the division of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee; 
(j)  Requirements for immediate notification of accidental or slug discharges; 
(k)  A statement that violation of any local, state, or federal standard or requirement impacting a user's discharge shall be considered a violation of this section; and 
(l)  The ALARA plans set forth in subsection 22-9.4I. 
(2)  Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Limits on the average and maximum rate of discharge, limits on the time of discharge, and requirement for flow regulation and equalization; 
(b)  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average discharges and maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties; 
(c)  Requirements for the installation of applicable levels of pretreatment technology designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
(d)  Development and implementation of spill control and/or slug discharge control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges; 
(e)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges or fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(f)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(g)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules; 
(h)  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(i)  Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring; 
(j)  A statement that compliance with the industrial user's permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal, state and local pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit; and 
(k)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the division to promote compliance with this section, and other local, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
C.  Within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of completed applications, the division shall review and evaluate the applications, deny any application which does not, in the opinion of the division, meet the requirements of this section, and shall propose such other special conditions as it deems advisable. All wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of this section and all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations. The division will act only on applications that are accompanied by a complete report outlining all information required by this section. Persons who have filed incomplete applications will be notified by the division of the nature of the deficiency and will be given a deadline to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within the specified deadline, the division shall deny the application for a wastewater discharge permit and notify the applicant in writing of such action. 
D.  Upon notification to the industrial user, the division at any time, may modify the permit for reasons including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or quality since the time of permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW or to the condition of the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a potential threat to the POTW or to the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of the waste treatment by-products; 
(5)  In response to violations of any terms or conditions of the wastewater permit; 
(6)  To correct misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  The revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner/operator. 
E.  Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner or operator with prior approval of the division. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer along with the below listed information renders the wastewater permit voidable by the division on the date of facility transfer. The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which: 
(1)  States that the new owner has no present intent to change the facility operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit; and 
(4)  Facility contact, operator and authorized representative. 
F.  Permits may be suspended or terminated for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the division of significant changes to the wastewater and/or process prior to the changed conditions; 
(2)  False or inaccurate self-monitoring reports; 
(3)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(4)  Refusing to allow the division timely access to the facility premises or records; 
(5)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(6)  Failure to pay fines or penalties assessed for violations to this section; 
(7)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(8)  Failure to submit accurate periodic compliance reports; 
(9)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey; 
(10)  Failure to provide the required notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; 
(11)  Making false statements or representations to the division; or 
(12)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the permit or this section, or of any local, state or federal law affecting discharge. 
G.  Permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations for periods greater than six (6) months. All prior permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater permit. 
H.  A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with this section a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  8) 
22-9.7 - Reporting requirements. 
A.  Within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the effective date of a categorical standard, or one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR Section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the division, a baseline monitoring report which shall contain the information listed below. A baseline monitoring report shall be submitted by industrial users subject to pretreatment standards and requirements ninety (90) calendar days prior to the approval and issuance of a discharge permit authorizing commencement of discharge. Industrial users with an existing permit that have changed processes or sources so as to become a new source shall submit a baseline monitoring report ninety (90) calendar days prior to commencement of discharge, contingent on approval by the division. A baseline monitoring report shall be submitted ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration date of an existing discharge permit. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards and any other local, state or federal laws or regulations governing its discharge. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged, as described in subsection 22-9.7A(1)(d) and (e) of this section. 
(1)  The information required by this subsection shall include: 
(a)  Name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners; 
(b)  A list of any environmental control permits held by the user or for the facility; 
(c)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes; 
(d)  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR Section 403.6(e). The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by costs or feasibility considerations; 
(e)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(i)  The Industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards and any other local, state or federal laws affecting its discharge applicable to each regulated process and sample to demonstrate compliance during the required reporting period. Sampling shall be performed and reported every six (6) months, at a minimum. 
(ii)  In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the standards or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
(iii)  A minimum of four (4) grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. All other pollutants shall be measured by composite samples obtained through flow proportional sampling techniques where feasible. If flow proportional composite sampling is infeasible, samples may be obtained through time proportional sampling techniques or through four (4) grab samples if the user demonstrates to the control authority's satisfaction that such a sample shall be representative of the discharge. 
(iv)  The user shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
(v)  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR Section 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority. 
(vi)  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the director determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator. 
(vii)  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
(viii)  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW; 
(f)  A statement shall be provided which is approved by an authorized representative of the industrial user and qualified professional as determined by the division, verifying that pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(g)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M shall be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user shall provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(h)  Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule: 
(i)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.); 
(ii)  No increment shall exceed nine (9) months; and 
(iii)  Not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority; 
(i)  All baseline monitoring reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 22-9.5(H). 
B.  Report on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in subsections 22-9.7A(l)(d), (e), and (f) SFCC 1987 and subsection 22-9.5H SFCC 1987. All sampling shall be done in conformance with subsection 22-9.7D(3) SFCC 1987. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
C.  Periodic Reports on Continued Compliance. 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard (except a nonsignificant categorical user as defined in 40 CFR Section 403.3(v)(2), after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the control authority during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the control authority or the approval authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported except that the control authority may require more detailed reporting of flows. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required by the control authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. At the discretion of the control authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority may modify the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The control authority may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The control authority may authorize a waiver where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
(b)  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the permit or other equivalent individual permit, but in no case longer than five (5) years. The user shall submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent permit. 
(c)  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user shall provide data from at least one (1) sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. The request for a monitoring waiver shall be signed in accordance with subsection 22-9.7P SFCC 1987. and include the certification statement in subsection 22-9.5H SFCC 1987. Nondetectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
(d)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority shall be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver shall be maintained by the control authority for three (3) years after expiration of the waiver. 
(e)  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by the control authority, the industrial user shall certify on each report with the statement below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user: 
 "Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR ------- {specify applicable national pretreatment standard part(s)}, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ------ {list pollutant(s)} in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under subsection 22-9.7(C)(1) SFCC 1987." 
(f)  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present based on changes that occur in the user's operations, the user shall immediately: comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection 229.7C(1) SFCC 1987 or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the control authority; and notify the control authority. 
(g)  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  The control authority may reduce the requirement in subsection 22-9.7C(1) SFCC 1987 to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the approval authority, where the industrial user meets all of the following conditions: 
(a)  The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following: 
(i)  0.01 percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity authority of the POTW, or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches; 
(ii)  0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and 
(iii)  0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed by a POTW in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.5(c) and (d); 
(b)  The industrial user has not been in significant noncompliance, as defined in subsection 22-9.10 SFCC 1987 for any time in the past two (2) years; 
(c)  The industrial user does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period pursuant to subsection 22-9.7D(3) SFCC 1987; 
(d)  The industrial user shall notify the control authority immediately of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer meet conditions of paragraph C(3)(a) or (b) of this subsection. Upon notification, the industrial user shall immediately begin complying with the minimum reporting in paragraph C(1) of this subsection; and 
(e)  The control authority shall retain documentation to support the control authority's determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for reduced reporting requirements under paragraph C(3) of this subsection for a period of three (3) years after the expiration of the term of the permit. 
(4)  For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Section 403.6(c), the report required by paragraph C(1) of this subsection shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the report required by paragraph C(1) of this subsection shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. 
(5)  All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 22-9.5H SFCC 1987. 
(6)  All written reports shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage pre-paid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
D.  Monitoring and Analysis to Demonstrate Continued Compliance. 
(1)  Except in the case of nonsignificant categorical users, the reports required in paragraphs A, B, C, and E of this subsection shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the control authority, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the control authority in lieu of the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the required sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the user shall not be required to submit the compliance certification required under subsections 22-9.7A(1)(f) and B of this section. In addition, where the POTW itself collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the industrial user shall not be required to submit the report. 
(2)  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the control authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority shall perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Resampling is not required if: 
(a)  The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month; or 
(b)  The control authority performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the control authority receives the results of this sampling. 
(3)  The reports required in subsection 22-9.7A, B, C, and E of this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data are representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The control authority shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority, the samples shall be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling shall be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as appropriate. 
(4)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports required in paragraphs A and B of this section, a minimum of four (4) grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the control authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs C and E of this subsection, the control authority shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(5)  All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. (See Sections 136.4 and 136.5) Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the administrator determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator. 
(6)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in paragraph C or E of this subsection monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedures prescribed in paragraph D(5) of this subsection, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
E.  Reporting Requirements for Industrial Users not Subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The control authority shall require appropriate reporting from those industrial users with discharges that are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards. Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the control authority at least once every six (6) months (on dates specified by the control authority) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the control authority. In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation required by the control authority to determine the compliance status of the user. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the control authority in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user. 
F.  Notification of Changed Discharge. All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR Section 403.12(p). 
G.  Notice of Potential Problems, Including Slug Loading. All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, by the industrial user. 
H.  The control authority shall randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users, conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards, and inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year. 
I.  Record-Keeping Requirements. 
(1)  Any industrial user and POTW subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this section, including documentation associated with best management practices. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(a)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(b)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(c)  Who performed the analyses; 
(d)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(e)  The results of such analyses. 
(2)  Any industrial user or POTW subject to the reporting requirements established in this section (including documentation associated with best management practices) shall be required to retain for a minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this section) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the director and the regional administrator (and POTW in the case of an industrial user). This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW or when requested by the director or the regional administrator. 
(3)  Any POTW to which reports are submitted by an industrial user pursuant to paragraphs A, B, C, and E of this subsection shall retain such reports for a minimum of three (3) years and shall make such reports available for inspection and copying by the director and the regional administrator. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user or the operation of the POTW pretreatment program or when requested by the director or the regional administrator. 
J.  All wastewater samples shall be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
K.  In the event an industrial user's monitoring results indicate that a violation of this section has occurred, the industrial user shall immediately notify the division and resample its discharge. The industrial user shall report the results of the repeated sampling within thirty (30) calendar days of discovering the first violation. 
L.  Each industrial user is required to notify the division of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or pretreatment systems which might alter the characteristics, quality or volume of its wastewater. 
(1)  The division may require the industrial user to submit information as necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater permit application, if necessary. 
(2)  The division may issue a discharge permit under subsection 22-9.6 SFCC 1987 or modify an existing wastewater permit under subsection 22-9.6D SFCC 1987. 
(3)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the division has responded to the industrial user's notice. 
(4)  Daily flow average increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater and/or the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant shall be deemed significant. 
M.  Each industrial user shall take reasonable measures to predict and prevent any prohibited discharges of substances regulated by this section. Devices and systems to prevent prohibited discharges shall be provided and maintained at the facility owner's or user's expense. For those industries required to submit a spill prevention and/or slug discharge control plan in accordance with this section, detailed plans showing any pretreatment system's facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the division prior to construction. Review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Industrial users who commence contributions to the POTW after the effective date of this section [7] and who are defined by the division, as significant industrial users, shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the POTW until an accidental discharge response plan has been approved by the division. 
(2)  In any case of prohibited discharge which may potentially upset, interfere or pass through the treatment facilities, or cause potential health hazards to POTW personnel, or impair the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of waste treatment by-products, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the division of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. Failure to notify the division of any prohibited discharge under this section within one (1) hour of recognition of the discharge constitutes a violation of this section. 
(3)  Within five (5) calendar days following prohibited discharge, the user shall, unless exempted by the division, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any liability which may be incurred as a result of such discharge; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, criminal or civil penalties, or other liability. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a prohibited discharge described in subsection 22-9.7L(2) SFCC 1987, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
N.  Industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a discharge permit shall, as required by the division, provide any information or reports that are deemed by the division to be necessary. 
O.  Where required by the division, manholes or cleanouts shall be required to be placed in the industrial user's wastewater system for the purpose of monitoring and periodic sampling of the wastewater effluent. Such manholes shall meet all standards and specifications as set forth by the division and shall be maintained at the industrial user's expense. 
P.  Signatory Requirements for Industrial User Reports. The reports required by subsections 22-9.7A, , and C SFCC 1987 shall include the certification statement as set forth in subsection 22-9.5H SFCC 1987 and shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports required by subsections 22-9.7A, B and C SFCC 1987 is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 
(a)  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(b)  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports required by subsections 22-9.7A, B and C SFCC 1987 is a partnership, or sole proprietorship respectively. 
(3)  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph P(1) or (2) of this subsection if: 
(a)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph P(1) or (2); 
(b)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(c)  The written authorization is submitted to the control authority. 
(4)  If an authorization under paragraph P(3) of this subsection is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of P(3) of this subsection shall be submitted to the control authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  9; Ord. #2008-30,  2) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2006-42, codified herein as Section 22-9, was adopted July 26, 2006. 

22-9.8 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  The division shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user or applicant to carry out all inspection, exam and copy records required under subsection 22-9.7, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by industrial users or applicants, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users. Representatives of the POTW shall be authorized to enter any premises of any industrial user or applicants in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are required to be to assure compliance with pretreatment standards. The division shall sample and monitor each permitted facility at least once annually and more frequently if as the division determines reasonable in order to determine compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the division, state, and U.S. EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their responsibilities. 
(2)  The division, state, and U.S. EPA shall be permitted to set up or require installation on the industrial user's property, of such devices as are reasonably necessary to conduct sampling, and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The division may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user's expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quantity shall be calibrated periodically in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines by the industrial user to ensure their accuracy. Records of calibration methods and frequency shall be made available to the division upon request. Costs of laboratory testing or analysis by an outside firm approved by the city for permit compliance monitoring shall be the responsibility of the user. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial users premises shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the division and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing division personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be considered a violation of this section. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  10) 
22-9.9 - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs, and from division inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user is able to demonstrate, in writing and to the satisfaction of the division that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information. 
A.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR Section 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
B.  When proved by the industrial user to the satisfaction of the division that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which discloses trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this section, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. The division shall take reasonable measures to preserve the confidential nature of such information. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  11) 
22-9.10 - Publication of significant violators. 
    The division shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the area where the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
A.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits; 
B.  Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
C.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
D.  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the division's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
E.  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) calendar days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
F.  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) calendar days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
G.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
H.  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  12; Ord. #2008-30,  3) 
22-9.11 - Miscellaneous charges and fee provisions. 
    The division shall adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the municipal pretreatment program which shall include: 
A.  Fee for permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
B.  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users; and the costs of monitoring or analysis by independent firms when so required by the division; 
C.  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; and 
D.  Other fees as the division may deem necessary to carry out the purposes set forth herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by these regulations and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the division. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  13) 
22-9.12 - Violations; penalties, and enforcements. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated or is violating a requirement of this section, the city may: 
(1)  Issue a written notice of violation; 
(2)  File a citation in municipal court as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987; 
(a)  Violation of any provision of Section 22-9 SFCC 1987 is subject to enforcement pursuant to Section 3-17-1C(3) NMSA (1991 Cum. Supp.). This law allows a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation. 
(3)  Commence a civil action in district court for appropriate relief, including injunctive relief; or 
(4)  Determine that the violation is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is therefore declared a nuisance, and as such may be abated as set forth in Section 10-9 SFCC 1987. 
C.  A notice of violation shall state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation and set forth a deadline for correction of the violation pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice. The notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to correct the violation pursuant to the requirements, the city will take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and and/or restore the property and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to subsection 22-9.14 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  14) 
22-9.13 - Abatement by city. 
    If after the notice is issued, the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in said notice, the city or a contractor, designated by the city, shall request permission to enter upon the subject private property and if granted, is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and abate has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  15) 
22-9.14 - Charging cost of abatement/liens. 
    Within thirty (30) calendar days after abatement of the violation by the city, the city shall notify the owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) calendar days, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The city may assess a fee for the placement of the lien. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  16) 
22-9.15 - Exigent circumstances abatement. 
    The city, pursuant to its police powers, is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this section that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the city, the city and/or its agents are authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation for the protection of the community. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this section. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  17) 
22-9.16 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose and objectives set forth in subsection 22-9.2 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2006-42,  18) 
22-10 - WASTEWATER EXTRA-STRENGTH SURCHARGE PROGRAM. 

22-10.1 - Scope. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the equitable distribution of the costs of conveying, treating, operating and maintaining the POTW. 
B.  These provisions shall apply to all nonresidential wastewater dischargers using the city POTW and shall be administered by the division. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  70) 
22-10.2 - Surcharge parameters. 
    The city shall maintain appropriate surcharge parameters based on federal and state requirements placed on the operation, maintenance and performance of the POTW. The parameters may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
A.  Flow, COD and TSS. 
B.  A base flow in gpd and concentration in mg/l for each wastewater parameter may be established by the city. The user will be surcharged for discharges in excess of the base. 
C.  The city may apply any or all of the parameters to the user as appropriate. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  71) 
22-10.3 - User categories. 
    The city may place each user in a user category for purposes of developing a category mean for flows and parameters. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  72) 
22-10.4 - Estimation of wastewater flows. 
A.  The city will estimate the quantity of wastewater discharged by the user. The amount of wastewater discharged shall be assumed to be ninety percent (90%) of the water consumed unless the user can provide acceptable evidence to the city showing otherwise. 
B.  The city may require that the user install water measuring equipment and other related items to assist with making this determination, if water service is not provided by the city. 
C.  The city may require the user to report readings and make meter available for the city to spot check. 
D.  The user shall provide a safe, secure location meeting the city's requirements for conducting flow measurement studies within sixty (60) days of receipt of the city's request. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  73) 
22-10.5 - Discharge sampling. 
A.  The city shall determine the location for all wastewater sampling. The user shall provide a safe, secure location meeting the city's requirements for the wastewater sampling within sixty (60) days of receipt of the city's request. 
B.  The method of sampling shall be determined by the city. Methods may include grab or composite depending on the user's flow, access, process and other variables. The standard shall be a time-weighted six-day composite. 
C.  The duration and frequency of sampling shall be determined by the city. Duration and frequency may include single samples or multiple samples taken over a period of time depending on the user's flows, access, process, hours of operation and other variables. The sampling shall be done once every two (2) years, or as otherwise determined by the city. 
D.  All wastewater analysis shall comply with the requirements listed in 40 CFR 136 and/or the standard methods. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  74) 
22-10.6 - Estimation of wastewater parameter concentrations. 
    In lieu of wastewater sampling and testing, the city has the option of estimating one (1) or all of the user's discharge parameter concentration and mass based on the information developed from other users or on incomplete information on the user's discharge. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  75) 
22-10.7 - Wastewater resampling. 
A.  The city may perform a resample if the results of the analysis do not appear to correspond with the user's operation or for other reasons determined by the city. Resampling shall follow the same procedure as for discharge sampling. The city may perform periodic unannounced resampling and inspections to assure continued compliance with these rules and regulations, including inspection of grease trap pumping records. 
B.  Individual users may request a resample of their wastewater upon payment of the fee established in Exhibit A of this chapter. [8] The individual user may have one-half (1/2) of the resample tested by a city-approved lab and present the resulting data to the city for its review. The user shall be responsible for all costs associated with the resampling and testing, and reporting shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Testing shall be performed in accordance with EPA 40 CFR 136 and/or the latest approved edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
(2)  The resampling shall follow procedures described by the division. 
C.  Recovery of resampling costs performed by the city at the request of the user shall be reimbursed in accordance with the fees as shown in Exhibit A.* 
(Ord. #1997-3,  76; Ord. #2003-19,  1; Ord. #2009-41,  1) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 

22-10.8 - Assessment of the surcharge. 
A.  The city will assess the surcharge on the users found to be discharging wastewater above the base surcharge parameters. 
B.  Calculation of surcharge will be made in accordance with Exhibit A* of this section. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  77) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-10.9 - Surcharge billing. 
    The city shall include the surcharge on the user's monthly utility bill. It shall be identified as a separate surcharge fee to the user. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  78; Ord. #2003-25,  23) 
22-10.10 - Discharge credits. 
    No credits shall be given for wastewater discharged at a concentration less than the base domestic concentration. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  79) 
22-10.11 - Violations. 
    Violations against these rules and regulations include: 
A.  Disregard of notification(s) issued by the city to install proper sampling equipment, sampling port or other items requested by the city. 
B.  Upon being shown proper identification, refusing to allow city personnel on user's property for the purpose of user category verification, locating a sampling port, monitoring, estimating water usage or administration. 
C.  Removing, damaging, relocating or tampering with sampling and monitoring equipment. 
D.  Improperly maintaining a grease trap. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  80; Ord. #2003-25,  24) 
22-11 - GREASE INTERCEPTOR FACILITIES. 

22-11.1 - Description. 
    The purpose of an interior or exterior grease interceptor is to remove grease or oil from sewage prior to discharge to the public sanitary sewer. These interceptors serve as small flotation chambers where grease rises to the water surface and is retained, while the clearer water underneath is discharged. The use of the word interceptor is interchangeable with the word trap. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  81) 
22-11.2 - Regulatory guideline. 
    No water or waste containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees (32) and one hundred fifty degrees (150) Fahrenheit shall be discharged into any public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  82) 
22-11.3 - Special requirements. 
    The size and type of grease interceptor shall be subject to the approval of the city's building inspection division. The grease interceptor shall be installed in a line separate from other sanitary plumbing facilities. In general, all grease interceptors shall be designed for exterior installation, of capacity sufficient to service those grease generating fixtures connected thereto. Wastes other than those requiring separation shall not be discharged into the grease interceptor. Grease traps shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner that will permit easy access and maintenance by the user and inspection by the city. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  83) 
22-11.4 - Grease interceptor standards. 
    The minimum requirements for interceptor sizing, construction, materials and other features shall be those required by the Unified Plumbing Code (UPC), latest edition and any modifications, revisions or amendments made by the city's building inspection division. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  84) 
22-11.5 - Pre-existing grease interceptors. 
    Grease interceptors existing upon the adoption of this chapter shall not be exempt from the provisions in this section. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  85) 
22-11.6 - Maintenance. 
    Grease traps shall be cleaned at or before the receptacle reaches seventy-five percent (75%) of its design capacity. The operator of a grease trap shall maintain a log book of all maintenance activities and evidence of grease disposal in accordance with city, state and federal regulations. Grease traps shall be subject to unannounced inspection by the city's industrial pretreatment section at any time during their operation. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  86) 
22-11.7 - Grease interceptor requirements. 
A.  All restaurants, cafeterias, institutional kitchens, and other installations having facilities for the preparation and serving of food in quantity, laundromats, car washes, gas stations, auto machinery garages and car washes, and art shops or art galleries where the potential for discharge of grease, oils and waxes into the sanitary sewer system exists, whose location is within the city's sanitary sewer service area shall be required to install a grease interceptor. 
B.  Any facility as listed above, that is currently operating without the required grease interceptor, even though there may have been no history of blockages caused at or downstream from their location, shall be required to install a grease interceptor. 
C.  Customer shall submit plans or technical drawings to install a grease trap as stipulated in this section, within three (3) months after receiving notice of noncompliance. 
D.  Customer shall then have up to six (6) additional months to install the grease interceptor, upon approval of the drawings by the city's building inspection division. 
E.  An application for a new water or sewer service connection may be denied pending installation of a grease interceptor. 
F.  Any commercial or industrial facility, currently on an on-site sewer system and making an application to connect to the public sanitary sewer, shall install or show proof of installation of a grease interceptor, according to the parameters of this section, prior to approval of the application. 
G.  Septic tank waste from any commercial or industrial user within the public sewer service area who desires to dispose of such waste via the city's septage receiving station, shall, prior to approval of such an application, install a grease interceptor in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
H.  When any commercial or industrial facility that is found to have grease traps which are inadequate to meet the requirements of this section, and is connected to the public sanitary sewer system, and/or is in the process of changing owners, lessees or renters, the fee simple owner shall be required to update the system in compliance with these rules and regulations before the new owner or operator will be allowed to commence discharge. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  87) 
22-12 - PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW. 

22-12.1 - Administrative enforcement, review and penalties. 
A.  The division may take any or all of the following actions (division action) with respect to any violation of this chapter or order issued hereunder, or of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or of any permit condition or denial, or of any other local, state or federal law or regulation affecting discharge: 
(1)  Deny a permit not in compliance with subsection 22-9.4 application. 
(2)  Issue an emergency cease and desist order for the suspension of any activity by the user, whenever, in the opinion of the director, such emergency suspension is reasonably necessary to stop an actual or to prevent a threatened discharge which may potentially create an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or may potentially interfere with the operation of the POTW or with the city's potential options for the beneficial reuse, marketing, reclamation or disposal of the waste treatment by-products. 
(a)  The director shall have hand-delivered or shall send the notice of emergency suspension by certified mail to the user and/or the owner at the address set forth on the permit application. 
(b)  The notice of emergency suspension shall set forth the nature of the emergency, the reasons for the emergency suspension, and a request that the user and/or owner show cause why the emergency suspension should not remain in effect. 
(c)  Any user notified of an emergency suspension of its wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge to the POTW. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply with the suspension order, the division will take such steps as deemed reasonable, including but not limited to immediate severance or blockage of the sewer connection. 
(3)  Issue an administrative compliance order setting forth the terms and conditions of any action reasonably required by the division for the user's continued discharge, including permit modification; 
(4)  Suspend the user's discharge permit; 
(5)  Terminate the user's discharge permit; 
(6)  Modify the user's discharge permit; 
(7)  Terminate the user's service; 
(8)  Impose fines on the user; and/or 
(9)  Seek criminal penalties and/or imprisonment. 
B.  Before initiating any division action, except for those division actions set forth in subsection 22-12.1A(1) or (7), the division shall afford the user and/or owner the following rights to pre-action administrative review: 
(1)  The division shall issue written notice of the proposed action or permit application denial, and shall have hand-delivered or shall send the notice by certified mail to the user and/or the owner at the address set forth on the permit application. If the notice is sent by regular mail, it shall be deemed to be served three (3) days after being placed in the mail to the address shown on the user's application. Whether or not the user and/or owner appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. 
(2)  The notice of proposed action shall set forth the proposed division action, the reasons for the proposed action, and a request that the user and/or owner show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(3)  The user and/or owner wishing to participate in the pre-action administrative review shall file with the director a written response to the notice of proposed action within ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of proposed action. The response shall include the facts supporting the user and/or owner's position that the proposed action should not be taken, and shall also include any alternatives to the division's proposed action. 
(4)  The owner and/or user may request a hearing on the proposed action by filing a written request with the department within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of the notice of proposed action. If a hearing is requested, it shall be set within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request, and notice of the hearing shall be delivered to the user and/or owner at least twenty (20) days before such hearing. If the notice is sent by regular mail, it shall be deemed to be served three (3) days after being placed in the mail to the address shown on the user's application. 
(5)  If the owner/user does not timely request a hearing, the department shall make his/her determination based solely on the written petition. 
(6)  The user and/or owner shall bear the burden of proving by the preponderance of the evidence any ruling which it wants the department to issue. 
(7)  If a hearing is timely requested, the department shall conduct the hearing, or may appoint a hearing officer to make recommendations to the department upon which the department's written order will be based. 
(8)  The department shall issue a written order within thirty (30) days of the hearing, or within thirty (30) days of the written response if no hearing is requested, indicating the action which will be taken. The department's written order shall be considered final agency action, and shall remain in effect during any appellate review process, unless otherwise ordered by the reviewing court. The department may assess the costs of such hearing process if the user and/or owner is not successful. Any fine, or portion thereof, which is not sustained by the department shall be refunded to the user and/or owner within thirty (30) days of the department's order, together with interest at the legal rate. 
(9)  The division action sought to be reviewed shall remain in effect during the pendency of the hearing, and during any appellate review process, unless otherwise ordered by the reviewing court. 
C.  An owner and/or user may request administrative review of any emergency suspension order through the following procedures: 
(1)  The user and/or owner wishing to seek administrative review shall file with the department a written response to the notice of emergency suspension within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice of emergency suspension. The response shall include the facts supporting the user and/or owner's position that the emergency suspension should not remain in effect, and shall also include all plans to rectify the emergency. 
(2)  The owner and/or user may request a hearing on the proposed action by filing a written request with the department within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice of proposed action. If a hearing is requested, it shall be set within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request, and notice of the hearing shall be delivered to the user and/or owner at least three (3) days before such hearing. If the notice is sent by regular mail, it shall be deemed to be served three (3) days after being placed in the mail to the address shown on the user's application. 
(3)  If the owner/user does not timely request a hearing, the department shall make its determination based solely on the written response. If no written response is filed, the user and/or owner shall be deemed to have abandoned all rights to administrative review, and the emergency suspension shall become permanent. 
(4)  The user and/or owner shall bear the burden of proving by the preponderance of the evidence that the emergency suspension should not remain in effect. 
(5)  If a hearing is timely requested, the department shall conduct the hearing, or may appoint a hearing officer to make recommendations to the department upon which the department's written order will be based. 
(6)  The department shall issue a written order within ten (10) days of the hearing, or within ten (10) days of the written response if no hearing is requested, indicating the action which will be taken. The department's written order shall be considered final agency action, and shall remain in effect during any appellate review process, unless otherwise ordered by the reviewing court. The department may assess the costs of such hearing process if the user is not successful. 
(7)  The emergency suspension order shall remain in effect during the pendency of the hearing, and during any appellate review process, unless otherwise ordered by the reviewing court. 
D.  A user and/or owner may seek review by the department of any condition or term of a permit, modification of a permit, refusal to issue a permit or to modify a permit, or order issued with respect to a permit, or of any fine assessed by the director, through the following administrative procedure: 
(1)  The user and/or owner shall file a petition for review with the department within thirty (30) calendar days of the action sought to be reviewed. 
(2)  The petition shall contain a description of any division action being appealed, the facts supporting the appeal, and the proposed outcome. 
(3)  If the petition seeks review of any fine, evidence of full payment of the fine shall accompany the petition for review. 
(4)  The owner and/or user may request a hearing on the proposed action by filing a written request with the department within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of the notice of proposed action. If a hearing is requested, it shall be set within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request, and notice of the hearing shall be delivered to the user and/or owner at least twenty (20) days before such hearing. If the notice is sent by regular mail, it shall be deemed to be served three (3) days after being placed in the mail to the address shown on the user's application. 
(5)  If the owner/user does not timely request a hearing, the department shall make his/her determination based solely on the written petition. 
(6)  The user and/or owner shall bear the burden of proving by the preponderance of the evidence any ruling which it wants the department to issue. 
(7)  If a hearing is timely requested, the department shall conduct the hearing, or may appoint a hearing officer to make recommendations to the department upon which the department's written order will be based. 
(8)  The department shall issue a written order within thirty (30) days of the hearing, or within thirty (30) days of the written response if no hearing is requested, indicating the action which will be taken. The department's written order shall be considered final agency action, and shall remain in effect during any appellate review process, unless otherwise ordered by the reviewing court. The department may assess the costs of such hearing process if the user and/or owner is not successful. Any fine, or portion thereof, which is not sustained by the department shall be refunded to the user and/or owner within thirty (30) days of the department's order, together with interest at the legal rate. 
(9)  The division action sought to be reviewed shall remain in effect during the pendency of the hearing, and during any appellate review process, unless otherwise ordered by the reviewing court. 
E.  This section shall not apply to disputes or appeals regarding utility billing or payment arrangements which shall comply with subsection 15-1.8 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  88; Ord. #2003-25,  25) 
22-12.2 - Judicial enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or orders issued hereunder, the division shall seek injunctive relief to the extent allowed by law. 
B.  Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to enforcement pursuant to Section 3-17-1C(3) NMSA (1991 Cum. Supp.) and as otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  89) 
22-12.3 - Costs of administrative procedures. 
A.  The costs of transcribing any hearing, the charges of any hearing officer, the costs of any copying or clerical work required for the hearing, filing fees in an amount equal to that currently in effect in state courts, and the actual cost of city staff time required to attend the hearing or perform any additional work in connection with the hearing may be assessed against any person unsuccessful in a request for administrative review. 
B.  The division shall adopt a schedule of charges and make same available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  90) 
22-12.4 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidation shall be deemed to apply solely to those specific provisions and the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  91) 
22-12.5 - Prohibited disposal of impermissible waste. 
    Disposal of impermissible waste from a commercial or industrial facility into the city's septage receiving station or at any manhole or other part of the public sanitary sewer shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The division shall have the option to suspend or to terminate the permit for violation of this section, pursuant to Section 22-10 of this chapter. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  92) 
22-12.6 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of the Wastewater Utility Ordinance is March 1, 1997. 
(Ord. #1997-3,  93) 
22-13 - TREATED EFFLUENT MANAGEMENT. 

22-13.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Treated Effluent Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2003-19,  3) 
22-13.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish treated effluent as a water resource owned by the city of Santa Fe, to promote and regulate the use of treated effluent and to establish compensation for its use commensurate with its value as a limited natural resource and as an essential element in the management of the total water resources of the city of Santa Fe and to define conditions which shall apply to any agreements the city may enter for the use of treated effluent. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  4) 
22-13.3 - Declaration of policy. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds and determines that treated effluent is a water resource owned by the city and, as such, is an essential element in the long-term integrated management of the community's total water supply. Because the potential demand for treated effluent may exceed the supply, the sale and lease of treated effluent is established as one (1) method for allocation among competing users. In entering sales and leases, the city shall continue to assess the value of such water not only on the basis of competing purchasers but also in light of the changing demands upon the city's entire water resources. It is the intent of the city to provide treated effluent primarily for use within the service area of its water and wastewater utilities. The limited supply of treated effluent shall be prioritized to augment the city's ground and surface water resources and to provide suitable nonpotable water to offset demands on the city's potable water resources. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  5) 
22-13.4 - Applicability. 
    This section shall apply as of November 1, 1999, to all users of treated effluent. Provisions of this section shall be incorporated by reference in all treated effluent delivery agreements which the city adopts after November 1, 1999. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  6) 
22-13.5 - Rate established. 
    The rate for treated effluent shall be established in Exhibit A.* The rate shall be reviewed periodically and revised as necessary. The established rate shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the governing body shall adopt an amended rate. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  7) 
Editor's note- *Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
22-13.6 - Effluent use agreements required. 
    Any use of treated effluent shall be authorized through an agreement adopted by the governing body, such agreement shall be in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  8) 
22-13.7 - Bulk sale of treated effluent. 
    The city shall be authorized to dispense nonpotable treated effluent for bulk use provided that: 
A.  The term of the effluent use is less than twelve (12) months. 
B.  The city maintains a tracking log system which includes name of user, location of use, volume purchased, and intended use. 
C.  The user signs an agreement regarding the terms, conditions, guidelines, and requirements for use in this section. 
D.  The user signs a release of liability for the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  9) 
22-13.8 - Use of treated effluent. 
    Commercial, industrial, recreational and agricultural uses are permitted provided that they comply with the state of New Mexico environment department policy for the use of domestic wastewater effluent for irrigation, December 1985, as amended. The applicant shall have the responsibility for demonstrating that public health and safety will not be endangered and shall comply with all city and state regulations, guidelines and requirements for use. Failure to follow the guidelines and requirements for use shall be cause to discontinue service or sale of bulk treated effluent. These provisions shall apply to all users of effluent. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  10) 
22-13.9 - Contents of effluent use agreements. 
    A treated effluent use agreement authorized by the governing body subsequent to November 1, 1999, shall contain: 
A.  A maximum term not to exceed four (4) years; 
B.  Options to renew at the sole discretion of the city; 
C.  Provisions for billing and payment and the imposition of penalties for delayed payment; 
D.  A release of liability for the city of Santa Fe; 
E.  Requirement to obtain a ground water discharge permit from the New Mexico environment department; and 
F.  Provisions for the financing of required physical improvements to the effluent delivery system that are consistent with water utility service extensions. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  11) 
22-13.10 - Applicability of emergency water restrictions. 
    The city shall reserve the right to restrict or suspend treated effluent water delivery to all users in the event of a declared water emergency. The water emergency may include but not be limited to an interruption of the fresh water delivery system, drought conditions or a significant mechanical failure within the wastewater treatment or effluent delivery system. The water quality shall meet all applicable state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  12) 
22-13.11 - Use of funds. 
    Funds derived from the use of treated effluent shall accrue to the wastewater utility and shall be used for capital improvements associated with: 
A.  The use of treated effluent; 
B.  Operation and maintenance costs associated with the treated effluent delivery system; and 
C.  Other physical improvements or studies associated with wastewater enhancement. 
(Ord. #2003-19,  13) 
EXHIBIT A 
to 
Chapter XXII 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
SANITARY SEWER RATE, FEE 
AND PENALTY SCHEDULE 
Adopted: February 12, 1997 (Ordinance 1997-3) 
Amended: June 25, 1997 (Ordinance 1997-16) 
Amended: July 25, 2001 (Ordinance 2001-22) 
Amended: June 25, 2003 (Ordinance 2003-19) 
Amended: July 9, 2003 (Ordinance 2003-25) 
Amended: July 30, 2003 (Ordinance 2003-26) 
Amended: April 12, 2006 (Ordinance 2006-15) 
Amended: May 30, 2007 (Ordinance 2007-18) 
Amended: October 29, 2007 (Ordinance 2007-40) 
Amended: February 27, 2008 (Ordinance 2008-14) 
Amended: April 29, 2009 (Ordinance 2009-14) 
Amended: October 14, 2009 (Ordinance 2009-41) 
Amended: June 8, 2011 (Ordinance 2011-22) 
Amended: March 28, 2012 (Ordinance 2012-17) 
Amended: November 12, 2014 (Ordinance 2014-34) 
Editor's note- 
;adv=14;This Exhibit A replaces in its entirety the Exhibit A adopted in Ordinance 1997-3. 
EXHIBIT A 
1. Introduction. 
    The intent of this schedule is to consolidate in one document all information regarding sanitary sewer rates, fees and penalties. In addition when applicable, formulas and procedures used to arrive at the different dollar figures have been shown in detail. 
    Currently, the sewer rates, fees and penalties are scattered throughout Chapter 22 of the Code. This has in many instances caused confusion to those unfamiliar with the legal language and format of the Code. 
    This document has been organized to present the different rates, fees and penalties, along with formulas and procedures used to arrive at them, in a more user-friendly fashion. The different rates, fees and penalties are presented in the same order as they appear in the Code. 
2. Noncompliance with Notice to Connect to Sewer (Subsection 22-3.5). 
    2.1. The amount expended by the city shall bear the interest rate of six percent per year from the completion of the work until paid. 
3. Septage (Septic Tank Waste) Discharge Fee. 
    Septage regulations adopted by the council and made effective September 14, 1992, provide for the discharge of septage at the city-designated facility to be subject to a user fee as described and amended below: 
    3.1. Loads up to two thousand gallons, shall be charged forty-one dollars and five cents ($41.05) per load. 
    3.2. Loads larger than two thousand gallons shall pay an additional forty-one dollars and five cents ($41.05) for every incremental load of two thousand gallons or a fraction thereof in excess of the first two thousand gallons. 
    3.3. After-hours emergency discharges shall be subject to a fee of one hundred ten dollars and eighty-two cents ($110.82) per load up to two thousand gallons. 
    3.4. After-hours emergency discharges of loads larger than two thousand gallons shall be assessed one hundred ten dollars and eighty-two cents ($110.82) plus forty-one dollars and five cents ($41.05) for every incremental load of two thousand gallons or a fraction thereof in excess of two thousand gallons. 
    3.5. In accordance with the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act, Section 7-9-4.1 NMSA 1978, and effective July 1, 1996, a surcharge of up to 5.26 percent shall be imposed on each billing rendered in accordance with this section. 
4. Penalty for Violation of this Chapter. 
    4.1. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be sentenced as provided by subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. Fines shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation. Each violation shall be a separate distinct offense. 
5. Private Sewer Construction Permit Fee. 
    5.1. Fees for private sewer construction permits shall be assessed in the same manner as those fees established for sanitary sewer service connections. 
6. Construction Inspection Fee. 
    6.1. For each inspection made by the land use department staff, the city shall assess a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) per service connection. All subsequent reinspections due to unacceptable construction or noncompliance with the City Code or city regulations and standards, the city shall assess an additional inspection fee as described above. 
7. Wastewater Utility Expansion Charge (UEC). 
    7.1. Except as set forth in Section 7.3, the wastewater utility expansion charge (UEC) applies to customers within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and to customers in those areas outside the corporate limits to which wastewater service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe as follows: 
    7.1.1. New customers connecting to the city's wastewater system; and 
    7.1.2. Existing customers if there is an increase in the number of dwelling units or an increase in the size of the nonresidential water meter; however, the charge shall reflect only the increase in the number of dwelling units or the increase in the size of the meter. 
    7.2. Waiver of UEC fees shall comply with the following provisions: 
    7.2.1. The UEC shall be waived for the following: 
A.  Santa Fe Homes Program for-sale or for-rent units as defined in Section 26-1 SFCC 1987; 
B.  Housing opportunity program home or housing opportunity program rental unit subject to a valid housing opportunity program agreement; 
C.  A low priced dwelling unit as defined in Section 26-2 SFCC 1987; 
D.  A qualifying project within the Midtown LINC Overlay District as defined in Subsection 14-5.5(D)(4)(b) SFCC 1987. 
    7.2.2 The UEC may be waived at the discretion of the governing body for the following: 
A.  A qualifying economic development project as defined in Subsection 11-11.4 SFCC 1987. 
    7.2.3. Application for waivers of the UEC shall be made at the time of application for a building permit. Applications shall be reviewed by the office of affordable housing. 
    7.3. The UEC shall be as follows: 
    7.3.1. Single-Family Detached Dwelling Unit or Accessory Dwelling Unit 
    As defined in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 
(Heated Living Area) Charge per unit 0 - 1,500 Sq. Ft. $499 1,501 - 2,000 Sq. Ft. $735 2,001 - 2,500 Sq. Ft. $911 2,501 - 3,000 Sq. Ft. $1,052 3,001 - 3,500 Sq. Ft. $1,169 3,501 - 4,000 Sq. Ft. $1,269 4,001 - 4,500 Sq. Ft. $1,357 4,501 or more Sq. Ft. $1,435  
    7.3.2. Multi-Family Dwelling Unit - $561 per unit. 
    Includes apartment, condominium, single family attached and residential studio units. 
    7.3.3. Mobile Home Park Pad - $902 per unit. 
    7.3.4. Nonresidential (meter size) - Charge per meter. 
?"  3/4" $876 1" $2,190 11/2" $4,380 2" $7,008 3" $14,016 4" $21,900 6" $43,800 8" $70,080 10" $127,020  
    7.3.5. Any separate water meter installed for irrigation purposes only shall not be included in the calculation of the charge. 
    7.3.6. In the event that the development does not have a water meter, or the wastewater division director or developer believes the size of the water meter does not accurately reflect wastewater generation, the developer may submit or the director may require the submission of a study, prepared by a professional engineer, to determine the charge listed in the above table for the water meter that most closely matches the cost of capital facilities to treat the biochemical oxygen demand that will be generated by the proposed development. 
    7.4. The UEC shall be due prior to issuance of a building permit if the property is located in the city limits and prior to obtaining a permit to connect to the sewer if the property is located outside the city limits. 
    7.5. Payments of wastewater utility expansion charges shall be deposited in an account separate from other funds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39  10; Ord. # 2018-4 ,  11) 
8. Sewer Service Charges. 
A.  Connected to City Sewer. 
1.  Single Family Residential Sewer Service Fees and Usage Fees. 
Single family residential sewer service fees and usage fees shall apply if a sewer customer is served by city water and meets the single family service classification for water as set forth in Chapter 25 SFCC 1987. If not served by city water, single family residential sewer service fees and usage fees shall apply where the sewer connection serves only one unit* for normal domestic sewage. 
a.  In city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.58 per 1,000 
gallons of water** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $12.88/unit*  
b.  Inside presumptive city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.84 per 1,000 
gallons of water** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $13.82/unit*  
c.  In city limits and presumptive city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2015 Connected to city water $6.22/unit* $3.82 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2015 Not connected to city water $6.22/unit* $13.75/unit* January 1, 2016 Connected to city water $6.52/unit* $4.01 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2016 Not connected to city water $6.52/unit* $14.43/unit* January 1, 2017 Connected to city water $6.84/unit* $4.21 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2017 Not connected to city water $6.84/unit* $15.16/unit* January 1, 2018 Connected to city water $7.18/unit* $4.42 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2018 Not connected to city water $7.18/unit* $15.90/unit* January 1, 2019 Connected to city water $7.53/unit* $4.64 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2019 Not connected to city water $7.53/unit* $16.70/unit*  
d.  Outside presumptive city limits: 
Customer Wholesale Rate for Santa Fe County Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2014 Connected to county water $4.29/unit* $3.95 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2014 Not connected to county water $4.29/unit* $14.22/unit* January 1, 2015 Connected to county water $4.48/unit* $3.95 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2015 Not connected to county water $4.48/unit* $14.22/unit* January 1, 2016 Connected to county water $4.70/unit* $4.14 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2016 Not connected to county water $4.70/unit* $14.92/unit* January 1, 2017 Connected to county water $4.93/unit* $4.34 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2017 Not connected to county water $4.93/unit* $15.62/unit* January 1, 2018 Connected to county water $5.17/unit* $4.55 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2018 Not connected to county water $5.17/unit* $16.39/unit* January 1, 2019 Connected to county water $5.42/unit* $4.77 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2019 Not connected to county water $5.42/unit* $17.17/unit*  
2.  Multi-Family Residential Sewer Service: 
The following sewer service fees and usage fees shall apply if a sewer customer is served by city water and meets the multi-family residential service classification for water as set forth in Chapter 25 SFCC 1987. If not served by city water, multi-family residential sewer service fees and usage fees shall apply where the sewer connection serves more than one unit* for normal domestic sewage. 
a.  In city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.58 per 1,000 
gallons of water** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $12.88/unit*  
b.  Inside presumptive city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.84 per 1,000 
gallons of water** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $13.82/unit*  
c.  In city limits and presumptive city limits: 
Customer Wholesale Rate for Santa Fe County Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2015 Connected to city water $6.22/unit* $3.82 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2015 Not connected to city water $6.22/unit* $13.75/unit* January 1, 2016 Connected to city water $6.52/unit* $4.01 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2016 Not connected to city water $6.52/unit* $14.43/unit* January 1, 2017 Connected to city water $6.84/unit* $4.21 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2017 Not connected to city water $6.84/unit* $15.16/unit* January 1, 2018 Connected to city water $7.18/unit* $4.42 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2018 Not connected to city water $7.18/unit* $15.90/unit* January 1, 2019 Connected to city water $7.53/unit* $4.64 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2019 Not connected to city water $7.53/unit* $16.70/unit*  
d.  Outside presumptive city limits: 
Customer Wholesale Rate for Santa Fe County Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2014 Connected to county water $4.29/unit* $3.95 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2014 Not connected to county water $4.29/unit* $14.22/unit* January 1, 2015 Connected to county water $4.48/unit* $3.95 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2015 Not connected to county water $4.48/unit* $14.22/unit* January 1, 2016 Connected to county water $4.70/unit* $4.14 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2016 Not connected to county water $4.70/unit* $14.92/unit* January 1, 2017 Connected to county water $4.93/unit* $4.34 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2017 Not connected to county water $4.93/unit* $15.62/unit* January 1, 2018 Connected to county water $5.17/unit* $4.55 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2018 Not connected to county water $5.17/unit* $16.39/unit* January 1, 2019 Connected to county water $5.42/unit* $4.77 per 1,000 
gallons of water** January 1, 2019 Not connected to county water $5.42/unit* $17.17/unit*  
3.  Commercial Sewer Service: 
The following sewer service fees and usage fees shall apply where the water meter(s) serves a use not classified as single family residential or multi-family residential sewer service set forth above or where service is provided for a combination of residential and commercial services. 
a.  In city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.58 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $12.88/unit*  
b.  Inside presumptive city limits: 
Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.84 per 1,000 
gallons gallons of water*** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $13.82/unit*  
c.  In city limits and presumptive city limits: 
Customer Wholesale Rate for Santa Fe County Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2010 Connected to city water $5.85/unit* $3.58 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** July 1, 2012 Not connected to city water $5.85/unit* $12.88/unit* January 1, 2015 Connected to city water $6.22/unit* $3.82 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2015 Not connected to city water $6.22/unit* $13.75/unit* January 1, 2016 Connected to city water $6.52/unit* $4.01 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2016 Not connected to city water $6.52/unit* $14.43/unit* January 1, 2017 Connected to city water $6.84/unit* $4.21 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2017 Not connected to city water $6.84/unit* $15.16/unit* January 1, 2018 Connected to city water $7.18/unit* $4.42 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2018 Not connected to city water $7.18/unit* $15.90/unit* January 1, 2019 Connected to city water $7.53/unit* $4.64 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2019 Not connected to city water $7.53/unit* $16.70/unit*  
d.  Outside presumptive city limits: 
Customer Wholesale Rate for Santa Fe County Effective Date Monthly Service Fee Monthly Usage Fee January 1, 2014 Connected to county water $4.29/unit* $3.95 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2014 Not connected to county water $4.29/unit* $14.22/unit* January 1, 2015 Connected to county water $4.48/unit* $3.95 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2015 Not connected to county water $4.48/unit* $14.22/unit* January 1, 2016 Connected to county water $4.70/unit* $4.14 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2016 Not connected to county water $4.70/unit* $14.92/unit* January 1, 2017 Connected to county water $4.93/unit* $4.34 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2017 Not connected to county water $4.93/unit* $15.62/unit* January 1, 2018 Connected to county water $5.17/unit* $4.55 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2018 Not connected to county water $5.17/unit* $16.39/unit* January 1, 2019 Connected to county water $5.42/unit* $4.77 per 1,000 
gallons of water*** January 1, 2019 Not connected to county water $5.42/unit* $17.17/unit*  
4.  Exceptions to Commercial Sewer Service. 
Mobile home parks; commercial greenhouses; churches; properties owned by the U.S. government, the State of New Mexico, the City of Santa Fe, the county of Santa Fe and the Santa Fe board of education; and state accredited private elementary and secondary schools and colleges shall not be considered commercial sewer services and shall be considered residential sewer service. 
B.  Not Connected to City Sewer. 
1.  Accessible to city sewer system 
(as defined in subsection 22-2.1 SFCC 1987) 
Effective Date Cost per unit*/lot January 1, 2010 $5.85 per unit* or if no unit* $5.85 per lot January 1, 2015 $6.22 per unit* or if no unit* $5.85 per lot January 1, 2016 $6.52 per unit* or if no unit* $5.85 per lot January 1, 2017 $6.84 per unit* or if no unit* $5.85 per lot January 1, 2018 $7.18 per unit* or if no unit* $5.85 per lot January 1, 2019 $7.53 per unit* or if no unit* $5.85 per lot  
2.  Not accessible to city sewer system No charge. 
C.  Taxes. 
Billings under this schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the city and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
Notes: 
*  Unit means: 
  For residential customers: one room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease and physically separated from any other rooms or residential units that may be in the same structure and containing independent plumbing facilities. A residential unit may include, but is not limited to, a single family house, an apartment unit, condominium unit, mobile home, or a guest house. 
  For commercial customers: an area constituting a separate, independent enterprise establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease and physically separated from any other commercial units that may be in the same structure and containing independent plumbing facilities. 
  For both residential and commercial purposes, the term unit does not include a motel or hotel unit or similar transient lodging or rest homes, nursing homes or similar institutional facilities. 
**  Shown on the water meter readings averaged for the months of December, January, and February of the preceding year. If any of those three (3) months were a zero reading, the water consumption for that month will not be used in the average. For example, if one month has a zero read then the two months consumption will be added and then divided by two. In the case where three zero reads were recorded for December, January, and February, then the previous year water usage will be used. In the event that the previous year also had three zero reads, then the wastewater management division director will estimate the average based on water usage history for that particular customer's residence or business. If any of those three months were a reading less than 1,000 gallons, the water consumption for that month shall be assumed to be 1,000. For example: 
December 5,000g water consumption January 0g water consumption, so 0 gallons assumed February 900g water consumption, so 1,000 gallons assumed Total (for the 3 months) 6,000 gallons water consumption Average (Divide by two since one zero read) 3,000 gallons  
***  Shown on the water meter reading for that utility billing cycle. 
9. Reserved.* 
Editor's note- Section 9 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25  26. 
10. Reserved.* 
Editor's note- Section 10 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25  26. 
11. Reserved.* 
Editor's note- Section 11 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25  26. 
12. Extra-Strength Surcharge. See the definition of COD in subsection 22-2.1 and Section 22-10 for information related to the extra-strength surcharge. 
12.1. The Surcharge fee shall be equal to: 
0.9 x (C-D) x F x cf x L, for users whose discharge has been tested, and 
0.9 x (M-D) x F x cf x L, for users whose discharge has not been tested. 
Where: 
C = COD concentration in the user's discharge stream in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
D = Average domestic sewage COD concentration, established at 550 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
F = Average water use in million gallons per month as shown in the water division records. 
cf = 8.34. A factor to convert the units of milligrams to pounds per million gallons. 
L = The mass based cost of providing air to remove the COD in wastewater. The cost has been established at the following costs: 
Effective Date Cost per pound January 1, 2010 $0.51 January 1, 2015 $0.54 January 1, 2016 $0.56 January 1, 2017 $0.59 January 1, 2018 $0.62 January 1, 2019 $0.65  
M = Mean COD concentration in the user's sewage disposal as tested. 
0.9 = Represents ninety percent of the water used through a water meter as being discharged into the sanitary sewer. 
Or: 
Monthly water usage x 0.00337*L = Amount of monthly surcharge fee. 
12.2 The resampling fee shall be equal to: $75.00 and shall not be sampled more than once per calendar year. 
13. Treated Effluent Rates. 
    The rate for treated effluent shall be two dollars and five cents ($2.05) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of treated effluent or fifty percent (50%) of the rate for potable water as set forth in Chapter XXV SFCC 1987, whichever is more, plus administrative costs and applicable state taxes. However, contract users of treated effluent who enter a recreational access agreement with the city that allows for recreational access to their facilities for conduct of city parks or recreation division authorized programs may be granted a discount of no more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per parks or recreation division maximum planned or actual authorized use for programs that will be conducted at their facility at regular times and a credit of no more than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per parks or recreation maximum planned or actual authorized use for programs that will be conducted at regular intervals. The terms of such discounts or credits will be determined on a case by case basis, and included in any such recreational access agreement. Any discount or credit may only apply against total charges incurred during the same annual effluent delivery period as the authorized program and shall never result in the contractor being credited more than fifty percent (50%) of the total amount charged for treated effluent delivered during such period. 
(Ord. #1997-3, Ex. A; Ord. #1997-16, Ex. A; Ord. #2001-22, Ex. A; Ord. #2003-19,  14-18; Ord. #2003-25,  26; Ord. #2003-26,  2; Ord. #2006-15,  1; Ord. #2007-18,  1-4; Ord. #2007-40,  14; Ord. #2008-14,  1; Ord. #2009-14,  1; Ord. #2009-41,  1; Ord. #2011-22,  1; Ord. #2012-17; Ord. #2014-1,  2; Ord. #2014-34  1, 2) 
EXHIBIT B
to
Chapter XXII 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
SANITARY SEWER DESIGN CRITERIA 
EXHIBIT B 
INTRODUCTION. 
    This document presents the criteria, standards and regulations related to the design of public sanitary sewer systems for general development service. It does not cover the criteria necessary for design or major interceptor sewers, or treatment facilities. The material is directed to the competent design professional and is not intended to be a detailed design handbook. Criteria and standards presented are those determined to be the minimum acceptable values necessary to result in system designs having satisfactory functional characteristics, durability and operational suitability. It is expected that the designer will strive for the best design to suit the circumstances involved, and that designs will reflect sound professional judgment at all times. 
Section 1. GOVERNING REGULATIONS 
    Ordinances and policies related to the design and operation of sanitary sewer systems include the following: 
A.  LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES (Chapter XIV SFCC 1987) 
    This ordinance primarily requires that sewer service be available to proposed developments before issuance of building permits. There are no specific design criteria included in this chapter. 
B.  SEWER REGULATIONS (Chapter XXII SFCC 1987) 
    This chapter contains uniform requirements for the users of the city of Santa Fe wastewater collection and treatment system. 
C.  AREA-WIDE WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT FACILITIES PLAN 
    This plan, adopted by the city governing body and approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, shows the sanitary sewer system boundaries, expansion plans, future improvements and criteria for the design of the treatment plant. 
D.  SANITARY SEWER COLLECTION MASTER PLAN 
    Two phases of this plan have been developed by the city. 
Section 2. ENGINEERING DESIGN CRITERIA FOR GRAVITY SEWER LINES 
    Unless otherwise authorized by the city's Wastewater Management Division, for a specific project, specifications for pipe and other construction materials will be as required in the current New Mexico Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (Specifications). 
A.  DESIGN CAPACITY CRITERIA 
(1)  Off-site flows shall be determined by the Wastewater Management Division (WMD). 
(2)  In areas with a mix of residential, commercial, industrial, etc., roughly representative of the city as a whole, the population of the contributing area shall be determined and the design flows calculated as follows: 
Q a = Average Flow - 110 * Population/10 6 , in MGD 
Q p = Peak Flow - 2.5 * Q a (.9), in MGD 
Q d = Design Flow = 1.2 * Q p in MGD 
(for cfs multiply MGD by 1.547) 
(3)  Population loadings are assumed to be: 
2.5 persons for apartments, townhouses and mobile homes 
DU 
3.3 persons for R-1 single-family homes 
DU 
Where DU = Dwelling Unit 
(4)  In primarily nonresidential areas, design flows are determined by other methods as may be appropriate, upon approval by the WMD. 
(5)  Design shall be for full pipe flow at the design flow. 
(6)  Manning's Formula shall be used for determination of pipe flow velocities and capacities using a value for Manning's n = 0.013, except for PVC & HDPE pipes for which designer shall use 0.009. 
(a)  Peak velocity = Velocity at peak flow conditions 
(b)  Average velocity = Velocity at average flow conditions 
B.  MANHOLE CRITERIA 
(1)  Manholes must generally be located on the centerline of street right-of- way or of street width if the street is not concentric with the right-of-way. Manholes in curved streets may be located as much as 5' off from centerline of street or right-of-way; however, required clearances from other utilities must be maintained. The offset of such manholes is to be measured from center of manhole barrel to the centerline of the street or right-of-way. 
(2)  Standard minimum manhole depth is 6.0', measured from rim to invert. 
(3)  The required inside diameter for a manhole is determined as follows: 
(a)  Minimum inside diameter is 4 feet. 
(b)  A minimum 9" wide shelf must be provided on each side of each main line within the manhole. 
(c)  Where the main flow changes direction at a manhole, the manhole must be large enough so that the centerline radius of curvature of the flow invert will be larger than the pipe diameter. 
MINIMUM MANHOLE DIAMETERS REQUIRED FOR 
DIRECTION CHANGES 
Degrees of Direction Change Pipe 
IDO 5 45 50 75 80 85 90 
21" 4' 4' 4' 4' 4 4 4 4 24" 4' 4' 4' 4' 4' 4' 4' 6' 27" 4' 4' 4' 4' 4' 4' 6' 6' 30" 4' 4' 4' 4' 4' 6' 6' 6' 36" 6' 6' 6' 6' [-NOT PERMITTED-] 42" 6' 6' 6' [-NOT PERMITTED-]  
(4)  Flow shall not be permitted to change horizontal flow direction by more than 90 in a manhole. Under the following conditions, the maximum horizontal change in flow direction permitted shall be 50, although special design considerations will be made where the situation warrants. 
(a)  All lines larger than 36". 
(b)  Any continuous lines with a design flow greater than 3 MGD and a design velocity of 5 fps or greater. 
(c)  Any junction of two flows, each with design flow greater than 3 MGD, where one line has a design pipe velocity of 5 fps or greater. 
(5)  Invert elevations will be called out for each inlet and outlet at a manhole. 
(6)  Drops across manholes will be provided as follows: 
(a)  Where the main flow does not change direction at the manhole, the design will provide: 
(i)  A slope across the manhole at least equal to the average of the slopes of the incoming and outgoing lines. 
(ii)  The minimum drop will be 0.05 feet for lines 36 inches in diameter and smaller. 
(b)  Where the main flow changes direction at the manhole, the design will maintain the average of the slopes of the incoming and outgoing lines and compensate for the loss of velocity head caused by the turn. 
(i)  The slope component will be equal to the average of the slopes of the incoming and outgoing lines times the diameter of the manhole. 
(ii)  The velocity head component will be determined by the following formula: 
h b = K B (v) 2 / 2g 
where: 
h b = required drop to compensate for loss of velocity head (feet). 
K B = bend coefficient, use 0.4 for 90 turn, 0.32 for 45 turn and linear proportioning for other deflection angles (dimensionless). 
v = design velocity of incoming line based on design flow, ft/sec. 
g = 32 ft/sec 2 . 
(iii)  The total drop required through the manhole will be the sum of the slope component and velocity head component. 
(iv)  The minimum drop through a manhole will be 0.10 feet. 
(c)  Where flows converge at a manhole, the inverts should be designed to produce a smooth water surface at design flow with no backwater conditions in any of the incoming lines. Excessive drops which cause turbulence are to be avoided. 
(d)  The use of drop connections to manholes (drop manholes) will require WWMD approval and shall conform to Standard Details. 
(7)  The maximum distance between manholes allowed is: 
(a)  8"-21" mains - 450' 
(b)  24" & larger - 500' for average velocities 3 fps or less 
(c)  24" & larger - 800' maximum, for average velocities greater than 3 fps. 
C.  LINE CRITERIA 
(1)  Sanitary sewer materials must comply with the requirements set forth in the Standard Specifications shown on Standard Details. 
(2)  Minimum line size allowed: 8" inside diameter. 
(3)  Following are minimum slopes considered necessary in noncurvilinear lines to provide minimum allowable velocities. GREATER SLOPES THAN MINIMUM ARE DESIRABLE AND ARE TO BE PROVIDED WHERE POSSIBLE. Maximum slopes should never result in super critical flow. 
SEWER I.D. MINIMUM SLOPER (ft/ft) 8" 0.0060* 10" 0.0028 12" 0.0022 15" 0.0015 18" 0.0012 21" 0.0010 24" 0.0008 27" 0.00068 30" 0.00060 36" 0.00048  
* A minimum slope of 0.0040 ft/ft is acceptable for an 8" line if the design loading is at least 200 R-1 DU's or 275 R-T, R-2 or mobile home dwelling units. This slope is also acceptable when the line material is PVC. 
(4)  Sections of line that are flat relative to the upstream line shall be avoided. As much as possible, continuous flow velocity and capacity will be provided. The energy gradient should slope generally parallel to the slope of the invert with no abrupt changes nor slopes opposite to the direction of flow. 
(5)  Line depth should be sufficient to provide gravity service to property contiguous to the line. Generally, house services shall be a minimum of 4' below the top of curb at the property line as measured from the top of curb to the invert of the service line. 
(6)  The main lines are to be located within public right-of-way except as noted in subsection 7, following, and are to be aligned in accordance with the Primary Utility Locations, see Standard Drawings. Where the Primary Utility Locations do not apply, the following criteria shall apply: 
(a)  The New Mexico Environmental Department policy on the proximity of water and sewer lines: 
Whenever possible, it is desirable to lay parallel water and sewer lines at least 10 feet apart horizontally, and the water line should be a higher elevation than the sewer. If this is not possible, separate trenches will be required in all cases (this shall be effective even though one line has been installed prior to the other), and the water line shall be at least 2 feet above the sewer. When water and sewer lines cross each other, the water line shall be at least 3 feet above the sewer; otherwise the sewer shall be of ductile iron pipe. A preferred alternative is encasement in concrete as shown in the Standard Details for 10' on each side of the water line. If ductile iron pipe is used it must be run from manhole to manhole. 
(b)  Main lines must be located so that they can be maintained without disturbing any sidewalk, curb, gutter or any other utility. The required trench must be totally within the paved roadway. 
(c)  Written approval of the city's Wastewater Management Division (WMD) must be obtained for any deviations from the primary utility locations. 
(7)  Sanitary sewer lines may be located outside public right-of-way only under the following conditions: 
(a)  Prior written approval is given by the WMD director or his/her designee. 
(b)  The main line must be located as follows: 
(i)  In a paved, permanent access utility easement, or 
(ii)  In a utility easement within a planned green/open space with access from a street suitable for sewer line maintenance equipment. 
(iii)  If (1) and/or (2) above are impossible due to prior plating, the situation will be handled as a special case to be approved by the WWMD. 
(c)  In a permanent utility easement granted for exclusive use of water and sanitary sewer. It must be possible to excavate any buried sanitary sewer with 1:1 side slopes from the bottom of the pipe, without disturbing any sidewalk, curb and gutter, or any other utility. The required trench must be contained within the paved roadway and/or the exclusive easement. A minimum width easement of 20' is required for lines up to 10 feet deep. Lines deeper than 10 feet shall be provided with easements of a width in accordance to the following schedule: 
DEPTH (H) EASEMENT WIDTH (FT) 10-15 25 16-20 35 >25 100  
(d)  Compliance with the New Mexico Environmental Department policy on the proximity of water and sewer lines must be achieved. 
(e)  In private streets or rights of way, Primary Utility Locations shall apply. 
D.  CURVILINEAR SEWERS 
    Curvilinear sewers are permitted in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The pipe length to be used, deflection angle, and radius of curvature must be stated on the plans. 
(2)  The maximum design deflection angle shall be ? of pipe manufacturer's recommended maximum. 
(3)  The minimum radius of curvature is 300' based on 5.5 foot pipe lengths. If shorter lengths are available, small radii as appropriate shall be considered. 
(4)  The maximum distance between manholes shall be 400'. 
(5)  The slope of the curvilinear of the sewer must be at least 5% greater than the slope upstream straight line sewer. Additionally, the minimum slope criteria for curvilinear sewers is shown below: 
SEWER I.D. SLOPE 8" 0.0066 10" 0.0030 12" 0.0024 15" 0.0018  
(6)  Generally, concrete encasement according to the Specifications and Standards Details is recommended where necessary due to proximity of water lines. If ductile iron pipe is utilized in lieu of concrete encasement, it shall be run from manhole to manhole. 
(7)  Gravity Sewer - Minimum radius for Curvature for PVC SDR-35 pipe 
Pipe Diameter Laying Length Min. Radius
of Curvature Max. Offset
per Length 8" 13'-0' 300 ft. 3" 8" 20'-0" 300 ft. 8" 10" 13'-0" 375 ft. 21/2" 10" 20'-0" 375 ft. 61/2" 12" 13'-0" 450 ft. 2" 12" 20'-0" 450 ft. 6"  
Diameters greater than 12", shall be designed as approved by WWMD. 
E.  SERVICE CONNECTIONS (Private collection systems and individual service connections). 
(1)  A minimum four inch (4") service connections must be made to the main line except at the end of cul-de-sacs where connection to a manhole shall be permitted in the manner shown in the Standard Specifications and Standards Details. 
(2)  Six inch (6") service connections shall be permitted only where a six inch (6") tee in the main exists. 
(3)  Four inch (4") and six inch (6") mechanical taps are permitted to tappable ten inch (10") main lines. Mechanical taps are required where tees are not available in existing lines. Mechanical taps shall conform to the Standard Details. 
(4)  Six inch (6") service connections to eight inch (8") mains and all service connections eight inch (8") and larger shall be made by means of a manhole when there are no existing tees of the required size in the main. Insertion of a full joint of pipe containing a factory-made tee will be permitted, if practical, for purposes of connecting a six inch (6") service to an existing eight inch (8") main. Approved coupling devices shall be required. Service connections to a manhole are to be made with the invert of the service at the elevation of the top of the main line. No inside-manhole piping shall be permitted. 
(5)  Service connection shall not be made to sewer interceptors (lines twelve (12) inches in diameter or larger) or lines with peak flows greater than three (3) MGD, regardless of size. 
(6)  All service connections shall be made such that the service is perpendicular or radial to the sewer main. 
(7)  All service connections shall have a minimum slope of 2/4" per foot toward the main within the public right-of-way. 
Section 3. ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PRESSURE SEWERS 
A.  GENERAL CONDITIONS 
(1)  Systems referred to in these design standards entail high and low pressure sewer installations to serve public or privately financed developments. All pipes, fittings, pumps, pump controls, and other appurtenant components of pressure sanitary sewers shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in New Mexico, with experience in the design of pressure sanitary sewer systems. 
(2)  Pipe design, installation and testing shall be made in accordance with AWWA Standards applicable to water lines, applicable provisions of the Santa Fe City Code, and the New Mexico Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. 
(3)  Pressure sewer systems may only be used when, in the opinion of the WMD engineer, topographic or other conditions may not allow for the operation of conventional gravity flow sewers, or when installation of such sewers may disturb existing drainage ways and/or would increase the erosion potential in existing arroyos. 
(4)  Prior to its design, the concept of using a pressure system must be accepted in writing by the WMD engineer in the form of a sanitary sewer availability statement. For the WMD to make a determination, the proponent of a pressure sewer shall submit the relevant information regarding the site's topography. 
(5)  The WMD shall maintain and update, not less frequently than once every two years, all standard detail drawings to be used by engineers in the design of pressure systems. 
(6)  Design documents shall include all relevant system information as required the WMD for its review. 
B.  HIGH PRESSURE SEWERS 
(1)  These systems generally include a lift station(s), a pressurized discharge line (forcemain), an emergency power supply source, and all appurtenant controls and instrumentation, installed for sanitary sewage to be discharged into a gravity flow segment of the city's system. 
(2)  The design of lift stations, forcemains and controls shall follow the guidelines presented in the Manual of Practice (MOP) No. FD-4, Facilities Development, of the Water Environment Federation. 
(3)  Complete construction documents for this type of facility, shall include a design memorandum, specifications, and drawings for pumps, piping, instrumentation, alarms and telemetry. All parts shall be, in the opinion of the WMD, fully compatible with the city's existing system. 
C.  LOW PRESSURE SEWERS 
(1)  Low pressure sewers may constitute a very viable alternative to gravity flow collection lines. These systems will generally include individual on-site grinder pump stations discharging a finely ground slurry into small diameter, low pressure (60 psig or less) mains located within appropriate public utility easements or rights of way. Under certain conditions, it may also be desirable to use grinder pump stations which discharge into gravity flow sewer lines. 
(2)  Complete construction documents shall include the design memorandum, specifications and drawings for the entire system or network, from the grinder pump to the ultimate point of discharge into the gravity sewer. All parts shall be, in the opinion of the WMD, compatible with the city's existing system. 
(3)  Pump stations shall be designed as a package, complete with wet well, and appurtenant instrumentation and controls, fully compatible with the city's existing systems. Each station shall serve no more than one individual legal lot. 
(4)  Individual grinder pump stations for residential service shall be designed to perform their grinding and pumping functions using no more than one (1) horsepower. The electric power for the installation shall be derived from the same source that serves the building and not a separate one. A grinding pump station shall serve no more than one residential lot. 
(5)  Placement of the grinder pump station shall be outdoors, in a location of easy access for maintenance personnel. Wet well shall be provided with integral accessways. 
(6)  Low pressure collection system shall be designed as branched networks without loops, and as few as possible abrupt directional changes. 
(7)  Pipes and appurtenant fittings shall be designed to be installed and tested in accordance with AWWA Standards applicable to water systems. 
(8)  Design shall provide to protect the city system from potential odor problems associated with low pressure sewer discharges. 
D.  EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURER LIST 
(1)  The city shall maintain an up-to-date list of pre-qualified manufacturers for lift and grinder pump stations, as well as electrical and instrumentation equipment. 
(2)  This list shall be updated not less often than once every two years. Proposed revisions to the list shall be submitted by a professional engineer for review by the WMD. Proposals shall include the rationale for the recommended revision(s). 
(Ord. #1997-3, Ex. B) 
CHAPTER XXIII - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
23-1 - GENERAL REGULATIONS. 

23-1.1 - Paving and repairing of streets. 
    The streets of the city shall be paved, repaved or repaired under the direction of a city engineer and in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the city or a consulting engineer employed by the city, and of such material as the city may specify for that purpose. The expense of the paving, repaving or repair or as much as may seem just and proper to the governing body after hearing shall be charged against the owners of the property abutting on the street on that particular place where such paving, repaving or repairs are made or benefited thereby in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1953,  24-1; Code 1973,  30-1; SFCC 1981,  4-11-1) 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to maintain and improve streets and assess owners of abutting properties, Sec. 3-49-3 NMSA 1978; generally, Arts. 33, 34 and 49 of Ch. 3 NMSA 1978. 
23-1.2 - Vacation or partial vacation of plat; approval of governing body; duties of city clerk. 
    Short Title. This subsection shall be known as the "Vacation of Plat Ordinance." 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the vacation or partial vacation of plats when vacation and reversion of such affected land is based on proper dedication of the subject property to the city of Santa Fe for public purposes, there are reversionary rights in the grantor(s) and it is deemed in the public interest to do so. It is intended by this subsection that important factors to be considered in vacation or partial vacation of a plat shall first be whether the public right-of-way continues to be a necessary part of the city's utility easements which should not be disturbed, whether the public right-of-way is a necessary and integral part of the city's traffic and neighborhood scheme for travel, balanced against other interests such as whether the public right-of-way is no longer needed or used as a public right-of-way or has become a public nuisance and no other reasonable remedy is available to abate the nuisance. It shall also be a considered factor whether at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the grantors or their successors in interest approve of the vacation when the city believes it is in the city's best interests to vacate or partially vacate the plat. In no circumstance shall any property be landlocked as a result or interpretation of this subsection. 
B.  Definitions. 
(1)  Owners of the land means all of the owners of adjacent properties to the affected right-of-way, unless the governing body determines that there is good cause relating to the public welfare to vacate or partially vacate the plat with at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the owners complying with paragraph C(1)(a) herein below. A calculation of seventy-five percent (75%) of a total of owners of the affected adjacent right-of-way shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
(2)  Plat means the map, chart, survey, plan or replat certified by a licensed or registered surveyor which contains a description of subdivided land with ties to permanent monuments. In regard to vacation or partial vacation of a plat relating to a public right-of-way, a plat may not be vacated in whole or in part unless the grantor(s) dedicated the subject land for the right-of-way with reversionary rights to the grantor(s). Evidence of such reversionary rights must be clearly shown on the certified plat or in any deed of conveyance or incorporated in a properly adopted ordinance. 
(3)  Public nuisance means any activity, function, status, or the result of such activity, function, or status whether participated in by one (1) person or several, whether caused by machines, persons, or other devices, which affects the health, safety, and welfare of an individual, a neighborhood or community and degrades the quality of life for such individual, neighborhood or community. 
(4)  Vacation of plat means properly effected reversion of dedicated property to the grantors or their successors in interest and recording in the county real property records that the plat is vacated, i.e., that it is set aside, and including a reference to the vacation statement recording. 
C.  Vacation of Plat. 
(1)  Any plat filed in the office of the county clerk may be vacated or a portion of the plat may be vacated provided: 
(a)  The owners of the land in the territory proposed to be vacated sign a statement, duly acknowledged, declaring the plat or a portion of the plat to be vacated; and 
(b)  The statement is endorsed "Approved" by the planning authority of the municipality within whose platting jurisdiction the subdivision lies. 
(c)  The public works committee review each request for a vacation of plat or partial vacation of plat and make its recommendation for approval or denial of the request at a public hearing before the request proceeds to the planning commission for its review. 
(2)  In approving the vacation or partial vacation of a plat, the planning authority of the municipality shall consider if the vacation or partial vacation of a plat will adversely affect the interests or rights of persons in contiguous territory or within the subdivision being vacated. In approving the vacation or partial vacation of a plat, the planning authority of the municipality may require that streets dedicated to the municipality in the original plat shall continue to be dedicated to the municipality. The owners of lots on the vacated plat or on the portion of the plat being vacated may enclose in equal proportions the adjoining streets and alleys which are authorized to be abandoned by the planning authority of the municipality. 
(3)  The statement declaring the vacation or partial vacation of a plat and having the proper endorsements shall be filed in the office of the county clerk wherein the original plat is filed. The county clerk shall mark the applicable words "Vacated" or "Partially Vacated" across the plat and shall refer on the plat to the volume and page on which the statement of vacation or partial vacation is recorded. 
D.  Vacation Rights of Utility. The rights of any utility already existing shall not be affected by any vacation or partial vacation of a plat. 
(Ord. #2000-19,  5) 
Editor's note- Former subsection 23-1.2, Maintenance of Railroad Crossings, was replaced by Ordinance No. 2000-19. This section, as set out herein, is based on  3-20-12 and 13 NMSA 1978,  3-49-1 NMSA 1978 and a charter municipality's powers under the New Mexico State Constitution, Art. X,  6.D. Municipalities are authorized in  3-49-1 NMSA 1978 to vacate alleys, regulate their use and use of structures under them, and to prohibit and remove encroachments or obstructions on them. Article X,  6.D, of the New Mexico State Constitution provides that a municipality which adopts a charter may exercise all legislative powers and perform all functions not expressly denied by general law or charter. There is no general law that denies municipalities the power to vacate plats, and statutes in fact expressly authorize municipalities to do so. 
23-1.3 - Railroads not to block streets or crossings. 
    It is unlawful for any engineer, fireman, conductor, yardmaster, agent or any railway employee having charge, permanently or temporarily, of any engine, train or car to allow any railway engine, train or car to remain across or on any street or public crossing in the city for a period longer than five (5) minutes, except in cases where movement is liable to cause danger to life or property. 
(Code 1953,  24-3; Code 1973,  30-3; SFCC 1981,  4-11-3) 
23-1.4 - Obstruction of streets. 
A.  Permit Required; Fee. Except as otherwise provided, any person desiring to place any obstruction on any public street, alley or way in the city shall make application to the public works department for a permit to do so. Such permit shall be granted on compliance with terms as may be imposed by a city engineer and on the payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per permit. 
B.  Warning Lights Required. Except as otherwise provided, warning lights shall be placed and maintained from sundown to sunup of every day at both ends of every obstruction on any street of the city and at intervals of not more than fifty feet (50') along such obstruction. 
C.  Removal. 
(1)  Any obstruction on any street or alley or in that half of the street adjoining any store, shop, building or premises in violation of paragraphs A or B above, shall immediately be removed by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(2)  It is the duty of any police officer or other authorized city employees finding an obstruction in any street or alley, to notify and require the owner, occupant or person in charge, to remove the obstruction immediately. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person to refuse or neglect to comply with such order and the city shall immediately remove the obstruction at the expense of the owner or occupant. 
(4)  No person shall hinder, interfere with, or prevent the city from performing any of the duties conferred in this paragraph. 
(Code 1953,  24-4-24-7; Code 1973,  30-4-30-6; SFCC 1981,  4-11-4-4-11-6; Ord. #2011-12,  1) 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to regulate obstructions on streets, Sec. 3-49-1 NMSA 1978. 
23-1.5 - Barbed-wire fences. 
A.  It is unlawful, except by permission of the public works department, to erect within the city any barbed-wire fence enclosing any lot or parcel of land fronting on any street within the city, or any fence that may be dangerous to life and limb, whether to animals or persons, by reason of projecting prongs, barbs or tines. The public works department shall only approve barbed-wire for use in conjunction with security fencing. In such instances the barbed-wire shall be at least six feet (6') from the ground. 
B.  Any person erecting a barbed-wire fence without permission of the public works department is guilty of instituting a nuisance, and on failure to abate the same after reasonable notice thereof, is subject to the provisions of Section 1-4 of this code. 
(Code 1953,  24-8; Code 1973,  30-7; SFCC 1981,  4-11-7) 
23-1.6 - Sidewalk repairs; responsibility. 
A.  No person owning or in charge or control of any lot or property within the city shall permit any footway or sidewalk contiguous thereto or running along the street line thereof to be out-of-repair, loose or broken or to be unsafe to pedestrians. 
B.  The person owning or in charge or control of any lot or property within the city where there exists a footway or sidewalk contiguous thereto or running along the street line thereof which is out-of-repair, loose or broken or is unsafe to pedestrians, shall immediately notify the public works department of the city of the aforesaid need for repair of the sidewalk and when the repairs shall be promptly completed. In the event the person owning or in charge or control of any lot or property within the city where a sidewalk repair is necessary fails to repair the same, then the public works department director shall require the person owning or in charge or control of any lot property within the city to make such repairs as are deemed necessary to repair the sidewalk in accordance with ADA standards, as provided in subsection 23-1.7 SFCC 1987. 
(Code 1953,  24-10; Code 1973,  30-8; SFCC 1981,  4-11-8; Ord. #1987-17,  1; Ord. #2006-64,  1) 
State Law reference- Maintenance of Sidewalks, Sec. 3-49-4 NMSA 1978. 
23-1.7 - Repair, improvement and construction of sidewalks. 
A.  If the public works department director determines that it is necessary to repair, improve or construct a sidewalk fronting an individual tract or parcel of land, the public works department director shall prepare a notice of violation requiring that a sidewalk be repaired, improved or constructed in conformity with the existing sidewalk standards adopted by the municipality and ADA standards. 
B.  A copy of the notice of violation shall be served by certified mail; return receipt requested at the last known address of the owner or agent in charge of the tract or parcel of land which is contiguous to the sidewalk. If the owner, as shown by the real estate records of the county clerk or agent in charge of the building, structure or premise cannot be served as provided in this subsection, a copy of the notice of violation shall be posted on the building, structure or tract or parcel of land which is contiguous to the sidewalk and a copy of the notice of violation shall be published one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Santa Fe. 
C.  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a copy of the notice of violation or of the posting and publishing of a copy of the notice of violation, the owner or agent in charge of the building, structure or premise shall commence repairing, improving or constructing a sidewalk. 
D.  Within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of a copy of the notice of violation or of the posting and publishing of a copy of the notice of violation, the owner or agent in charge of the building, structure or premise may file a written appeal with the public works department director. The appeal shall include the following: 
(1)  The factual basis for the appeal; 
(2)  The legal basis for the appeal; and 
(3)  The desired or requested action or outcome. 
E.  Appeals shall be heard by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The owner or agent shall be given notice of the hearing. The hearing officer shall take testimony from the city and the owner or agent, record the proceedings and prepare a written report and recommendation to the city manager. The city manager shall provide a written decision to the customer. Such decision shall be final. 
F.  The municipality may repair, improve or construct the sidewalk at the cost and expense of the owner or agent. If the owner or agent in charge of the tract or parcel of land which is contiguous to the sidewalk fails to commence repairing, improving or constructing the sidewalk: 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days of being served a copy of the notice of violation or of the posting and publishing of the notice of violation if no written objection is filed; 
(2)  Within five (5) days of the determination by the city manager that the notice of violation shall be enforced if no appeal is taken. 
G.  The reasonable cost of the repair, improvement or construction shall constitute a lien against the tract or parcel of land which is contiguous to the sidewalk. The lien shall be foreclosed in the manner provided in Sections 3-36-1 through 3-36-5 NMSA 1978. 
H.  If, within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the final determination of the city manager, the owner of the tract or parcel of land which is contiguous to the sidewalk fails to repair, improve or reconstruct the sidewalk as required in the notice of violation, the owner of the tract or parcel of land contiguous to the sidewalk is liable for any injury received by any person, which injury is proximately caused by the negligence of such owner pertaining to such faulty repair, construction or maintenance of the sidewalk, and the municipality is not liable. 
(Code 1953,  24-9; Code 1973,  30-9; SFCC 1981,  4-11-9; Ord. #2006-64,  2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Sec. 3-49-4 NMSA 1978. 
23-1.8 - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
A.  The owners, agents or occupants of any property shall keep the sidewalks and gutters in front of and adjoining such property clean of snow and ice and after any fall of snow shall cause snow and ice to be immediately removed from the sidewalks and gutters fronting and adjoining their respective lots or parts of lots; provided that snow and ice not be placed in the street. 
B.  On the failure of any persons named above to remove snow and ice from the sidewalks and gutters, the proper city officials may cause such snow and ice to be immediately removed by laborers employed by the city; in such event, the costs and charges of removing the snow and ice shall become a lien and charge against the premises, to be paid on demand to the city clerk by the person failing to observe the provisions of paragraph A of this subsection. 
C.  In the event of any suit being brought by the city for the enforcement or collection of the lien and charges set out for snow removal, the person failing to observe the provisions of this subsection is liable for an attorney's fee to be paid into court for the benefit of counsel for the city in such action and such attorney's fee is a lien on the property, enforceable in the same manner as the above-mentioned charge. 
(Code 1953,  24-11; Ord. #1959-19,  5; Code 1973,  30-10; Ord. #1980-38,  9; SFCC 1981,  4-11-10) 
State Law reference- Removal of snow and ice, Sec. 3-49-1 NMSA 1978. 
23-1.9 - Parking adjacent to filling station. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle to park or stop on the sidewalk area adjacent to any property used as a filling station or place where gasoline or lubricants are sold to the public. 
(Code 1953,  24-39; Code 1973,  30-39; Ord. #1982-10,  2; SFCC 1981,  4-11-11) 
Editor's note-  4-17-9, SFCC 1981, was recompiled as  4-11-11. 
23-1.10 - Servicing vehicles on sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for the owner, operator or any employee of a filling station or place where gasoline, oils or lubricants are sold to the public to service or install gasoline or oil in a motor vehicle while such vehicle is standing on a sidewalk area adjacent to the filling station or obstructing the full and complete use of the sidewalk area by pedestrians. 
(Code 1953,  24-40; Code 1973,  30-40; Ord. #1982-10,  2; SFCC 1981,  4-11-12) 
Editor's note-  4-17-10, SFCC 1981, was recompiled as 4-11-12. 
23-1.11 - Installation of gasoline pumps near sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for the owner of any property, the use of which is contemplated as a filling station to construct or install pumps for the distribution of gasoline at a point on such property nearer than fifteen feet (15') from the sidewalk line. No building permit for the construction of a filling station or like business shall be issued if it appears that the building plans contemplate the construction of the pumps at a point nearer to the sidewalk line than is herein specified or if the proposed location of gasoline pumps shall, in the opinion of the fire department, constitute a fire hazard. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  11; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-11-13) 
23-1.12 - Enforcement. 
    The police department shall strictly enforce the provisions of this section by causing the immediate removal of all obstructions on any sidewalk area and may adopt a suitable plan or method of marking the sidewalk areas adjacent to filling stations constructed so near to the property line as to be likely to cause violations of subsection 23-1.11 SFCC 1987. 
(Code 1953,  24-42; Code 1973,  30-42; Ord. #1982-10,  2; SFCC 1981,  4-11-14) 
Editor's note-  4-17-12, SFCC 1981, was recompiled as  4-11-14. 
23-2 - EXCAVATIONS, STREET CUTS AND RESTORATION. 

23-2.1 - Short Title. 
    This section will be known as the "Street Cut and Restoration Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1988-2,  2) 
23-2.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish permit fees, inspection fees and restoration penalties and to define responsibilities and standards of performance for all persons performing street cuts in public places and performing excavation in public rights-of-way or other property. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  3) 
23-2.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Applicant means any person, other than a franchised utility company, required by this section to apply for a street cut license or a street cut permit to make a street cut. 
    Business day means a normal full eight-hour business day for the city of Santa Fe. 
    Compaction and restoration standards means those standards set forth in the "New Mexico Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction 1987" - issued by the New Mexico Chapter of the American Public Works Association as it may be amended from time to time. 
    Director means the public works director of the city of Santa Fe or his designated representative. 
    Emergency means any situation or condition existing in which there is an interruption or disruption of gas, electric, water, or telecommunications service to one (1) or more customers being served by a franchised utility company or any situation or condition in which there is a danger of serious bodily injury or property damage. 
    Excavation means the act of make a hole, trench, or ditch which penetrates through or under the surface in a public right-of-way or other public property resulting from the removal of dirt or other material. 
    Franchised utility company means any person, entity, or corporation which is a public utility within the meaning of the New Mexico Public Utility Act, Section 62-3-1 et seq. NMSA 1978 or subject to the jurisdiction of the New Mexico State Corporation and has a franchise ordinance with the city of Santa Fe. It also includes an independent contractor that has entered into a contract with the franchised utility company to perform the street cut or excavation when the independent contractor is performing services for the franchised utility company. In order to be considered a franchised utility company independent contractor within the meaning of this term the franchised utility company must file a notification with the director of the name, business address, business telephone number and the responsible individual for the independent contractor. 
    Governmental agency project means any street cuts undertaken by a franchised utility company for or on behalf of a project initiated by the city, county, state, or federal government or any of its agencies or instrumentalities and includes all action taken by the franchised utility company to further the governmental agency project. 
    License means the written form approved by the director which is a prerequisite to the issuance of any street cut permit. 
    Permit means the written form approved by the director in which a person describes the street cut which will be performed in a public place and in which are contained any special conditions required of the person by the city in the execution of the work. 
    Permittee means a person that has received a street cut permit from the director. 
    Person means any individual, estate, trust, receiver, cooperative association, club, corporation, franchised utility company, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other entity. 
    Public place means all property owned, maintained or controlled by the city of Santa Fe used as highways or streets, paved or unpaved or any curb, gutter, sidewalks, plazas or other paved or concrete surfaces. 
    Public right-of-way or other public property means all the county of Santa Fe or the state of New Mexico, for the use of the public alleys, bicycle paths, pedestrian or equestrian paths, ways, places, parks, non-surfaced easements, rights-of-way or other unpaved or unsurfaced property. 
    Right-of-way intersection means an intersection of two (2) or more highways or streets or other public thoroughfares or six hundred feet (600') whichever is greater. 
    Street cut means: 
A.  The act of cutting a hole, trench, ditch in or through the surface of a public place; 
B.  The act of drilling, boring or tunneling under or jacking up the surface of a public place having a paved or concrete surface. 
    Substructure means any manhole, valve, box, test box, vent, or other similar facility located below the surface of any public place. 
    Substructure opening means an opening into a lawful substructure, the top of which is approximately flush with the adjoining surface of a public place and which is so constructed as to allow frequent opening without injury or damage to a public place and without removal of pavement, dirt or other material. 
    Traffic standards means those standards set forth in "The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways - Part VI" as issued and revised by the Federal Highway Administration and the "New Mexico Manual and Specifications for a Uniform Systems of Traffic Control Devices" and the "Uniform Traffic Ordinance of the city of Santa Fe" as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  4) 
23-2.4 - License required. 
    Any person, other than a franchised utility company, desiring to make a street cut in any public place in the city shall first obtain a street cut license from the city. No person, other than a franchised utility company, shall be issued a street cut license until the provisions required for a license in this section are completed. A franchised utility company shall be deemed to hold a license by virtue of its franchise relationship with the city. When the application is approved and signed by the director, the application shall constitute a license. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  5) 
23-2.5 - Information required in license. 
    The applicant must submit the following information to obtain a license: 
A.  A completed application form containing the signature and title, if any, of the applicant; 
B.  A certificate of insurance issued by a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city in accordance with subsection 23-2.7 of this section; 
C.  A payment and performance surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) issued by a reputable bonding company licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. The bond is to insure completion of all phases of the work, payment of costs incurred by city agencies if required to complete work which the applicant fails or refuses to complete in a timely fashion and to insure completion of any corrective work required by this section; 
D.  A certification in writing that the applicant has read and understands the contents of this section. 
    Licensing requirements outlined above shall be kept current. The certificate of insurance and the payment and performance surety bond will be reviewed periodically by the city and no street cut permit shall be issued unless the insurance and bonding policies are in effect. There is no cost for such license, and the license remains valid as long as the required insurance and surety bond are effective. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  6) 
23-2.6 - Acceptance of license constitutes acceptance of terms and conditions of section. 
    By submitting the application and accepting the license issued by the city the applicant agrees to the following: 
A.  Execute a certification that the applicant is qualified to perform work as required in this section; 
B.  Timely complete all work required by this section and covered by the street cut permit; 
C.  Complete any specific item within three (3) business days after written notice is given by the city unless the project is of such a magnitude that it cannot realistically be completed in that time; 
D.  Allow the city to complete the work specified in the street cut application and street cut permit and bill the applicant if the work is not completed within the time allotted above; 
E.  Perform any special conditions required of the permittee by the city in the execution of the work; 
F.  Repair or correct defective materials and/or workmanship which occurs within a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance of such work by the city. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  7; Ord. #2004-41  1) 
23-2.7 - Liability insurance or self-insured. 
A.  No person, other than a franchised utility company, shall make a street cut or enter a substructure opening or perform work until a certificate of insurance to the city establishing that such person is insured against bodily injury or personal injury to any person other than the employee of the permittee and against liability for damages, other than the work itself, because of injury to or destruction of tangible property, including loss of use resulting therefrom, with the limits. 
    Each such certificate shall provide that the city be given at least thirty (30) calendar days notice of cancellation in writing by the insurance company. 
B.  A franchised utility company shall at all times maintain insurance or at its sole option self-insure against all risks and perils set forth above for the limits of liability set forth above. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  8) 
23-2.8 - Permit application. 
A.  Every person, required to obtain a street cut permit by this section must either be licensed or must be a franchised utility company. The person shall make written application on forms provided by the city prior to the performance of any work. The written application shall state: 
(1)  The name and title of the person; 
(2)  The business telephone number of the person; 
(3)  The business mailing address and principal place of business of the person; 
(4)  An estimate of the location and dimensions of the installation or removal for which the street cut is to be made; 
(5)  The purpose of the facility and the estimated beginning and end dates of the period which will be required to complete such work, including backfilling said street cut, removing all obstructions, material and debris and restoration of the surface. 
B.  A franchised utility company is authorized to cut a public place without obtaining a street cut permit for the purpose of raising or lowering a substructure opening to meet grade changes brought about by city maintenance, repairs or resurfacing or for the installation, reinstallation or removal of a street light or utility pole, provided the raising or lowering a substructure opening occurs within two (2) calendar weeks of the planned starting date for the paving overlay project or major street restoration. 
C.  A franchised utility company is authorized to obtain a single street cut permit in those situations in which the franchised utility company makes separate street cuts within the same right-of-way intersection as part of the same franchised utility company project. 
D.  The approved permit shall be the grant of authority for the permittee to occupy the public place as described in the permit. Normally this permit will be issued within two (2) business days after filing the application not including the day the application is filed. 
E.  The street cut application when approved and signed by the director, constitutes a street cut permit. 
F.  The permittee, other than franchised utility company, shall begin work at the site indicated in the street cut permit within three (3) business days from the date the permit is issued, unless the city extends that period due to weather conditions. Should no work be started at the work site within the three-day period and the city has not granted a time extension, the permit shall be null and void, with no reimbursement of fees. The applicant shall obtain a new permit, including payment of the permit fees before any work is started. After a street cut is commenced, the permittee shall perform with diligence all work covered by the street cut permit and shall promptly complete work and restore the public place. 
G.  A franchised utility company shall begin work at the site indicated in the street cut permit within three (3) business days from the date set in the permit for commencement of construction unless the city extends that period due to weather conditions or other conditions beyond the control of the franchised utility company. Should no work be started at the work site within the three-day period and the city has not granted a time extension, the permit shall be null and void, with no reimbursement of fees. 
H.  In the event of an emergency, street cuts may be made by a franchised utility company without first obtaining a street cut permit therefor, provided that each franchised utility company so making an emergency street cut shall file their application for a street cut permit within two (2) business days after the city is open for business. 
I.  A franchised utility company is authorized to file its application for a street cut permit and all supporting data for a street cut for all projects except major projects through the use of a telecopy machine located in the city offices in accordance with procedures set up between the director and the franchised utility company. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  9) 
23-2.9 - Licensee street cut permit and approvals. 
A.  No person, other than a franchised utility company, shall make any street cut in a public place unless the person holding a street cut license obtains a street cut permit from the city. 
B.  No franchised utility company shall make any street cut in a public place until the franchised utility company obtains a street cut permit from the city except in an emergency. In the event of an emergency the franchised utility company shall proceed with the street cut immediately and thereafter file a street cut application within two (2) business days after the city is open for business. 
C.  Construction methods for installation in which boring, tunneling, or jacking under a public place are involved require specific prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  10) 
23-2.10 - Street cut permit fees, restoration penalties; exemptions. 
A.  Effective July 1, 2011, a street cut permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged for each street cut permit issued. A separate permit shall be required for each street cut as defined in subsection 22-2.3 SFCC 1987. A single repair project may consist of multiple street cuts. 
B.  Restoration penalties provided for in this section shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per square foot of resurfaced area. 
C.  After acceptance or approval by the city of the work completed under the permit, a property owner residing on the property for which the work was completed may apply to the streets division for reimbursement of the fee provided that all dwelling units on the property are occupied by a household earning less than eighty percent (80%) of the area median income as certified by a nonprofit affordable housing organization, under contract with the city, or otherwise qualified organization. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  12; Ord. #2004-41,  3; Ord. #2006-9,  2; Ord. #2011-12,  2) 
23-2.11 - Billing and payment of street cut fees, inspection fees and restoration penalties. 
A.  All persons, except a franchise utility company, shall pay the street cut permit fee and any restoration penalties incurred at or prior to the time of the issuance of the street cut permit. The streets and drainage division may approve an alternate payment schedule for larger projects such as utility reconstruction projects provided that such schedule is approved prior to issuance of the street cut permit. 
B.  A franchise utility company shall be billed on a monthly or quarterly basis as determined by the city for all street cut permits issued the previous billing period and all restoration penalty fees incurred for the previous billing period. The billings shall be made in accordance with a billing procedure established by the city. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  12; Ord. #2004-41,  3; Ord. #2006-9,  2) 
23-2.12 - Restoration of street cuts. 
A.  Any person holding a street cut permit shall undertake to restore each street cut in accordance with the compaction and restoration standards required by this section. This shall include both the backfilling of the street cut and the restoration of the surface. 
B.  When a licensee resurfaces a public place with concrete or asphalt and the air temperature or moisture content is below the minimum standards contained in the compaction and restoration standards or the weather conditions are such that the licensee is unable to resurface the public place within seven (7) business days after the city's acceptance of the density tests as required under this section, the licensee shall immediately check with the director or the director's designee concerning how and when the public place shall be resurfaced. The director may require that the licensee cold patch the street cut on a temporary basis. The licensee shall restore the surface of the street cut in accordance with the compaction and restoration standards required by this section. 
C.  When a franchised utility company resurfaces a public place with concrete or asphalt and the air temperature or moisture content is below the minimum standards contained in the compaction and restoration standards or the weather conditions are such that the permittee is unable to resurface the public place under compaction and restoration standards, the permittee shall cold patch the street cut. Thereafter, the next spring, or sooner if weather allows, the permittee shall remove the cold patch and restore the surface of the street cut in accordance with the compaction and restoration standards required by this section. 
D.  Any franchised utility company making a street cut is required to perform its own compaction tests and submit a certificate of compaction to the city within five (5) business days after the compaction test is made. The compaction shall be performed by a certified employee of the franchised utility company or by an independent laboratory approved by the city. The certification shall include the street cut permit number if one is assigned by the city, a description of the location of the street cut and of the place or places where the compaction was tested, the individual certified to perform the compaction test, the company performing the compaction test and a certification that it met the compaction and restoration standards setting forth the compaction levels. 
E.  The city may perform all necessary compaction tests in connection with street cuts for any person, other than a franchised utility company unless the city delegates that to an independent laboratory approved by the city. 
F.  Cost for restoration of the pavement surface shall be borne by the permittee. 
G.  If a permittee, other than a franchised utility company, makes a street cut that is not resurfaced by the permittee within seven (7) business days after the city's acceptance of the compaction and density tests and the city has not granted an extension of time due to weather conditions or other circumstances beyond control of the permittee, the city may resurface the street cut and bill the permittee for the cost, including city administrative costs. 
H.  If a franchised utility company makes a street cut that is not resurfaced by the franchised utility company within seven (7) business days after compaction and the city has not granted an extension of time due to weather conditions or other circumstances beyond control of the company, the city may resurface the street cut and bill the franchised utility company for the cost, including city administrative costs. 
I.  It shall be the responsibility of the permittee restoring the public place to keep the street cut safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the pavement surface has been restored. 
J.  Any time periods cited in this section may be extended by the city due to weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of the permittee. 
K.  Acceptance or approval of street cut work or backfilling does not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee for incomplete or defective workmanship or materials if discovered within two (2) years of restoration of the surface. 
L.  When permits are issued for work on arterials, collectors, the downtown area or other important streets, such streets shall be patched with temporary asphalt or approved bridging across the street cut at the end of each working day and opened to traffic unless other procedures are approved in advance by the city. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  13; Ord. #2004-41,  4) 
23-2.13 - Street cut warranty and restrictions. 
A.  Any person, including a franchised utility company making a street cut, is required to correct defective materials and workmanship performed under each street cut permit for a period of two (2) years from the date the work performed under such permit is completed. 
B.  The city shall not accept any private street for maintenance in which the asphalt or concrete pavement layer has been cut by a street cut unless the street cut and restoration has been accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the Street Cut and Restoration Ordinance of the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  14) 
23-2.14 - Street cut restoration penalties. 
A.  Street cut permits shall not be normally issued for a street or portion of a street which has been newly constructed, reconstructed or received major restoration where the surface is surfaced with concrete or asphalt or to be surfaced with concrete or asphalt or similar material or where there has been pavement overlay occurring within the past five (5) years of the city's acceptance of the construction, reconstruction, restoration or paving overlay. 
B.  When work is absolutely necessary and a street cut is made after acceptance of the street for maintenance by the city of Santa Fe, a restoration penalty shall be assessed upon completion of the work for which the specific street cut permit was issued; provided however, that a permit shall be issued to a franchised utility company and the franchised utility company shall be billed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
C.  The amount of the restoration penalty shall be at the rate set forth in this section. 
D.  The city shall give the franchised utility company six (6) months prior written notice, and twelve (12) months' notice where possible, of any new construction, reconstruction, major restoration or paving overlay. This will allow the franchised utility company the opportunity to make any street cuts necessary prior to the construction or reconstruction of the public place. In the event the city fails to provide the franchised utility company the six-month advance notice required herein the franchised utility company shall not be obligated to pay any restoration penalty for making the street cut. 
E.  No restoration penalty shall be applicable where the city has not given the required six (6) months prior written notice of the new construction, reconstruction, renovation or pavement overlay. 
F.  The restoration penalty may be waived by the city if imposition of the penalty would be unfair and the restoration of the pavement surface by the permittee is deemed adequate. 
G.  The restoration penalty does not apply when the work performed does not cut the pavement surface, provided that the requirements of the Street Cut and Restoration Ordinance of the city of Santa Fe are followed. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  15; Ord. #2004-41,  5; Ord. #2006-9,  3) 
23-2.15 - Routing of traffic. 
A.  During the entrance into a substructure opening or performance of street cut work, the person making the street cut must take appropriate measures to maintain traffic conditions as near normal as practicable at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the public. 
B.  The city may require a person making the street cut to notify various public agencies and the public of proposed work prior to issuance of a permit or prior to commencement of the proposed work. 
C.  Warning signs must be placed near each street cut or substructure opening being entered so as to give adequate warning to vehicular and pedestrian traffic both night and day and cones or other approved devices must be placed to channel traffic. The traffic controls, including but not limited to, the number, type, size and location of the signs shall be done in accordance with the traffic standards set forth in this section. 
D.  The person making a street cut shall place a visible sign at each end of the construction area which is visible from a distance and sets forth the name of the person making the street cut, or in the case of a franchised utility company, the name of the company together with a business telephone number to handle calls from the motoring public. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  16) 
23-2.16 - Clearance of vital structures. 
    Work under the provisions of this section must be performed and conducted so as to not interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes and all other vital structures or equipment designated by the city. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  17) 
23-2.17 - Maintenance of traffic and pedestrian flow. 
    The person must maintain safe and adequate passage of vehicle and pedestrian traffic on all streets and at all street intersections as required by the latest manual of uniform traffic control devices (MUTCD) published by the United States department of transportation-federal highway administration and in conformance with this section. When a street has been closed or detoured because of a street cut, the traffic engineer must be notified prior to removal of barricades and other traffic control devices. Relocation of the facilities of a franchised utility company shall be governed by the provisions of that franchise. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  18; Ord. #2004-41,  6) 
23-2.18 - Permittee's obligation to protect franchise utility company and city property. 
    The permittee must, at his own expense, support and protect all utilities which may be in any way affected by the street cut work and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. Before commencing a street cut, the permittee shall know the location of all utilities in or near the area of the street cut. The permittee is required by state law to use the services of the New Mexico One Call System, Inc. for location of existing utilities. In the event said utilities are damaged, including damage to pipe coating or other encasement devices, the utility owner must be notified immediately and the damage repaired by the utility. The permittee shall pay the utility for all costs associated with the repair. The permittee must also protect the street cut from surface water flows by appropriate diversions or ponding devices. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  19; Ord. #2004-41,  7) 
23-2.19 - Protection of adjoining property. 
    The permittee must at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property, by taking suitable measures for that purpose. Where in the protection of such property, it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purposes of taking appropriate protection measures, the permittee must, unless otherwise provided by law, obtain permission from the owner of such private property. The permittee must at his own expense shore up and protect all building, walls, fences or other property that may be damaged during the progress of the street cut work and be responsible for all damages on private property resulting from his failure to properly protect and carry out such work. The permittee may not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in any public place without first obtaining written permission from the city. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  20) 
23-2.20 - Care of excavated material. 
    All materials excavated and piled adjacent to the street cut or in any public place must be piled and maintained so as to not endanger the public and those working in the excavation and so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to those persons using the public place and adjoining property. All material excavated must be laid completely along the side of the street cut and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as is reasonably possible to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Excavated materials may not be used as a barricade. In order to expedite flow of traffic or to keep dirt and dust from spreading or flying, the permittee shall use guards or other methods and/or shall water the excavated material. Traffic markings removed as a part of the street cut shall be replaced by the permittee with materials similar to those originally in place and in a manner satisfactory to the traffic engineer, or the traffic markings may be replaced by the city at the permittee's expense. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  21) 
23-2.21 - Cleanup. 
    Each permittee must thoroughly clean up from the public place all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from street cut excavation work. All cleanup operations at the location of such street cuts are to be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and are to comply with subsection 23-2.15 of this section. During the progress of work or immediately after completion of such work, the permittee shall cleanup and remove all refuse, dirt and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work. Upon failure to do so within twenty-four (24) hours after having been notified in writing, the city may cause to have such work done, and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  22) 
23-2.22 - Protection of water course. 
    The permittee must maintain all gutters, easement crossing and related drainages water free and unobstructed for the full depth and width or provide adequate substitutes for any such water course as are blocked by the street cut. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  23) 
23-2.23 - Breaking through pavement. 
A.  The use of pavement breakers which endanger existing structures or other property shall be prohibited. 
B.  Saw-cutting of concrete may be required when the nature of the job or condition of the street warrants. When required, the depth of the cut must be at least one-third ( 1/3 ) the total thickness of the pavement up to a maximum depth of three inches (3"). 
C.  Sections of sidewalks or curbs and gutters are to be removed to the nearest expansion joint, score line or saw cut edge. Sidewalk cuts parallel to the street shall normally require removal of the entire sidewalk unless the sidewalk width is in excess of four feet (4'), unless other methods are approved in writing by the city. 
D.  Unstable pavement must be removed over the caveins and the subgrade is to be treated in the same manner as the main street cut. 
E.  Pavement edges must be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the center line of any trench. All cuts shall be parallel or perpendicular to the street except for drop inlet connection lines. 
F.  The permittee is not required to repair damage existing prior to the street cut, unless the cuts leave small floating sections that may be unstable; in which case the permittee must remove such sections and backfill such areas as well as the area of the street cut. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  24) 
23-2.24 - Excavation in public right-of-way or other public property. 
    A person, other than a franchised utility company, shall only excavate in a public right-of-way or other public property after obtaining a street cut permit and the excavation is done in accordance with the provisions required for a street cut. 
    A franchised utility company is authorized to excavate in a public right-of-way or other public property after giving the director and the director of the city department having jurisdiction over the public right-of-way or other public property advance written notice of the franchised utility company's intent to excavate. After the excavation the franchised utility company shall immediately backfill the excavation, return the soil to a compaction at least equal to or better than the compaction adjacent to the excavation as shown by a certified compaction test to be maintained on file in the office of the franchised utility company. The franchised utility company shall return the surface of the land to its original condition insofar as reasonably practical. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  25) 
23-2.25 - Trenches in pipe laying. 
    At the issuance of the permit the city may limit the maximum length of open trench possibilities at any time. No pavement shall be scored or otherwise marked for removal in excess of the area described in the permit. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  26) 
23-2.26 - Urgent work. 
    If, in the judgment of the director, traffic conditions, safety or convenience of the traveling public, or the public, or the public interest require that street cut work be performed speedily, the director may, at the time the permit is granted, require prompt completion of street cut work in the shortest time possible. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  27) 
23-2.27 - Noise, debris and working hours. 
    Each permittee must conduct and carry out street cut work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the public and occupants of neighborhood property and in compliance with the City Noise Ordinance. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  28) 
23-2.28 - Preservation of survey monuments. 
    Any survey monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of the street, property subdivision, precise survey reference point, or a permanent survey, or a permanent survey bench mark within the city may not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the city. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks will be granted only upon condition that the person applied for such permission pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  29) 
23-2.29 - Inspection. 
    The city may make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  30) 
23-2.30 - Advance notice of improvements. 
    The city shall inform the public a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to any proposed street or sidewalk improvements, except in emergency circumstances, in order that the public may install other facilities prior to the city making such street or sidewalk improvements. It is the responsibility of the person installing other facilities to install necessary substructures in advance of the city's improvements whenever possible. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  31) 
23-2.31 - Noncompliance by permittee. 
    In the event a permittee fails to comply with the requirements of this section, the city may issue written notice of noncompliance and conduct a hearing. Based on the findings of the hearing, the director is authorized and empowered to suspend, cancel or withdraw any license or permit issued by him to the permittee. Within ten (10) business days of the director's written discussion, the permittee may appeal the director's determination to the governing body by filing written notice with the city manager. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  32) 
23-2.32 - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of the Street Cut and Restoration Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished according to subsection 1-3.1 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #1988-2,  33) 
23-3 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS. 

23-3.1 - Permits. 
A.  Any landowner desiring to construct a driveway crossing any sidewalk or public right-of-way or desiring to cut a curb for any purpose, shall first make formal application to the department of public works on forms the department will provide. 
B.  To obtain a permit to cut any curb or construct any such driveway, the owner shall file, with the application, a plan showing accurately the extent and character of the proposed driveway and curb cuts. 
C.  After examination and consideration of the application and plan, and examination of the premises, if deemed necessary, the public works department is authorized and directed to approve a permit for the curb cut and for construction of a driveway over a right-of-way, if the use of the driveway will not unreasonably interfere with the proper and safe use of the sidewalk or right-of-way to be crossed, or the proper and safe use of the street or other public way to which ingress and egress is made from private premises. 
D.  The public works department shall make its determination based on the standards hereinafter specified. 
E.  No construction shall be made until such permit has been granted. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.1 by Ord. # 1979-21,  1; SFCC 1981,  4-13-1) 
23-3.2 - Building permit prerequisite. 
    Before commencement of any new construction, it is mandatory for the owner to obtain approval from the public works department for any driveway curb cut or sidewalk crossing. This approval must be issued before a building permit for such new construction is approved. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.2 by Ord. #1979-21,  2; SFCC 1981,  4-13-2) 
23-3.3 - Curb cut requirements. 
A.  In all residential areas which include all dwelling units, single-family, apartments or otherwise: 
(1)  The minimum width of curb cuts shall be twelve feet (12') and maximum width shall be twenty-two feet (22'); 
(2)  A minimum of twenty-five feet (25') of standing curb must remain between any two (2) cuts on the same lot or single parcel of land, or if more than one (1) lot or parcel of land is being put to a single land use, then the requirement shall apply to the land use; 
(3)  No double or circle drives shall be installed or maintained unless the property shall have a minimum of sixty feet (60') frontage on the street affected thereby; and 
(4)  Corner property curb cuts shall be no closer than ten feet (10') from the property line of the intersecting street, and the driveway shall not encroach on corner curb return of intersections. Driveways are prohibited on one-way turning roadways of channelized intersections. Where traffic volumes are heavy or where the intersection is signalized, the corner clearance shall be at least twice the stated minimum value on the stopping side of the intersection. 
B.  In all light traffic commercial areas, which include all office buildings or other commercial buildings not more than two (2) stories in height, the width of curb cuts shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') and a maximum of thirty-five feet (35'). All other requirements are the same as in residential areas. 
C.  In all heavy traffic commercial areas, which include but are not limited to all retail centers and drive-in type establishments, no curb cuts shall be closer than five feet (5') from side property lines. The width of curb cuts shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') and a maximum of thirty-five feet (35'); provided, however, the department of public works may approve a curb cut over thirty-five feet (35') in width when justified after a study of: 
(1)  Traffic volume; 
(2)  Pedestrian volume; 
(3)  One-way streets; and 
(4)  Type of business making request. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision herein, curb cuts may be allowed within five feet (5') of the side property line if approved by the department of public works for the purpose of providing two-way driveways to a parking lot. All other requirements are the same as in residential areas. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.3 by Ord. #1979-21,  3; Ord. #1980-38,  13; SFCC 1981,  4-13-3) 
23-3.4 - Appeals. 
    In the event any applicant is aggrieved by the refusal of the city to grant any permit, or in the event any owner or occupant is aggrieved by the receipt of the notice of proposed revocation provided for in subsection 23-3.5, the applicant, owner or occupant may, within ten (10) days after denial of the application or receipt of the notice, appeal the decision to the governing body, through the city manager, by filing written notice thereof with the city manager. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.4 by Ord. #1979-21,  4; Ord. #1980-38,  14; SFCC 1981,  4-13-4) 
23-3.5 - Abandoned and nonconforming curb cuts. 
    Subsections 23-3.1 through 23-3.10 of this chapter are not retroactive as to any curb cuts or crossings in existence and in actual use at the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 1979-21, except as follows: 
A.  If any driveway or other sidewalk crossing is clearly abandoned as a crossing, or no longer used for its intended purpose, any permit heretofore or hereafter granted for the use of the crossing as such is subject to revocation by the city only after thirty (30) days' written notice of the proposed revocation has been given to the owner of the property to which the crossing is appurtenant. The owner's name and address will be ascertained from the tax rolls of Santa Fe county. Notice will also be effected by giving a copy of the written notice to the occupant of the premises, if any, if such occupant is other than the owner. It is sufficient notice under the provisions of this subsection and subsection 23-3.6 to make delivery of the notices by certified mail with return receipt requested. In the event the name and address of the owner cannot be reasonably ascertained from the current Santa Fe county tax rolls and the premises are unoccupied, it shall be sufficient under this subsection and subsection 23-3.6 to publish the notice in English in a newspaper of general circulation; and 
B.  All curb cuts determined by the department of public works to constitute a traffic hazard, and which become nonconforming upon passage of subsections 14-3.1 through 14-3.10, shall be subject to revocation as provided in paragraph A, above. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.5 by Ord. #1979-21,  5; Ord. #1980-38,  15; SFCC 1981,  4-13-5) 
23-3.6 - Conformance requirements. 
A.  In the event the city has revoked any permit for curb cut or use of a sidewalk crossing under the provisions of subsection 23-3.5, such crossing shall be removed by and at the expense of the owner of the property to which the curb cut or crossing is appurtenant. Further, the curb and sidewalk shall be properly restored after the city has given written notice to the owner or occupant in the manner specified in subsection 23-3.5, directing such removal and proper restoration of the curb and sidewalk. 
B.  The time allowed for removal and restoration by the owner or occupant is thirty (30) days after notice in the cases provided for in subsection 23-3.5, and two (2) years after notice in the cases provided for in subsection 23-3.5, paragraph B. 
C.  Upon resolution duly passed by the governing body that a traffic hazard exists at a nonconforming curb cut which causes immediate and imminent danger to life, safety or property, conformance may be required within a lesser period of time set by the governing body, but in no event less than thirty (30) days. 
D.  Each day's delay of the owner in complying with such notice after the expiration of the time specified shall constitute a separate violation of subsections 23-3.1 through 23-3.10. If conformance is not attained within the time allotted, the city may make the necessary removal and restoration at the cost of the owner and the cost shall constitute a lien on the property affected. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.6 by Ord. # 1979-21,  6; Ord. #1980-38,  16; SFCC 1981,  4-13-6) 
23-3.7 - Construction of sidewalk crossings. 
    All construction of driveways, other sidewalk crossings and curb cuts shall be done in a manner and with materials prescribed by the specifications of the public works department existing at the time such construction is accomplished and shall be carried out at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.7 by Ord. #1979-21,  7, SFCC 1981,  4-13-7) 
23-3.8 - Exception; selected subdivisions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in subsections 23-3.1 through 23-3.10 to the contrary, the owner of any land subdividing it and dedicating sidewalk areas or public rights-of-way for use by the public and not cutting existing curbs, sidewalks or public ways shall not be required to pay the fifteen dollars ($15.00) permit fee required in subsection 23-3.10. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  3-21.8 by Ord. #1979-21,  8; Ord. #1980-38,  17; SFCC 1981,  4-13-8) 
23-3.9 - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of subsections 23-3.1 through 23-3.10 shall, upon conviction, be punished according to Section 1-3 of this code. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.9 by Ord. #1979-21,  9; SFCC 1981,  4-13-9) 
23-3.10 - Fees. 
    A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per permit shall be collected by the city. A permit is required for each curb cut. 
(Ordained as Code 1973,  30-21.10 by Ord. #1979-21,  10; Ord. #1980 38,  18; SFCC 1981,  4-3-10; Ord. #2011-12,  3) 
23-3.11 - New subdivisions. 
    No new subdivision within the city shall be approved by the governing body unless the plat of the subdivision includes a commitment by the subdivider for the construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks on grades and to specifications as required by zoning regulations and approved by the city engineer or other authorized representative on all streets within the subdivision. 
(Code 1953,  24-29; Code 1973,  30-22; SFCC 1981,  4-13-11; Ord. #38-1987,  2) 
23-3.12 - Property owners to construct and maintain. 
    Each owner of property shall construct and maintain curbs, gutters and sidewalks in front of the property so owned as required in subsection 14-93.7 SFCC 1987.* 
(Code 1953,  24-22; Ord. #1965-9,  2; Code 1973,  30-23; SFCC 1981,  4-13-12; Ord. #38-1987,  3) 
Editor's note- *Chapter 14 of the Santa Fe City Code 1987 was superseded by Ordinance No. 2001-38, adopted December 31, 2001. The correct requirements may be found in  14-9.2(f) of the current Chapter 14. 
23-3.13 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Subsection 23-3.13, Specifications from City, previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 38-1987. 
23-3.14 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Subsection 23-3.14, Time Limit on Construction, previously contained herein, has been repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 38-1987. 
23-3.15 - Compliance with city engineer's specifications. 
    All construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the city engineer or other authorized representative and in accordance with the approved city specifications and plans and any rules and regulations promulgated by the governing body. 
(Code 1953,  24-25; Code 1973,  30-26; SFCC 1981,  4-13-15; Ord. #38-1987,  6) 
23-3.16 - Penalty for noncompliance. 
    It is unlawful for any owner of property to fail to comply with the terms and provisions of subsections 23-3.12 through 23-3.15 SFCC 1987 or with the rules and regulations promulgated by the governing body. Before any person is prosecuted, he shall be given ten (10) days' written notice by the city engineer, or other authorized representative, of his failure to comply, and an opportunity within the ten-day period to make arrangements satisfactory to the city for compliance. 
(Code 1953,  24-26; Code 1973,  30-27; SFCC 1981,  4-13-16; Ord. #38-1987,  7) 
23-3.17 - Voluntary group projects. 
    Nothing in subsections 23-3.12 and 23-3.15 SFCC 1987 prevents groups of property owners from joining together for the purpose of constructing curbs, gutters and sidewalks under the terms of subsection 23-3.15 SFCC 1987 and submitting a joint or group application for approval by the city engineer or other authorized representative. 
(Code 1953,  24-27; Code 1973,  30-28; SFCC 1981,  4-13-17; Ord. #38-1987,  8) 
23-3.18 - City construction and assessment. 
    Nothing in subsections 23-3.12 and 23-3.15 SFCC 1987 prevents the city from ordering construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks and assessing the cost thereof against the property benefited in any manner provided by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1953,  24-28; Code 1973,  30-29; SFCC 1981,  4-13-18; Ord. #38-1987,  8) 
23-4 - SPECIAL USES OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PARKS. 

23-4.1 - Riding animals or driving motorized vehicles in city parks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to ride an animal or operate a motorized vehicle within the limits of the Plaza Park or parks of the city, except on designated roadways or as authorized by the city. 
(Code 1953,  24-30; Code 1973,  30-30; Ord. #1981-39,  1; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-1) 
23-4.2 - Solicitation on public property. 
    The practice by itinerant vendors or solicitors of going onto public property for the purpose of selling goods, wares and merchandise or for the purpose of disposing of the same is prohibited except as otherwise provided by law or authorized by the governing body. Each act of solicitation prohibited by this section shall constitute a public nuisance and a separate violation of this Code. Each violation shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2010-31,  1) 
Cross reference- Restrictions on panhandling, Sections 20-2 and 20-3 SFCC. 
23-4.3 - Enforcement of section. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce diligently the penal provisions of this section. The city attorney shall take such action in the name of the city, at law or otherwise, as he may be advised for the carrying into effect of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  3; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-3) 
23-4.4 - Dedication and designation of Santa Fe river park. 
    All the bed and channel of the Santa Fe river, with the adjacent streets, walks, highways and public lands owned or leased by the city or other public body, lying and being within the city limits of the city, is set aside and formally indicated for a municipal park, recreation ground and place of public enjoyment to be known as Santa Fe river park. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  4; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-4) 
Editor's note-  4-17-4, SFCC 1981, was formerly  4-17-3, SFCC 1981. 
23-4.5 - Obstructing Santa Fe river channel. 
    It is unlawful to place, dump, put or deposit within the limits of the Santa Fe river park or the channel of the Santa Fe river, any impediment, hindrance, obstruction or fill. 
(Code 1953,  24-35; Code 1973,  30-35; Ord. #1981-39,  5; Ord. #1982 10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-5) 
23-4.6 - Encroachment on Santa Fe River park. 
    It is unlawful to encroach on, fence, enclose, build on or use in any other manner for private purposes or as private property any portion of the Santa Fe river park. 
(Code 1953,  24-36; Code 1973,  30-36; Ord. #1981-39,  6; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-6) 
23-4.7 - Parades, processions and other special uses of streets. 
A.  All requests for parades, processions and other special uses of streets, as well as street closures, shall be made through the office of the city clerk and approved by the city manager. 
B.  All applicants are required to obtain a special use permit from the office of the city clerk prior to the event or activity. The city may, at its discretion, require the following: 
(1)  A map delineating the parade or procession route; and 
(2)  A city business registration or business license number. 
C.  The governing body shall set special use permit requirements, including service charges for obtaining a special use permit. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  7; Ord. #1982-10,  3, 4, SFCC 1981,  4-17-7; Ord. #1987-10,  1) 
23-4.8 - Blocking or obstructing of sidewalks. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to expose for sale or display on any stands or counters goods, wares or merchandise on any sidewalk in the city, to maintain any scales, weighing machines, counter display stand or other obstruction between the wall or property line of a building and the curb line of the street; or to in any manner obstruct any sidewalk or hinder its use by the public, except as provided for during Plaza and Plaza Park events, or as authorized by the governing body. 
B.  This subsection shall not prohibit the placing on city sidewalks of newspaper vending machines for the purpose of providing newspapers or periodicals for sale to the public; provided, however, that the placement of such machines be done in a manner so as not to hinder the free flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks or otherwise obstruct the public right-of-way. 
C.  This subsection shall not prohibit the placement of street furniture, as defined in subsection 7-1.15 of the code, on city sidewalks at designated bus stops; provided, however, that such placement of street furniture shall not encroach on the applicable standards for an accessible path, or hinder the free flow of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks or otherwise obstruct the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1953,  24-38; Code 1973,  30-38; Ord. # 1981-39,  10; Ord. #1982-10,  3; Ord. #1984-44,  1; SFCC 1981,  4-17-10; Ord. #1995-25,  3) 
23-4.9 - Organized gatherings in public parks. 
A.  All requests for use of public parks for organized gatherings, including the plaza and plaza park, as well as concessions supporting these events, may be approved by the parks and recreation department. 
B.  Applicants for use of city parks shall follow and be subject to the procedures, requirements, and restrictions adopted by the governing body. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  12; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-11; Ord. #1987-10,  2) 
23-4.10 - Fires in parks and recreational areas. 
    It is unlawful to start or maintain a fire in parks and recreational areas, except in designated areas or containers or as permitted by express written statement of the city. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  13; Ord. # 1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-12; Ord. #1987-10,  3; Ord. #2007-45,  28) 
23-4.11 - Parks; other prohibited activities. 
    Within any park, it is unlawful to: 
A.  Drive or hit golf balls, except at places set apart for that purpose; 
B.  Wear any footgear except tennis shoes on tennis courts; and 
C.  Roller skate, skateboard, bring bicycles, mopeds, motorcycles or animals on tennis courts. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  14; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-13; Ord. #1987-10,  4; Ord. #2007-45,  29; Ord. #2013-11,  1) 
23-4.12 - Camping regulations for city property. 
A.  Within any city park, it is unlawful to camp or lodge therein, without first having obtained a permit from the city. 
B.  Camping or lodging on city property is prohibited, except as permitted in paragraph A of this section. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, camping includes sleeping in a motor vehicle or trailer. 
(Ord. # 2013-11,  2) 
23-4.13 - City sports fields; league and school fees; requirements. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall apply to the following City of Santa Fe sports fields: 
(1)  Alto Park; 
(2)  Ashbaugh Park; 
(3)  Fort Marcy Park (ball field); 
(4)  Franklin Miles Park; 
(5)  Herb Martinez Park; 
(6)  Larragoite Park; 
(7)  Magers Field; 
(8)  Monica Lucero Park; 
(9)  Patrick Smith Park; 
(10)  Ragle Park; 
(11)  Salvador Perez Park; 
(12)  Sweeney School (soccer field); 
(13)  Villa Linda Park; and 
(14)  Wood Gormley School (soccer field); 
(15)  Southwest Area Node Regional (SWAN) Park. 
B.  League Fees. For use of the City of Santa Fe sports fields identified in paragraph A, above: 
(1)  Youth league, including a school, means a non-profit entity that organizes and runs programs for youth, up to the age of eighteen (18), for any sport or recreation activity. 
(a)  Each youth league and school shall be assessed a one hundred dollar ($100.00) permit fee per season, per sport or recreation activity. 
(b)  Each youth league and school shall provide adult representatives from their respective league and school to participate in the Great American Spring Cleanup and the Toss No Mas Fall Cleanup events hosted by Keep Santa Fe Beautiful. Each league shall encourage youth participants to attend the Keep Santa Fe Beautiful events. 
(2)  Adult league means a non-profit entity that organizes and runs programs for adults, over the age of eighteen (18), for a season, for any sport or recreation activity. Each adult league shall be assessed the following fees, per season, and such fees are inclusive of one (1) end-of-season tournament: 
(a)  Twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee per player, necessary to field a team according to each individual league; and 
(b)  Twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee for one (1) alternate player per team. 
(3)  League fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into a dedicated sports field maintenance fund to be used in conjunction with annual budgeted sports field maintenance amounts from the general fund. 
C.  Tournament Fees. The city shall assess a tournament fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per team, per tournament, for the use of City of Santa Fe sports fields. This paragraph does not apply to season adult league tournaments specified in paragraph B, above. 
D.  Requirements. 
(1)  On an annual basis, beginning in January, each league and school shall submit a letter of request to the city that specifies the: 
(a)  Type of sport; 
(b)  Number of participants and age groups being served; 
(c)  Estimated number of days and hours needed for field use for the season; 
(d)  Mission and goals of the league or school; and 
(f)  General yearly budget that includes a general statement of financial condition of the league. 
(g)  If applicable, the number of scholarships distributed for sports registration fees for the year before, and the estimated number of scholarships for sports registration fees available for the current year. 
(2)  Each league and school shall include with the letter of request, the following documents: 
(a)  Statement that reflects the general financial standing of the league or school that is applicable to the sports league from: 
(i)  A certified public accountant; or 
(ii)  The national organization which the league or school belongs to; or 
(iii)  The tax returns of the league or school; 
(b)  Code of conduct; and 
(c)  Bylaws or other document demonstrating how the league or school was organized and operates. 
(3)  Each youth league shall provide the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the participant the following documents: 
(a)  Copy of the league or school's letter of request to the city, with supporting documents; 
(b)  Summary of the city's costs to maintain each sports field, which shall be provided by the city to each league and school; and 
(c)  Copy of educational material provided by the city related to the disposal of solid waste and recycling which outlines the leagues and schools responsibility to dispose of solid waste and promote recycling. 
(4)  All leagues and schools shall be responsible, on an as-used basis, for clean-up of trash and litter directly related to their use of a sports field. The clean-up shall include proper separation of recyclables from trash. 
E.  Noncompliance. A league or school that does not comply with the requirements of subsection 23-4.13 SFCC 1987 shall not be granted a permit to use city sports fields or the league or school permit may be suspended. 
F.  Priority of Use of City Sports Fields, Other Than the MRC Sports Fields. City sports fields shall be prioritized for youth league and school use. 
(Ord. #2013-26  6; Ord. #2014-18  1; Ord. No. 2015-6  1; Ord. No. 2015-33) 
23-4.14 - Voluntary sports field maintenance fund. 
A.  Subsection 23-4.14 SFCC 1987 shall be known as the Voluntary Sports Field Maintenance Fund and is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to enact ordinances pursuant to its police power (N.M. Stat. Ann.  3-17-1 B (1978)) and pursuant to the City of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter, adopted effective March 15, 1998, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act, Sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978, and Article 10,  6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
B.  The city of Santa Fe is a charter municipality, empowered to make and enforce all laws concerning municipal affairs, subject to limitations of the city charter and the constitution and laws of the state of New Mexico. 
C.  The city shall create a voluntary contribution program/voluntary check-off provision on its monthly utility billing statements for the residents of Santa Fe to donate money to the city for ongoing maintenance of the city of Santa Fe sports fields. 
D.  The city shall make public on at least an annual basis regular reports of all funds allocated and all expenditures made as a result of the sports field fund. 
(Ord. #2013-26  7) 
23-5 - REGULATIONS FOR THE USE OF THE PLAZA AND PLAZA PARK - MAJOR COMMERCIAL EVENTS AND PLAZA ARTISTS/ARTISANS. 
    Intent. The Plaza and Plaza Park are the heart of the city. Its usage should be creative, evolving and non-institutionalized. Standards should encourage variety, equity in usage and regulations, and respect for the important role the Plaza and Plaza Park play in the life of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #1990-6,  1; Ord. #1995-46,  1) 

23-5.1 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
A.  Artist/artisan means a person who designs and creates arts or crafts. 
B.  Artwork means an object for sale by an artist/artisan. 
C.  Bicycle means a vehicle with two (2) wheels tandem, a steering handle, a saddle seat, and pedals by which it is propelled. 
D.  Canyon Road periphery area means an area bounded by Paseo de Peralta on the west, the southern right-of-way line of East Alameda Street on the north, East Palace Avenue and Camino del Monte Sol on the east, and Canyon Road and Acequia Madre Street on the south. This area includes both sides of the boundary streets, except along the southern right-of-way line of East Alameda Street. ( Editor's Note: A copy of the Canyon Road periphery area can be found at the end of this chapter.) 
E.  Collective means a nonprofit organization that shares the use of the license among three (3) to seven (7) nonrelated artists/artisans. 
F.  Collective license means a Plaza Park artist/artisan license issued to a collective. 
G.  Commercial use means any function or event at which goods, artwork, foodstuffs, merchandise of any kind are offered for sale. 
H.  Community Days Festival means a city sponsored event promoting the programs and services offered by local nonprofit organizations, performances by multicultural, youth, and school groups and celebrating the diversity of Santa Fe. 
I.  Findings mean mechanical fittings in a great variety, either commercially available or handmade, used to hold jewelry to the clothing or the person, i.e., ear wires, screw backs, broach pins, chains, gallery bezel wire or hollow beads. 
J.  Handmade means the design and creation of the artwork from raw materials and its finishing and decoration were accomplished by hand labor and by manually controlled methods that permit the maker to control and vary the construction shape, design and/or finish of each individual piece, but does not exclude the use of findings, hand tools and equipment nor does it exclude the hand assembly of premanufactured components in a creative manner. 
K.  Immediate family means the spouse, children and stepchildren of a Plaza Park artist/artisan. The city may require proof of relationship for family members. 
L.  Individual license means a Plaza Park artist/artisan license issued to an individual artist/artisan licensee pursuant to the provisions of subsection 23-5.3 SFCC 1987. 
M.  Machine made means the producing or reproducing of artwork in mass production by mechanical processes such as stamping, blanking, weaving, molds or offset printing and other printing methods that allow mass production except as allowed by these regulations. 
N.  Major commercial event means any commercial use for which the entire Plaza is used. 
O.  Minor rework means taking a machine made or mass produced item and making only minor additions or changes to the item. 
P.  Noncommercial use means any function or event at which nothing is offered for sale and at which no money or other valuable consideration is exchanged for goods or services. This use includes, but is not limited to, patriotic observances, political rallies, televised news media events and motion picture filming activities. 
Q.  Nonprofit organization means an organization that is registered as a New Mexico nonprofit organization with the New Mexico Public Regulatory Commission. 
R.  Original means the single, one (1) of a kind, master that can be used as the model for a reproduction. 
S.  Plaza means that inclusive area bounded on the north by the north curbline of Palace Avenue running in front of the Palace of the Governors, and on all other sides by the facades of the buildings, excluding portals, or property lines lying to the east, south and west of the Plaza Park as outlined in the map prepared by the city, labeled "Plaza Park Map." ( Editor's Note: The Plaza Park Map may be found at the end of this chapter.) 
T.  Plaza Park means that inclusive area bounded by the inside back of the curb surrounding the Plaza as outlined in the map prepared by the city, labeled "Plaza Park Map." ( Editor's Note: The Plaza Park Map may be found at the end of this chapter.) 
U.  Plaza Park artist/artisan means an artist/artisan or an artist/artisan represented by a collective issued a Plaza Park artist/artisan license. 
V.  Plaza Park artist/artisan license means a license issued to an artist/artisan by the city for the purpose of commercial sales on the Plaza Park. 
W.  Plaza periphery area means an area outside the Plaza Park, not including the Plaza Park, bounded by Sandoval and Grant Streets on the west, Alameda Street on the south, Paseo de Peralta on the east and Marcy Street on the north. This area includes both sides of the boundary streets. 
X.  Plaza pushcart vendor means a vendor who uses a non-permanent, non-motorized cart, barrow or unit that can be pushed by hand for the purpose of selling food products and is authorized by the city to be located in the Plaza Park, the Plaza, excluding the Plaza Park, or at any location in the Plaza periphery area. 
Y.  Portrait artist means a person who creates portraits, cartoons, caricatures, or silhouettes. 
Z.  Portrait artist license means a Plaza Park artist/artisan license issued to a portrait artist. 
AA.  Pushcart means a non-permanent, non-motorized cart, barrow or unit that can be pushed by hand. 
BB.  Raw materials mean any material that can be converted by manufacture or processing or a combination of manufacture and processing into a new and useful product. 
CC.  Recreational object means any object that can be thrown, kicked or struck, including, but not limited to, balls, frisbees or any object used in game or sport. 
DD.  Reproduction means the production of multiples of a single piece, the original or master, applicable to each medium. 
EE.  Resident of Santa Fe county means a person whose primary residence is in Santa Fe county. Residency shall be established by any standard identification that proves residency such as a driver's license, passport or voter registration, utility bills or other documentation. 
FF.  Roller skates or in-line skates means a shoe with a set of wheels attached for skating over a flat surface. 
GG.  Rotating license means a Plaza Park artist/artisan license issued to seven (7) artists/artisans to be used on a rotating basis. 
HH.  Service animal means any animal trained to assist mobility of impaired, blind, or deaf people or trained for and actively employed by a police department. 
II.  Skateboard means a narrow board about two feet (2') long mounted on roller skate wheels. 
JJ.  Special event means an event that is permitted by the city pursuant to subsection 18-8.9 SFCC 1987, Section 23-4 SFCC 1987, subsection 23-5.2 SFCC 1987 or resolution of the governing body. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  15; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-14; Ord. #1987-50,  1; Ord. #1990-6,  2; Ord. #1995-17,  1; Ord. #1995-46,  2; Ord. #2002-41,  4, 5; Ord. #2007-48,  1-3; Ord. #2009-49,  4; Ord. #2015-13  5; Ord. No. 2016-32) 
23-5.2 - Plaza uses; events; allowed uses. 
A.  No more than eight (8) permits per calendar year shall be issued by the city for major commercial events held in the Plaza. The events permitted are as follows: 
(1)  Challenge New Mexico Arts and Crafts Show; 
(2)  Fourth of July Pancake Breakfast; 
(3)  Spanish Market; 
(4)  Contemporary Hispanic Market; 
(5)  Santa Fe Girls' Inc. Arts and Crafts Show; 
(6)  Indian Market; 
(7)  Santa Fe Fiesta Labor Day Arts and Crafts Market; and 
(8)  Santa Fe Fiesta. 
B.  Each of the major commercial events noted in paragraph A above shall continue their assigned locations, and the Contemporary Hispanic Market shall be allocated the space along Lincoln Avenue between Palace Avenue and Federal Place. 
(1)  In order to accommodate the Spanish Market's growth requirements, this subsection will allow the Spanish Colonial Arts Society use of East San Francisco Street from Don Gasper to Cathedral Place and Palace Avenue from Grant Avenue to Cathedral Place. The Spanish Market will also extend thirty-three feet, six inches (33' 6") onto the east side of Lincoln Avenue. This will allow the Spanish Colonial Arts Society the similar configuration as the Southwest Indian Arts' annual Indian Market. 
(2)  This subsection will allow the Contemporary Hispanic Market use of Lincoln Avenue from Palace Avenue intersection starting at thirty-three feet six inches (33' 6") on the east side and twenty feet (20') from the fire hydrant on the west side all the way to Federal Place. This will allow the Contemporary Hispanic Market the ability to provide for their immediate and future growth needs. Depending upon the number of booths, as an alternative to using Lincoln Avenue between Marcy Street and Federal Place, the city may require booths to be located on Marcy Street between Lincoln Avenue and Sheridan Street. 
C.  Each of the major commercial events noted in paragraph A above shall submit a preliminary site plan for their event to city staff for their review and approval no less than three (3) months prior to the event. Adequate access for public health, safety and welfare shall be maintained. Access to existing businesses shall be considered. The city may require specific booth layouts. The city shall provide written comments to the event sponsor on the preliminary site plan within thirty (30) days of receipt of the plan. A final site plan shall be submitted to city staff no less than one (1) month prior to the event for their review and approval. City staff shall conduct inspections at the time of event setup. 
D.  Community Days Festival may occur on the Plaza the Friday, Saturday and Sunday preceding the Memorial Day Weekend. 
E.  No other event shall occur on the Plaza unless it qualifies as a noncommercial use. Sponsoring organizations shall comply with the fees as authorized in subsection 23-4.7 SFCC 1987 and established by resolution, unless the event is sponsored by the city. 
F.  Except for the authority to issue Plaza Park artist/artisan licenses for sales activity on the Plaza Park pursuant to subsection 23-5.3 SFCC 1987, a permit or authority to use the Plaza Park shall be granted only to a nonprofit organization and not an organization for profit or an individual. 
G.  The governing body shall, by resolution, authorize either a committee or city staff to receive, review and approve or deny requests for any function of a commercial or noncommercial use on the Plaza or Plaza Park. 
H.  Applicants for use of the Plaza or Plaza Park shall follow and be subject to the procedures, requirements and restrictions adopted by the governing body. 
I.  Any decision by the city manager or the city manager's designee may be appealed to the governing body within thirty (30) days of the decision. This provision does not apply to Plaza Park artist/artisan licenses that shall comply with subsection 23-5.3 SFCC 1987. 
J.  The city shall appoint a staff liaison for all major commercial events or noncommercial uses on the Plaza to oversee the administration of city regulations as they apply to each event. 
K.  Fees for the major commercial events shall be established by the governing body by adoption of a resolution. Fees shall not be waived. 
L.  Sponsors of special events shall be responsible for ensuring that all participants in their event have special event vendor licenses. Special event sponsor license applications and special event vendor license applications shall include a statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees to file and pay applicable gross receipts taxes on receipts from the special event. Sponsors shall file with the city the informational material they distribute to the vendors regarding the vendor's responsibility to file and pay gross receipts taxes on their sales at the special event. 
(Ord. #1981-39,  16; Ord. #1982-10,  3; SFCC 1981,  4-17-15; Ord. #1987-50,  2; Ord. #1990-6,  3; Ord. #1995-46,  3; Ord. #2000-20,  1; Ord. #2002-41,  6; Ord. #2007-48,  3; Ord. #2008-24,  1; Ord. #2015-13,  6) 
23-5.3 - Plaza artists/artisans; licenses; requirements; selection process; conditions of operations. 
A.  Short Title. This section may be cited as the "Santa Fe Plaza Park Artist/Artisan Program Ordinance." 
B.  Plaza Park artist/artisan licenses may be issued at the discretion of the city. Such licenses shall be privileges of the holders of a license, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such licenses are not and shall not be construed as rights in property or otherwise; and may be revoked by the city at any time, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Plaza Park artist/artisan licenses may be approved by the city manager. 
(1)  A total of nineteen (19) licenses may be issued for sixteen (16) Plaza Park spaces as follows: 
(a)  Eleven (11) individual licenses (each license has a space); 
(b)  Six (6) rotating licenses (all licenses share three (3) spaces); 
(c)  Two (2) collective licenses (each license has one (1) space). 
(2)  An artist/artisan license shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from January 1 or the date issued, whichever is later, of the first year to December 31 of the fifth year, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Collectives shall be responsible for insuring that all artists/artisans operating under the collective license meet the provisions of this section. 
(4)  If after the selection process is completed, a collective or individual license is not issued, the city manager may issue additional rotating spaces or days for the existing licensed rotators. 
D.  Requirements for Artist/Artisan License Applications. 
(1)  The city shall give public notice of the application period by whatever no-fee notice or announcement channels are available through local print, audio or video media. For the purpose of issuance of licenses in 2008, applications shall be submitted by January 31, 2008. Thereafter application shall be made during the month of October beginning in 2017 and every five (5) years after that. An applicant may apply for more than one (1) type of license; however, no more than one (1) license shall be issued to one (1) applicant. An application shall be submitted for each category of license; and for each art medium. The applicant shall not apply for more than two (2) art mediums. The application shall indicate which category of license is the applicant's first choice for a license. 
(2)  Applicants shall be required to pay an application fee for each application submitted. Such application fee shall be established by a resolution adopted by the governing body. 
(3)  Each applicant, as a condition of possessing an artist/artisan license, shall allow disclosure of the applicant's name, address and nature of business as a matter of public record. 
(4)  Applicants shall provide a state taxpayer identification number. 
(5)  Except for new businesses, applicants must provide a letter of good standing from the New Mexico taxation and revenue department. 
(6)  Applicants who have not been issued a license prior to 2003 shall be residents of Santa Fe county. 
(7)  Applicants for the individual license category shall have held and operated on a continual basis an individual license, a rotating license or participated in a collective license for the five (5) consecutive years prior to applying for an individual license. An applicant who was listed as a primary maker on a deceased license holder's license application, for five (5) consecutive years, may apply for an individual license if the applicant can demonstrate that he was the primary maker of the artwork. 
(8)  Each applicant shall designate on the application the type of artwork the applicant will offer for sale. 
(9)  Each applicant shall designate on the application the proposed hours of operation of the artist/artisan. 
(10)  All persons listed on the application shall not hold any other type of city license or registration, or be a member of an organization that holds any other type of city license or registration, to sell the same types of artwork as is sold on the Plaza during the term for which the license application is made, except for the following: 
(a)  A business registration at their place of work; 
(b)  For the limited time periods for which there is a special event on the Plaza and the Plaza artist/artisan is not able to participate in the special event; 
(c)  For the days in which the artist/artisan participates in other permitted arts and craft shows and will not display on the Plaza Park; or 
(d)  For days that the rotating artist/artisan is not at the Plaza Park space, the rotating or collective artist/artisan may sell his artwork elsewhere in the city. 
(11)  Only one (1) Plaza Park artist/artisan license shall be allowed per immediate family. 
(12)  The artist/artisan license fee, as established by adoption of a resolution by the governing body, for each Plaza Park artist/artisan shall be paid to the city. No refund of any portion of the fee shall be made when a license is relinquished or revoked. If fees are not paid accordingly, the license shall be revoked. 
(13)  Each applicant shall sign a statement that: 
(a)  A declaration under penalty of perjury that the art or craft item for which the applicant seeks certification is of the applicant's own creation or the creation of the applicant's immediate family defined as a spouse, mother, father, sister, brother or child, and that the applicant neither employs other persons nor is employed by another person in the production of the art or craft item for which the applicant seeks certification, with the exception of immediate family members. 
(b)  Affirms that all artwork to be sold meets the qualifications set forth in paragraph F(3) below. Affirms that the applicant is either or both the primary maker of the artwork or the primary seller of the artwork. If the applicant is not the primary maker, the application shall indicate the name(s) of the primary maker(s). The names of all members of the applicant's immediate family who may be making or selling the artwork shall be included in the application. Up to one (1) person, other than an immediate family member, who may be selling the artwork shall be indicated on the application. 
(c)  Grants the city manager, or his designee, when a complaint has been filed with the city, the authority to physically take artwork offered for sale by the artist/artisan, on the Plaza Park, into custody for examination and investigation of that particular item for compliance with this chapter, provided that such taking shall be only for a reasonable period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(d)  Affirms that if the applicant is granted a vendor license, then the applicant shall maintain adequate insurance in at least the amounts stated in the New Mexico Tort Claims Act and shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to the city on an annual basis during the term of the license. Such insurance shall name the city as the certificate holder. Failure to provide a current certificate of insurance at the required levels of coverage may result in the suspension or revocation of the license. 
(e)  Affirms in front of a notary public that all information included in and with the application is true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge; that the applicant, if a license is issued, will comply with all provisions of this section and any other applicable laws; and acknowledges that violation of this section or any other applicable law constitutes grounds for permanent revocation of the license. 
(14)  Applications may not be submitted by any artist/artisan who previously was issued a license but the license was revoked according to the procedures for revocation of the license set forth in subsection 23-5.3(H). 
(15)  Each application shall include four (4) photographs of the artist/artisan's studio or workspace. The artist/artisan shall agree to have the studio or workspace viewed by the city or by the jury panel or its designated representative during the selection process. 
(16)  Each application shall include ten (10) photographs or digital images of each art medium, representing the range of artwork to be sold. Two (2) dimensional artists/artisans may submit reproductions in lieu of photographs or digital images. The photographed or reproduced artwork shall have been made no more than one (1) year before the date the application is submitted. All applications, photographs and/or reproductions shall remain in the possession of the city. 
(17)  Each application shall include a written statement describing the process(es) that the artist/artisan uses to create each different type of artwork. 
(18)  Each applicant shall provide a proof of their signature or stamp. 
(19)  Each application shall include up to six (6) photographs or digital images of the proposed display with close ups of the sides, front and back showing the artwork that will be sold. 
(20)  Each application shall include photographs of the applicant and every other person named on the application. Photographs shall have been taken no more than one (1) year before the date the application is submitted, of a size that allows the person to be easily recognized, and no larger than eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches. 
(21)  Each artist/artisan included in the collective license or rotating license shall meet all requirements, including but not limited to the application submittal requirements, for individual vendor license applicants unless specified otherwise. 
(22)  Each application shall be reviewed by city staff for completeness. Incomplete applications shall not be considered. 
(23)  Dimensions for photographs, digital images and reproductions shall be no larger than eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches. 
E.  Procedures for License Selection. 
(1)  For the purpose of issuance of licenses in 2008, the city manager shall designate no later than February 8, 2008 and for subsequent years, no later than October 31 beginning in 2017 and every five (5) years after that, a jury panel. The city manager may disclose the names of the jury panel to the applicants. The jury panel shall include no less than five (5) members of the public who are artists and/or artisans or who have specialized knowledge of art and/or crafts representing a broad spectrum of artistic media. Prior to the designation of a jury panel, the city shall provide to the proposed jury panel members the names of the applicants for the Plaza artist/artisan licenses. 
(a)  A proposed jury panel member shall not be allowed to serve on the committee if he is related to an applicant for a Plaza artist/artisan license by consanguinity or affinity to the third degree. For purposes of this section consanguinity means related by blood; affinity means one's spouse or related through one's spouse; and third degree means aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews. 
(b)  A proposed jury panel member shall not be allowed to serve on the committee if he has a conflict of interest with any applicant in accordance with the city of Santa Fe Code of Ethics Ordinance, Article 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
(c)  Jury panel members shall affirm that they shall be fair and impartial during the selection process. 
(2)  Applications for each category of license and each art medium shall be reviewed by city staff to ensure that the application is complete. All scores shall be calculated by city staff and thereafter applications shall be ranked accordingly. Artists/artisans of a collective shall be judged as a whole. 
(a)  If applicant applies for a primary art medium only, then the total criteria score shall be the applicants ranking. 
(b)  If applicant applies for a primary and secondary art medium and the total criteria score of the primary and secondary art medium is 55 or above, then the total criteria score of the primary art medium and the secondary art medium shall be averaged and the average shall be the applicant's ranking. 
(c)  If applicant applies for a primary and secondary art medium and the total criteria score of the primary or secondary art medium is 54 or below, then the total criteria score of the primary or secondary art medium that scored 54 or below shall not be considered as part of the average referenced in paragraph (b) above. 
(d)  In the event the applicant is approved for a license and the primary or secondary art medium applied for received a total criteria score of 54 or below, the art medium that received a 54 or below shall not be sold by the license holder. 
(3)  The jury panel shall evaluate applications according to the following selection criteria and point system: 
(a)  Originality and creativity (30 points); 
(b)  Technique, craftsmanship and production methodology (30 points); 
(c)  An interview with the applicant, at which the applicant will be asked to demonstrate the creation of the artwork to the jury panel (20 points); 
(d)  Data tracked by city staff in accordance with subsection 23-5.3H SFCC 1987, shall be included as part of the selection criteria (10 points); and 
(e)  Compatibility and diversity with Plaza activities and the appropriateness of the artwork to the Plaza Park setting. Artwork should: be culturally appropriate; reflect an aesthetic that is not offensive to the community; and be indicative of the area's landscape and history. This subsection is not intended to restrict artistic creativity, expression or style or preclude contemporary art or craft forms or production, (10 points). 
(4)  The following additional points shall be added to determine the final ranking: 
(a)  Applicants who hold an individual license at their time of application shall be granted an additional seven (7) percent to their ranking for each year they have held such a license in the current license term, not to exceed thirty-five (35) percent; 
(b)  Applicants who hold a rotating vendor license but are applying for an individual vendor license shall be granted an additional three and one-half (3.5) percent for each year they have held a rotating license in the current license term, not to exceed seventeen and one-half (17.5) percent to their ranking; 
(c)  Applicants who hold an individual or a rotating artist/artisan license and are applying for a rotating vendor license shall be granted an additional seven (7) percent to their ranking for each year they have held such a license in the current license term, not to exceed thirty-five (35) percent; 
(d)  Applicants who held more than one license in the current license term shall be granted the additional percentage points relative to the number of years they have held the respective licenses in the current license term. Partial years shall be rounded to the nearest whole year; and 
(e)  Applicants who are an immediate family member of a Plaza artist/artisan not renewing their current license, and who can document that they made the wares, may receive the respective additional points. 
(5)  Applications shall be ranked numerically on the above basis and licenses shall be awarded in order of rank. In the event there is a tie in the ranking of applicants, the jury panel shall determine the appropriate means by which the tie shall be broken. The city shall give notice of the jury panel's ranking. An artist/artisan may appeal to the city manager the decision of the jury panel within fifteen (15) days of the city's notice of ranking. The city manager or his designee has sole discretion to approve or deny the appeal. The ranking of applications shall be adjusted pending the outcome of the appeal process. 
(6)  After the appeal period has ended and any adjustments made to the ranking, the city shall mail notification of approval of licenses to successful applicants. 
(7)  Prior to issuance of any license, the city shall assign spaces on the Plaza Park. An applicant who had a license the previous license period who receives a license for the coming license period may retain the space he or she used previously. Otherwise, spaces shall be assigned by means of a lottery. Prior to issuance of the rotating licenses, the city shall, by means of a lottery assign three (3) days a week for each artist/artisan. On an annual basis, during the term of the license, the assigned days for the rotating artists/artisans shall be reassigned by the city by means of a lottery or by a pre-developed schedule. 
(8)  Each successful applicant shall obtain a city business registration as set forth in Section 18-2 SFCC 1987 for use only on the Plaza. Each applicant shall also obtain a business registration for the location where the applicant produces the artwork. Each artist included in a collective license shall obtain an artist/artisan license for the Plaza area only as set forth in subsection 18-8.10 SFCC 1987. 
(9)  The artist/artisan license fee shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the written notification of approval. If the license fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the written notification, it shall be issued to the applicant with the next-highest score. 
(10)  In the event that during the five-year license period a Plaza artist/artisan space is available but no qualified applicant remains from the selection process, the city may repeat the selection process and issue licenses for the remaining time. 
F.  Conditions of Operation. 
(1)  License holders shall not lease their designated space. 
(2)  Artists/artisans shall not hinder or impede pedestrian flow on any sidewalk within the Plaza Park or traffic flow on any street surrounding the Plaza Park. 
(3)  All artists/artisans shall occupy no more than forty-two (42) square feet (seven feet by six feet (7'6')). Artists/Artisans may have one (1) or two (2) display tables not to exceed a total of twenty-one (21) square feet. Artists/artisans may have vertical displays not to exceed six (6) feet in height from the ground. The artwork shall not be displayed more than six (6) feet from the ground. If the jury panel approved two (2) art mediums, then the artist/artisan shall display each medium equally. The artist/artisan shall not change the approved mediums during the term of the license. Each table shall have skirting around three (3) sides. The side facing the Plaza Park may be left open. An umbrella and up to two (2) chairs are permitted. In addition to the display space, an additional work surface not to exceed four (4) square feet for operations may be used provided it is not used for display. All other supplies and storage shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion within the vendor's space. 
(4)  Except as set forth in this paragraph, all artwork shall be designed and handmade by the artist/artisan to whom the license is issued or a member of the artist's/artisan's immediate family identified on the application. The license holder shall be the primary maker and/or the primary seller of the artwork as stated in subsection 23-5.3(D)(13)(b) SFCC 1987. In the event of crisis, upon approval by the city, the license holder may temporarily designate an immediate family member that has been identified on the application as an alternate primary maker or primary seller. 
(a)  All artwork shall be handmade and not machine made except as set forth in this section. The artwork shall not be assembled from kits or be minor rework. 
(b)  Works such as sculpture or paintings, drawings, prints, or photographs and all other two (2) dimensional works of art shall be originals or high quality reproductions of the artist's work, consecutively numbered and signed or stamped by the artist. Quality reproductions of two (2) dimensional works are acceptable if hand enhanced. Reproductions shall be labeled as such describing the reproduction process. No less than one-half (1/2) of the display space shall be devoted to original artwork. 
(c)  For works such as photography and digital art, the city of Santa Fe recognizes that artwork created utilizing photographs and/or computer technology are inherently reproducible. The city also recognizes that the use of cropping, enlargement, and darkroom and digital processes can produce different effects from the same image. All of this is allowed in the Santa Fe Plaza Park Artist/Artisan program provided the licensed artist/artisan show and sell only original work that they have created, signed, numbered and produced in limited editions. Such work is not considered to be reproductions. 
(d)  During the term of the license, artists/artisans shall offer for sale only the type, quality and materials of artwork indicated on the artist/artisan's license application and accepted by the jury panel. 
(e)  The artwork shall comply with any applicable federal, state or city requirements regarding the authenticity of handcrafted products. 
(f)  Each artist/artisan shall visibly display a city-issued certificate at their stall on which the following words shall appear: "The issuance of this certificate does not constitute an endorsement by the city of Santa Fe or the article sold pursuant to the terms of this certificate. 
(g)  An authenticity statement shall be included in the sale of all the artwork. The statement shall describe the process and materials used in creating the artwork. The statement shall be signed by the artist/artisan who created the artwork. 
(5)  Loud speakers, for voice transmission and amplification of music, banging, hawking or yelling are prohibited. 
(6)  Signs of all types are prohibited except the following: 
(a)  Standard size business cards; 
(b)  A sign that provides method of payment, not to exceed eight and one-half by five and one-half inches (81/2"51/2"); and 
(c)  Up to two (2) signs, not exceeding eight and one-half by eleven inches (81/2" by 11") each, describing the artwork. 
(7)  The artist's/artisan's current business registration shall be available on site for inspection at all times of operation. 
(8)  Artist/artisan displays shall only operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. each day, including weekends, except as set forth in this paragraph. Artists/artisans shall not be set up after 12:00 noon, unless authorized by the city to extend the time, on the day prior to the major commercial events specified in subsection 23-5.2A SFCC 1987 or at any time on the days said major commercial events are held on the Plaza. An artist/artisan may apply to the sponsors of those events for inclusion as one of the vendors at that event. The city may also request artists/artisans to cease operation due to security reasons or in the event of an emergency. 
(9)  A nonprofit organization issued a collective license shall determine how the time available shall be allocated among the artists/artisans included in the collective. No more than one (1) artist/artisan may display his or her own artwork at one (1) time. The collective shall provide the city a written schedule showing the days and artists/artisans for each month. Artists/artisans participating under a collective license may be replaced by other members of the collective upon review and approval by the city. 
(10)  Only the artist/artisan or a member of the artist/artisan's immediate family or the one (1) person who has been designated on the application as the non-immediate family member shall sell the artwork. The license holder may list additional immediate family members not included in the application or change the person designated as a non-family member to sell the artwork, up to twice each year. 
(11)  Artists/artisans shall not sell food or drink. 
(12)  The artists/artisans shall operate their licenses as follows: 
(a)  During the months of March through October, all individual artist/artisans shall be set up and conduct business at least fifteen (15) days per month no less than five (5) hours per day, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(b)  Rotating license holders shall be set up at least twelve (12) days per month, unless otherwise approved by the city. If the rotating license holder is not able to set up, the rotating license holder shall be responsible for contacting another rotating license holder to set up during the license holder's absence. A rotating license holder shall not use more than one (1) space per day. 
(c)  The city retains the right to modify this requirement for all artist/artisans because of inclement weather. If an individual license holder is temporarily not set up to sell, the license holder may allow an artist/artisan issued a rotating or collective license to use the space upon notification to and approval by the city. 
(13)  Temporary vehicle parking on Palace Avenue for the setup or tear down of artist/artisan displays is permitted provided that artists/artisans shall have obtained a loading zone permit from the city parking division and comply with the requirements for such permit. 
(14)  Plaza park artist/artisan vendors shall be liable for paying applicable municipal gross receipts tax and submit a current letter of good standing from the New Mexico taxation and revenue department to the city manager or designee in a sealed envelope. Letters shall be submitted on an annual basis no later than December 31. A plaza park artist/artisan vendor license is subject to revocation if any plaza park artist/artisan vendor fails to deliver the current letter of good standing to the city manager or designee. 
(15)  The city may adopt a code of conduct that shall apply to all artists/artisans. 
G.  Transfer of License. A license is not transferable except as follows: 
(1)  If at any time after issuance of a license, an artist/artisan is not going to use a license, the artist/artisan shall notify the city and relinquish the license. The city may revoke a license if the city determines that the license has not been used for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. The city may offer the remaining time on the license to the next qualified applicant from the selection process set forth in this section. 
(2)  If a Plaza artist/artisan dies or becomes incapacitated, the city manager may offer the remaining time on the license to a member of the Plaza artists's/artisan's immediate family listed on the application. However, at the expiration of the license period, that immediate family member shall be considered a new applicant in the selection process. 
H.  Enforcement. 
(1)  The city shall inspect all displays at least monthly to confirm compliance with the section and any applicable laws. Upon determining that the artist/artisan is in violation of any provision of this section, the city may suspend or revoke the license subject to the provisions of Section 23-5 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  On an annual basis, the city shall meet with artists/artisans and conduct a written evaluation of the artist/artisan's compliance with the Santa Fe Plaza Park Artist/Artisan program. The city shall retain a copy of the written evaluation. 
(3)  The city shall investigate complaints alleging violation of this section provided that the complaint is filed on a form provided by the city, signed by the complainant and including the complainant's telephone number and address. 
(4)  The city has the authority to physically take any piece of artwork for sale by the artist/artisan into custody for examination and investigation of that particular artwork for compliance with this section, provided that such taking shall be only for a reasonable period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. The city has the authority to require that an artist/artisan demonstrate the creation of the artwork at any time after issuance of the license, in order to determine if the artist/artisan is in compliance with this section. During the term of the license, city staff shall have the right to inspect the studio or workspace of the artist/artisan. 
(5)  Any artist/artisan found to be not in compliance with this section shall be notified in writing, certified mail return receipt requested, of the violation and shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the notice to come into compliance. If the violation is not corrected, the artist/artisan shall be notified in writing, certified mail return receipt requested, that the license is suspended for fifteen (15) days. If the artist/artisan is found to not be in compliance a second time within a license period, the artist/artisan shall be notified in writing that the license is suspended for thirty (30) days. If the artist/artisan is found to not be in compliance a third time within a license period, the artist/artisan shall be notified in writing, certified mail return receipt requested, that the license is revoked. For the time period a license is suspended, the fifteen (15) day requirement set forth in subsection 23-5.3F(12) shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(6)  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of receiving a notice of violation, an artist/artisan may request a hearing before the city manager or his designee. 
I.  Termination of Artist/Artisan License. The city of Santa Fe reserves the right to terminate any or all Plaza artist/artisan licenses, with or without cause, if such termination is found to be in the best interest of the city of Santa Fe. In the event of termination, the city shall provide a thirty-day notice to each plaza artist/artisan whose license is being terminated. 
J.  Amendments. The city of Santa Fe reserves the right to amend the Plaza Park Artist/Artisan Ordinance prior to the expiration of any Plaza artist/artisan license. 
K.  Continuation of Artist/Artisan License. In the event that a selection panel has not been established or the applications have not been issued, the city manager may administratively extend the term of a license, not more than two (2) times, for a six-month period each time. 
L.  Review. This section shall be reviewed by the governing body within one (1) year of adoption. 
(Ord. #1990-6,  4; Ord. #1994-56,  1; Ord. #1995-15,  1; Ord. #1995-46,  4; Ord. #2002-41,  7; Ord. #2004-33,  1; Ord. #2007-48,  2, 3; Ord. # 2017-21 ,  1) 
23-5.4 - Plaza prohibited uses. 
A.  No person shall: 
(1)  Propel or operate a skateboard on the Plaza, as defined; 
(2)  Ride a bicycle or unicycle within the Plaza Park, as defined; 
(3)  Project, throw, kick or strike any type of recreational object except as otherwise permitted within the Plaza Park, as defined; or 
(4)  Smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or any other similar device that produces smoke and/or odor within the Plaza Park, as defined. 
B.  During major commercial events, the following activities and uses are prohibited on the Plaza, as defined: 
(1)  Riding bicycles or unicycles, except by assigned city police officers and paramedics; 
(2)  Projecting, throwing, kicking or striking any type of recreational object; 
(3)  Permitting or allowing animals to be present, unless the animals are on a leash or otherwise accompanied by a human or unless one of the following applies: 
(a)  Animals are permitted or allowed as part of a designated event, as sanctioned by the city, such as the Rodeo Parade, the Desfile de los Ninos, and the Fiesta Parade; or 
(b)  The animals are service animals; and 
(4)  Propelling or operating roller skates or in-line skates. 
C.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished according to the provisions of Section 1-3 of this Code. It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce diligently the provisions of this section by issuing: 
(1)  A warning for the first offense; 
(2)  A fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for the second offense; 
(3)  A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine for the third offense. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the playing of hacky sack in the Plaza Park shall not be prohibited in the southeast grassed quadrant of the Plaza Park as long as due care for the safety of the public is exercised. The playing of hacky sack shall not take place on walkways in the Plaza Park. 
(Ord. #1995-17,  2; Ord. #1999-51,  1; Ord. # 2017-9 ,  1) 
23-5.5 - Plaza pushcart vendors; licenses; requirements; selection process; conditions of operations. 
A.  Short Title. This section may be cited as the "Plaza Pushcart Ordinance." 
B.  Plaza Pushcart Vendor Licenses. Plaza pushcart vendor licenses may be granted at the discretion of the city manager. Such licenses shall be privileges of the holders of a license, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such licenses are not and shall not be construed as rights in property or otherwise; and may be revoked by the city at any time, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Number of Plaza Pushcart Vendor Licenses. The city manager may issue up to six (6) Plaza pushcart vendor licenses per term. 
D.  Location. At the discretion of the city, the locations of the plaza pushcart vendors may be designated in the Plaza Park; the Plaza; or the Plaza periphery. 
E.  Term. A vendor license shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from January 1 or the date issued, whichever is later, of the first year to December 31 of the fifth year, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Requirements for Plaza Pushcart Vendor License Applications. 
(1)  The city shall give public notice of the application period by whatever no-fee notice or announcement channels are available through local print, audio or video media. For the 2015-2017 license term, application shall be made during the month of April 2015. For the 2018-2022 license term, application shall be made during the month of October 2017. Every five years thereafter, application shall be made during the month of September. 
(2)  Each applicant shall be required to: 
(a)  Pay an application fee. The application fee shall be established by a resolution adopted by the governing body; 
(b)  Allow disclosure of the applicant's name and address as a matter of public record; 
(c)  Provide a state taxpayer identification number; 
(d)  Except for new businesses, provide a letter of good standing from the New Mexico taxation and revenue department and the New Mexico environment department; 
(e)  Be a resident of Santa Fe county; 
(f)  Describe on the application the type of food product the applicant will offer for sale, including prices; and 
(g)  Designate on the application the proposed hours of operation of the Plaza pushcart. 
(3)  Only one (1) Plaza pushcart vendor license shall be allowed per immediate family. 
(4)  The applicant shall affirm, in the presence of a notary public, that if the applicant is granted a Plaza pushcart vendor license: 
(a)  The license fee, or any portion thereof, is nonrefundable. 
(b)  During the term of the license, the applicant shall maintain adequate insurance in at least the amounts stated in the New Mexico Tort Claims Act and shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to the city on an annual basis during the term of the license. The insurance policy shall: 
(i)  Name the city of Santa Fe as an additional insured on the policy; and 
(ii)  State that the city shall be notified no less than thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of such insurance policy for any reason. Prior to operation as a Plaza pushcart vendor, the Plaza pushcart vendor shall furnish the city with a copy of a certificate of insurance. 
(c)  The applicant shall comply with all provisions of the Plaza Pushcart Ordinance, subsection 23-5.5 SFCC 1987, and any other applicable laws; and acknowledges that violation of this section or any other applicable law constitutes grounds for permanent revocation of the license. 
(5)  An application may not be submitted by any person who previously was issued a Plaza pushcart vendor license whose license was revoked according to the procedures for revocation of the license set forth in subsection 23-5.5J. 
(6)  Each application shall include: 
(a)  Four (4) photographs of the Plaza pushcart vendor's cart, with views of the front, back and each side of the cart, and the specifications of the cart; or 
(b)  A set of blueprints and specifications of each elevation of the proposed cart, if the cart has not been built. 
(7)  If a Plaza pushcart license is awarded, the vendor shall be required to obtain a permit to operate as a food establishment from the New Mexico environment department. 
(8)  Each applicant shall submit six (6) copies of the application, with original photographs or blueprints and specifications attached. Photographs shall have been taken no more than one (1) year before the date the application is submitted. Photographs shall be no larger than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2"11"). 
(9)  Each application shall be reviewed by city staff for completeness. Incomplete applications shall not be considered. 
(10)  The pushcart vendor license fee, as established by resolution of the governing body, shall be paid to the city. No refund of any portion of the fee shall be made when a license is relinquished or revoked. If fees are not paid accordingly, the license shall be revoked. 
G.  Procedures for License Selection. 
(1)  When necessary, the city manager shall designate a jury panel comprised of five (5) members who are residents of the city of Santa Fe to select the Plaza pushcart vendors. Prior to the designation of the panel, the city shall disclose the names of the pushcart applicants to potential panel members and the names of the potential panel members to the applicants. 
(a)  A jury panel member shall be prohibited from serving on the panel if he is related to an applicant for a Plaza pushcart license by consanguinity or affinity to the third degree. For purposes of this section consanguinity means related by blood; affinity means one's spouse or related through one's spouse; and third degree means aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews. 
(b)  A jury panel member shall not be allowed to serve on the panel if he has a conflict of interest with any applicant in accordance with the city of Santa Fe Code of Ethics Ordinance, Section 1-7 SFCC 1987. 
(c)  Each jury panel member shall affirm that they shall be fair and impartial during the selection process. 
(2)  The jury panel shall review and score each application separately. Scoring shall be based on the following number of points and criteria: 
(a)  Up to fifty (50) points for quality, freshness, taste and cost of food. 
(b)  Up to thirty (30) points for a personal interview with the applicant, at which time the applicant shall be required to explain how each food item that the applicant is proposing to sell is prepared and demonstrate how at least one food item is prepared. 
(c)  Up to ten (10) points for the design of the pushcart. 
(d)  Up to ten (10) points for compatibility and diversity of the pushcart and food items with Plaza activities. 
(3)  Scores shall be calculated by city staff. The results shall be ranked numerically and licenses shall be awarded in order of rank, from highest score to lowest. In the event there is a tie in the ranking of applicants, the jury panel shall determine the appropriate means by which the tie shall be broken. The city shall provide written notice of the jury panel's ranking. An applicant may appeal to the city manager the decision of the jury panel within fifteen (15) days of the date of the city's notice of ranking. The city manager or his designee has sole discretion to grant or deny the appeal. The ranking of applications may be adjusted based on the outcome of the appeal process. 
(4)  After the appeal period has ended and any adjustments have been made to the ranking, the city shall mail notification of approval of licenses to the successful applicants. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of any license, the city shall assign pushcart spaces on the Plaza Park, the Plaza or the Plaza periphery. An applicant who had a license the previous license period who receives a license for the upcoming license period may retain the space he or she used previously. Otherwise, spaces shall be assigned by means of a lottery. 
(6)  Each successful applicant shall obtain a city business registration as set forth in Section 18-2 SFCC 1987 for use only on the Plaza, in the Plaza park or on the Plaza periphery. 
(7)  The annual Plaza pushcart vendor license fee may be paid in full or in two (2) increments. The full or initial increment shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the written notification of approval; the second increment shall be paid no later than six (6) months from the date of issuance of the license. If the license fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the written notification, the license shall be issued to the applicant with the next-highest score. 
(8)  In the event that a Plaza pushcart vendor space is available but no qualified applicant remains from the selection process, the city may repeat the selection process and issue licenses for the remaining time. 
H.  Conditions of Operation. 
(1)  Plaza pushcart license holders are prohibited from receiving money, goods or services for use of their designated space. 
(2)  Plaza pushcart vendors shall not hinder or impede pedestrian flow on any sidewalk within the Plaza Park or traffic flow on any street surrounding the Plaza Park. 
(3)  Plaza pushcarts shall occupy no more than ninety-six (96) square feet (twelve feet by eight feet (12'8')). Such space shall include a cart no larger than four feet by eight feet by eight feet (4'8'8'), an umbrella if desired, a thirty-two-gallon trash can and a fire extinguisher (class 2A1OBC) as required by the city fire code. 
(4)  Plaza pushcarts shall pass a city mandated fire inspection. 
(5)  During the term of the license, push cart vendors may offer for sale only the products that were indicated on the license application and accepted by the jury panel. 
(6)  Loud speakers, for voice transmission and amplification of music, banging, hawking or yelling are prohibited. 
(7)  Signs of all types are prohibited except the following: 
(a)  Standard size business cards; 
(b)  A sign that provides method of payment, not to exceed eight and one-half by five and one-half inches (81/2"51/2"); and 
(c)  A total of three (3) square feet for a sign or signs, attached to the cart, which may include the name of the business and the menu. 
(8)  The pushcart vendor's current business registration shall be available on site for inspection at all times of operation. 
(9)  The pushcart vendor shall identify on the application the names of the individuals who are authorized to sell from the pushcart, along with the vendor. Such individuals may include one (1) member of the pushcart vendor's immediate family, or designee, one (1) non-immediate family member and one (1) employee of the vendor. Up to two (2) times per year, during the license term, the license holder may change the names of the designated individuals. 
(10)  The pushcart vendors shall operate their licenses as follows: 
(a)  For the months of March through October, pushcart vendors shall be set up a minimum of twenty (20) days per month, for six (6) hours per day, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., during the term of the license. This requirement may be modified by the city because of inclement weather. 
(b)  During the months of November through February, pushcart vendors may be set up as the weather permits. 
(c)  Pushcart vendors shall not be set up after 12:00 noon on a day prior to a major commercial event specified in subsection 23-5.2A SFCC 1987 or at any time on the days a major commercial event is held on the Plaza. A pushcart vendor may apply to the sponsors of the major commercial events for inclusion as one of the vendors at that event. 
(d)  The city may request that pushcart vendors cease operation due to construction, for security reasons or in the event of an emergency. 
(11)  The city shall designate temporary vehicle parking for the setup or tear down of pushcarts provided that Plaza pushcart vendors shall obtain a loading zone permit from the city parking division and comply with the requirements for such permit. 
(12)  Plaza pushcart vendors shall be liable for paying applicable municipal gross receipts tax and submit a current letter of good standing from the New Mexico taxation and revenue department to the city manager or designee in a sealed envelope. Letters shall be submitted on an annual basis no later than December 31. A plaza pushcart vendor license is subject to revocation if any plaza pushcart vendor fails to deliver a current letter of good standing to the city manager or designee. 
(13)  The city manager may adopt a code of conduct that shall apply to all pushcart vendors. 
I.  Transfer of License. A license is not transferable except as follows: 
(1)  If at any time after issuance of a license, a pushcart vendor is not going to use a license, the vendor shall notify the city and relinquish the license. 
(2)  The city may revoke a license if the city determines that the license has not been used for more than twenty (20) days within a calendar month, for the months of March through October. The city may offer the remaining time on the license to the next qualified applicant from the selection process set forth in this section. 
(3)  If a pushcart vendor dies or becomes incapacitated, the city manager may offer the remaining time on the license to a member of the Plaza push cart vendor's immediate family, or designee, who has been identified on the application. However, at the expiration of the license period, that immediate family member or designee shall be considered a new applicant in the selection process should they decide to apply. 
J.  Enforcement. 
(1)  The city shall inspect all pushcarts at least monthly to confirm compliance with this section and any applicable laws. Upon determining that the pushcart vendor is in violation of any provision of this section, the city may suspend or revoke the license subject to the provisions of Section 23-5 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  The city shall investigate complaints alleging violation of this section provided that the complaint is signed by the complainant and includes the complainant's telephone number and address. 
(3)  Any vendor found to be out of compliance with this section shall be notified in writing, by certified mail or personal service, of the violation and shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice to come into compliance. If the violation is not corrected, the vendor shall be notified in writing, by certified mail or personal service, that the license is suspended for fifteen (15) days. If the vendor is found to not be in compliance a second time within a license period, the vendor shall be notified in writing, by certified mail or personal service, that the license is suspended for thirty (30) days. If the vendor is found to not be in compliance a third time within a license period, the vendor shall be notified in writing, by certified mail or personal service, that the license is revoked. 
(4)  Within five (5) calendar days of receiving a notice of violation, a vendor may request a hearing before the city manager or his designee. 
K.  Termination of Pushcart Vendor License. The city of Santa Fe reserves the right to terminate any or all Plaza pushcart vendor licenses, with or without cause, if such termination is found to be in the best interest of the city of Santa Fe. In the event of termination, the city shall provide a thirty-day written notice to each pushcart vendor whose license is being terminated. 
L.  Amendments. The city of Santa Fe reserves the right to amend the Plaza Pushcart Vendor Ordinance prior to the expiration of any Plaza pushcart vendor license. 
M.  Continuation of Plaza Pushcart Vendor License. In the event that a jury panel has not been established or the applications have not been issued, the city manager may administratively extend the term of a license, not more than two (2) times, for no more than a six-month period each time. 
N.  Review. This subsection shall be reviewed by the governing body within one (1) year of adoption. 
O.  Effective Date. This subsection shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2009-49  5; Ord. No. 2015-1  1; Ord. # 2017-21 ,  2) 
23-6 - SALE OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON CITY PROPERTY.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of SFCC 1981,  4-17-19 and Ordinance Nos. 1981-39, 1982-10, 1990-6, 2009-52 and 2011-36.  Pursuant to Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2012-20, this section shall be reviewed one year from the adoption of Ordinance No. 2012-20 (May 30, 2012). 

23-6.1 - Sale or consumption of alcohol prohibited on city property. 
    The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on property owned or controlled by the city shall be prohibited except as set forth in subsection 23-6.2 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2012-20) 
23-6.2 - Permitted locations for the sale and consumption of alcohol on city property. 
A.  The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted at the following locations on city property and must comply with the requirements of subsection 23-6.3, except that the locations described in (1), (2), (3) and (5) below are exempt from the requirements of subsection 23-6.3: 
(1)  The Santa Fe community convention center and adjacent outdoor spaces under the center's control; 
(2)  That area of the Santa Fe municipal airport main terminal building and adjacent areas operated as a restaurant; 
(3)  The Marty Sanchez links de Santa Fe (golf course); 
(4)  Buildings owned by another party located on land owned by the city; 
(5)  On land or buildings owned by the city, located within the Santa Fe Railyard, as described in the Railyard Master Plan, for which the city has entered into a lease with another party for six (6) months or more except for the Railyard park, Plaza and Alameda (as defined in the Deed of Conservation Easement dated October 1, 2004) where alcohol is prohibited, unless specifically permitted under subsection 23-6.2 SFCC 1987; 
(6)  On land or buildings owned by the city for which the city has entered into a lease with another party for six (6) months or more; 
(7)  In or on railroad cars located on railroad tracks except as prohibited by state or federal law; and 
(8)  The area of Fort Marcy ballpark designated for concessions and seating shall be used for the sale and consumption of beer and wine only and only at professional baseball games. 
B.  The governing body may approve by resolution the sale and consumption of alcohol at all other locations on city property, except within the plaza as defined by subsection 23-5.1(R). The resolution specifying the event, date, hours, location, number of expected attendees, type of alcohol to be served, and required permits shall be adopted sixty (60) days in advance of the event. The resolution shall be limited to authorization for a single event. A separate resolution shall be required for repeated events, unless otherwise stated in the resolution. 
C.  All other applicable approvals required by state or city laws and regulations shall be obtained prior to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the property described in this subsection 23-6.2. 
(Ord. #2012-20; Ord. #2013-32; Ord. #2015-7  1; Ord. No. 2015-28; Ord. No. 2016-16; Ord. No. 2016-17; Ord. No. 2016-26; Ord. #2017-3,  1; Ord. # 2017-22 ,  1) 
23-6.3 - Regulations for the sale and consumption of alcohol on city property; administration. 
A.  The regulations contained in this subsection are applicable to the locations described in subsections 23-6.2(A)(4), 23-6.2(A)(6) and 23-6.2(A)(8). The regulations are not applicable to the locations described in subsections 23-6.2(A)(1) through 23-6.2(A)(3), 23-6.2(A)(5) and 23-6.2(A)(7). 
B.  When the governing body has authorized the sale and consumption of alcohol for an event or events on city property, whether pursuant to subsection 23-6.2 SFCC 1987 or through adoption of a resolution pursuant to subsection 23-6.2(B) SFCC 1987, the event sponsor shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  The event sponsor shall establish a designated drinking area. 
(a)  Except for Fort Marcy ballpark pursuant to subsection 23-6.2(A)(7), the designated drinking area, with entrances/exits and a mandatory buffer, to prevent the circulation of alcohol outside of the designated drinking area, shall be illustrated on a diagram that shall be submitted to the city manager or their designee, at least thirty (30) days before the event. The diagram shall include the dimensions of the drinking area, the location of the entrances/exits, the height and width of the mandatory buffer, which shall be four (4) feet high and five (5) feet wide, with further requirements to be determined in consultation with the city manager, and the locations for the placement of the advertising described in paragraph (6), below. 
(b)  The seating capacity in the designated drinking area shall be comprised of no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the seating capacity of the event. The seating capacity of the designated drinking area shall be posted in the designated drinking area. 
(2)  Alcohol regulations. 
(a)  Persons shall not leave the designated drinking area with an alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Alcohol service shall cease at least one (1) hour before the end of the permitted event, or at the end of the sixth inning for professional baseball games. 
(3)  Alcohol provider. Alcohol providers shall comply with all rules regarding alcohol service established by the director of the alcohol gaming division of the New Mexico regulation and licensing department, shall be educated on the subjects specified in 60-6E-5(B) NMSA 1978, and shall: 
(a)  Obtain a special dispenser permit for beer, wine, and cider only that shall be approved by the state of New Mexico and the city of Santa Fe. 
(b)  At the main entrance of the designated drinking area and at the point of sale of alcohol, verify the age of each person so that underage persons are prohibited from entering the designated drinking area or purchasing alcohol. 
(c)  Ensure that alcohol servers are at least twenty-one (21) years old and are licensed by the state. 
(d)  Ensure that a manager, who has been identified prior to the events by the event sponsor, is present at all times in the designated drinking area. A photograph of the manager and his or her name shall be posted at the point of sale of alcoholic beverages. At all times, the manager shall wear a nametag that identifies him or her as the manager. 
(e)  Prohibit alcohol servers from drinking alcohol during the event. 
(f)  Place signs in the designated drinking area and outside the designated drinking area that indicate the illegality of selling, serving and providing alcohol to minors and intoxicated persons. 
(4)  Alcohol limits. The only allowable alcoholic beverages at permitted event(s) are beer, wine and cider. 
(a)  During the permitted event, only three (3) alcoholic beverages per person are allowed as follows: 
ABV (Alcohol by Volume) Maximum Serving Size # Standard Drinks in highest ABV 6.00% or less ABV 12 ounces 6.00% = 1 Standard Drink* 6.01% - 7.00% ABV 10 ounces 7.00% = 1 Standard Drink* 7.01% - 8.00% ABV 8 ounces 8.00% = 1 Standard Drink* 8.01% - 10.00% ABV 6 ounces 10.00% = 1 Standard Drink 10.01% - 12.00% ABV 5 ounces 12.00% = 1 Standard Drink 12.01% - 15.00% ABV 4 ounces 15.00% = 1 Standard Drink  
*  Ounces by alcohol volume are rounded down. 
** No alcoholic beverages in excess of 15 percent (15%) ABV are permitted. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage cups shall be distinguishable from nonalcoholic beverage cups. 
(c)  Nontransferable wristbands shall be issued to verify age and to indicate the number of alcoholic beverages purchased. 
(d)  The purchase of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to one (1) purchase per person at one (1) time. 
(e)  In addition to alcoholic beverages, food and non-alcoholic beverage drinks shall be sold. Water shall be provided at no cost. 
(5)  Security. Security officers shall be hired and paid for by the event sponsor(s) and a safety plan shall be provided to the city of Santa Fe police chief. For all events, one (1) security officer for every one hundred (100) attendees shall be present at all times the designated drinking area is in operation, unless additional security officers are required by the city manager and/or the state of New Mexico alcohol and gaming division. In addition to the security officers required for events in excess of one thousand (1,000) attendees, the Santa Fe police department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this subsection, 23-6.3, with associated costs to be paid for by the event organizers. 
(a)  Security guards shall possess a current license issued by the New Mexico Private Investigations Board as a level two security guard pursuant to the Private Investigations Act, Chapter 61, Article 27B NMSA 1978, as may be amended thereafter from time to time. 
(6)  Advertising. 
(a)  Advertising of alcohol or tobacco at any city park is prohibited. 
(b)  The event sponsor shall place banners in conspicuous locations in the designated drinking area and throughout the park that: 
(i)  Display phone numbers and names of organizations that provide free rides for intoxicated persons; and 
(ii)  Provide information about the effects of alcohol abuse. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall approve the number of, size and locations of the above-described banners. 
(7)  Tasting events. Events designated by the governing body as wine tasting events, pursuant to the requirements of subsection 23-6.2(B), shall abide by the requirements of subsections 23-6.3(B)(2), (3) and (5), above, as well as the following regulations: 
(a)  The area of the event used for the service and consumption of alcohol during a wine tasting event shall be illustrated on a diagram that shall be submitted to the city manager or their designee, at least thirty (30) days before the event(s). The diagram shall include the dimensions of the area, the location of entrances/exits, the width of the mandatory buffer, which shall be four (4) feet high, with further requirements to be determined in consultation with the city manager, and the locations for the placement of the advertising described in paragraph (4), above. 
(b)  Admission shall be a presold/ticketed event at which no alcohol will be offered for sale. 
(c)  Service of alcoholic beverages shall cease at the stated conclusion of the event, at which point all remaining alcohol shall be removed from view of the public. No open or unopened containers of alcohol may be removed from the event by the general public, and shall remain under the supervision of a licensed individual at all times. 
C.  Administration. The city manager or their designee shall ensure that authorized event sponsors are in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. #2012-20; Ord #2017-3,  2; Ord. # 2017-22 ,  2) 
23-7 - MUNICIPAL RECREATION COMPLEX (MRC).[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-32, 1998-22, 1998-43, 1999-11, 1999-24, 2001-8, 2002-15, 2003-23, 2006-16, 2010-11. 

23-7.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "MRC Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-7.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the MRC Ordinance is to establish regulations and fees for the MRC golf course and sports fields. 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-7.3 - Applicability. 
    The MRC Ordinance applies to the: 
A.  City of Santa Fe Municipal Golf Course, Santa Fe, New Mexico, 18 hole, 7,415 yards, Par 72, 275 acres; 
B.  City of Santa Fe Municipal Golf Course, Santa Fe, New Mexico, 9 hole, 3,000 yards, Par 28, 50 acres; 
C.  City of Santa Fe Municipal Sports Fields at the Municipal Recreation Complex, Santa Fe, New Mexico, which include: 
(1)  The MRC Soccer Fields. 
(2)  The MRC Rugby Fields. 
(3)  The three (3) MRC Baseball Fields. 
(4)  The MRC BMX Fields. 
(5)  Any other sports fields funded by the MRC bonds. 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-7.4 - MRC golf rates. 
A.    
Type NM Resident Rate Out of State Rate 18 hole walking $30.00 $35.00 18 hole with cart $48.00 $53.00 18 hole senior walking $25.00 $28.00 18 hole senior with cart $36.00 $42.00 9 hole walking $23.00 $28.00 9 hole with cart $34.00 $40.00 9 hole senior walking $20.00 $25.00 9 hole senior with cart $28.00 $32.00 G-28 talking $16.00 $22.00 G-28 with cart $27.00 $32.00 G-28 senior walking $13.00 $20.00 G-28 senior with cart $20.00 $26.00 18 hole junior walking $14.00 $14.00 9 hole junior walking $10.00 $10.00 G-28 junior walking $9.00 $9.00 Weekday tournament (Tuesday-Thursday) $44.00 $44.00 Weekend tournament (Friday-Monday) $46.00 $46.00 5 round volume discount $135.00 $165.00 10 round volume discount $250.00 $300.00 20 round volume discount $460.00 $560.00 30 round volume discount $630.00 $780.00  
B.  Hometown Hero Rate. All active military and retired military, city and county law enforcement officers, city and county fire department members, and corrections officers working within Santa Fe county may receive the senior rate as noted in subsection A above. Players seeking the senior rate must show military or law enforcement ID. The Hometown Hero Rate is only valid Monday-Friday after 10:00 a.m. and Saturday-Sunday after 1:00 p.m. 
C.  In order to maximize revenues, be competitive with area golf courses and respond to market conditions, the city manager may upon review by the city finance director authorize in writing an increase or decrease of twenty-five percent (25%) to the rates described in paragraph A above. Such rate change shall be published in a local daily newspaper. Such rate change shall apply to the general public and shall not be available to a particular group or individual. The city manager may also occasionally authorize special short term promotional rates. 
D.  Gross receipts tax shall be paid on all greens fees set forth in paragraphs A. through C. above. The sum of the rate and gross receipts tax shall be rounded to the next highest quarter. 
E.  Juniors under the age of eighteen (18) and associated with a high school golf team or a golf program will be allowed to hit two (2) large buckets of range balls each after 3:30 p.m. free of charge while participating in a scheduled season. 
F.  Once each fiscal year, the city may sponsor a benefit tournament to support children and youth recreation programs at the Genoveva Chavez Community Center and the MRC. The applicable tournament rates will not be paid from the tournament revenues, but will be incorporated into the annual MRC rate analysis and proposed rate structure to cover the tournament fees that would have been applicable. 
(Ord. #2013-26; Ord. # 2018-8 ,  1) 
23-7.5 - MRC sports fields; fees; requirements; priority for use. 
A.  Youth League Fees. Youth league, including a school, means a non-profit entity that organizes and runs programs for youth, up to the age of eighteen (18), for any sport or recreation activity. 
(1)  Each youth league and school shall be assessed a one hundred dollar ($100.00) permit fee per season, per sport or recreation activity. 
(2)  Each youth league and school shall provide adult representatives from their respective league and school to participate in the Great American Spring Cleanup and the Toss No Mas Fall Cleanup events hosted by Keep Santa Fe Beautiful. Each league shall encourage youth participants to attend the Keep Santa Fe Beautiful events. 
B.  Adult League Fees. Adult league means a non-profit entity that organizes and runs programs for adults over the age of eighteen (18) years old for a season, for any sport or recreation activity. Each adult league shall be assessed the following fees, per season, and such fees are inclusive of one (1) end-of-season tournament: 
(1)  Twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee per player, necessary to field a team according to each individual league; and 
(2)  Twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee for one (1) alternate player per team. 
C.  Tournament Fees. The city shall assess a tournament fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per team, per tournament, for the use of City of Santa Fe sports fields at the MRC. This paragraph does not apply to season adult league tournaments specified in paragraph B, above. 
D.  League Requirements. 
(1)  On an annual basis, beginning in January, each league and school shall submit a letter of request to the city that specifies the: 
(a)  Type of sport; 
(b)  Number of participants and age groups being served; 
(c)  Estimated number of days and hours needed for field use for the season; 
(d)  Mission and goals of the league or school; and 
(f)  General yearly budget that includes a general statement of financial condition of the league. 
(g)  If applicable, the number of scholarships distributed for sports registration fees for the year before, and the estimated number of scholarships for sports registration fees available for the current year. 
(2)  Each league and school shall include with the letter of request, the following documents: 
(a)  Statement that reflects the general financial standing of the league or school from: 
(i)  A certified public accountant; or 
(ii)  The national organization which the league or school belongs to; or 
(iii)  The tax returns of the league or school; 
(b)  Code of conduct; and 
(c)  Bylaws or other document demonstrating how the league or school was organized and operates. 
(3)  Each youth league shall provide the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the participant the following documents: 
(a)  Copy of the league or school's letter of request to the city, with supporting documents; 
(b)  Summary of the city's costs to maintain each sports field, which shall be provided by the city to each league and school; and 
(c)  Copy of educational material provided by the city related to the disposal of solid waste and recycling which outlines the leagues and schools responsibility to dispose of solid waste and promote recycling. 
(4)  All leagues and schools shall be responsible, on an as-used basis, for clean-up of trash and litter directly related to their use of a sports field. The clean-up shall include proper separation of recyclables from trash. 
E.  Priority of Use of MRC Sports Fields. 
(1)  MRC sports fields shall be prioritized for adult leagues with youth league use scheduled pursuant to paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  When other city sports fields are unavailable to accommodate youth leagues or youth tournaments, on a particular day, weekend or week, and the MRC fields are not scheduled for use for that particular day, weekend or week, then the MRC fields may be made available to provide a field for such event at a pro-rated MRC fee. 
F.  Noncompliance. A league or school that does not comply with the requirements of Section 23-7 SFCC 1987 shall not be granted a permit to use sports fields at the MRC or the league or school permit may be suspended. 
(Ord. #2013-26; Ord. #2014-18,  2; Ord. No. 2015-6  2) 
23-7.6 - Concessions. 
    Concessions at the MRC sports fields shall be provided through the city. 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-7.7 - Establishment of other MRC rates; authority. 
    Rates for services, rentals, concessions, merchandise sales, and other fees or rates related to the MRC may be established by the MRC director as determined to be fair and reasonable. The MRC rates shall be comparable with the rates and fees charged for similar services and products at other municipal parks, fields and facilities which are set by the parks or recreation director. 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-7.8 - Deposit of fees collected at the MRC. 
    The city shall deposit all fees collected pursuant to this section into the MRC fund. 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-7.9 - Annual review. 
    MRC user fees and other municipal sports field rates shall be reviewed on an annual basis. 
(Ord. #2013-26) 
23-8 - STREET PERFORMERS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 

23-8.1 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  Street performers enhance the character of the city of Santa Fe; and 
B.  Street performers are professional entertainers whose livelihood comes from gratuities received; and 
C.  Street performers have a right to perform on public property; and 
D.  Street performers gather crowds who are entertained by their widely varied and creative performances; and 
E.  At some locations that street performers choose to entertain there is not enough room for a crowd, therefore, public safety matters occur because sidewalks, passageways, streets or entrances to buildings are blocked; and 
F.  Conflicts among street performers, between street performers and local businesses and sponsors of permitted events often arise because of the proximity of the street performers to other street performers, local businesses, or permitted events; and 
G.  Conflicts occur because the sound level of a street performance may interfere with other street performances, business dealings or other permitted events; and 
H.  In order to facilitate and encourage street performers, there is a need to establish regulation and licensing standards for street performers related to the times and public locations for street performances, distance requirements, public safety and compliance with current ordinances. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  2) 
23-8.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure the ability of street performers to perform in public spaces and to promote harmony among street performers, local businesses, permitted event sponsors, residents and visitors to Santa Fe by: 
A.  Addressing public safety concerns; and 
B.  Balancing the interests of the street performers with those of the local businesses, permitted event sponsor, residents and visitors to Santa Fe; and 
C.  Establishing regulation and licensing standards for street performers. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  3) 
23-8.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Perform or performance means entertainment such as, but not limited to reciting or singing, acting, dancing, miming, pantomiming, playing a musical instrument or performing a theatrical or literary work. 
    Street performer means an individual who performs, as defined herein, on public property within the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  4) 
23-8.4 - Business license required. 
A.  Street performers shall be required to obtain a city business license in accordance with Section 18-1 SFCC 1987, which may be applied for each calendar year. The business license shall expressly state the type of performance the street performer will be performing. 
B.  Only one (1) member of a street performer group is required to obtain a business license, unless a member or members of the group also perform individually, then that member or those members shall be required to obtain an individual business license. 
C.  Street performers shall pay license fees in accordance with subsection 18-8.10 SFCC 1987. 
D.  At all times street performers shall have available the performer's city-issued business license and photo identification for review by the city. 
(Ord. #2000-50,  5; Ord. #2014-19,  1) 
23-8.5 - Regulations. 
    Street performers may perform on public property within the city of Santa Fe but shall comply with the following regulations. 
A.  Street performers shall not block, or cause the blocking of any sidewalk, passageway, street, or entrance to a building. 
B.  Street performers may accept contributions of money or property at their performance, in exchange for representations of their own work, except that street performers shall not exchange any type of food product or vegetation, on public property. Street performers shall not sell goods or wares on public property at a fixed price except for audio or video recordings. 
C.  Street performers shall not perform on private property unless permission is granted from the property owner. 
D.  Street performers shall not infringe on events for which a city permit has been issued so as not to detract from the stated purpose of the permit including, but not limited to, Indian Market, Spanish Market, Fiesta Arts and Crafts, Fiesta and midday or evening performances at the bandstand on the Plaza. Any performance at such events shall only be with the written permission of the sponsor. 
E.  Use of fire, spray paint or aerosol in performances is prohibited. 
F.  Street performers shall stay at least fifty (50) feet away from other street performers, Plaza Park artist/artisan vendors and Plaza pushcart vendors. 
G.  Street performers shall not be plainly audible fifty (50) feet away from the performance site. A street performer may use amplification at any location, except in the Plaza, where amplification may be used only between 1:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. daily. A street performer may not use public power sources or portable generators. 
H.  Street performers shall not remain at any one (1) location longer than two (2) hours and then shall move at least one hundred (100) feet away from that location and shall not return to that location for two (2) hours. If the location was within the Plaza, the street performer shall move off the Plaza. 
I.  Street performers shall not perform on the Plaza bandstand. 
J.  Street performers shall not perform before 8:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 1:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday, except at city parks and recreation areas where the curfew is 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Saturday, in accordance with subsection 16-13.6 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  6; Ord. #2011-39,  1; Ord. #2014-19,  2) 
23-8.6 - Other compliance. 
    The conduct and behavior of all street performers shall be in compliance with the Santa Fe City Code 1987, which includes more specifically: 
A.  Subsection 10-2.4 - Noises Prohibited; 
B.  Subsection 10-2.5 - Zone District Noise Levels; Maximum; Correction; 
C.  Subsection 23-4.2 - Solicitation on Public Property; and 
D.  Subsection 23-4.8 - Blocking or Obstructing of Sidewalks. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  7) 
23-8.7 - Criminal enforcement; penalty; administrative enforcement. 
A.  Criminal Enforcement. The police department shall enforce the provisions of Section 23-8 SFCC 1987. 
(1)  Upon the first violation of the provisions of this section, the police may issue a warning to the person violating this section. 
(2)  Upon a second and subsequent violation by the same person, the police shall issue a citation. 
(3)  Any street performer who violates any provision of Section 23-8 SFCC 1987 or any other city ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Administrative Enforcement. 
(1)  If a street performer is in violation of any provision of this section or any provision of the SFCC 1987; or is operating in a manner contrary to the public welfare, then the city finance director may, in his discretion and upon reasonable evidence: 
(a)  Send the street performer a notice of violation specifically stating: 
(i)  The nature of the violation; 
(ii)  Whether there are past due license fees; and 
(iii)  If there are past due license fees, order that the past due license fees, plus a penalty that is double the amount due, be paid immediately, upon receipt of the notice; 
(iv)  If the fee and penalty are not paid, the provisions of this section or other provisions of the SFCC 1987 are not complied with and the operation contrary to the public welfare is not discontinued within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice, the street performer shall surrender his business license to the finance director and the license shall be placed in suspension until a hearing is held before the finance committee for consideration of revocation of the business license; or 
(b)  If the street performer's action creates an immediate and imminent danger, immediately place the business license in suspension until a hearing is held before the finance committee for consideration of revocation of the business license. 
(c)  Any notice of violation shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing by the finance committee in the event the violations are not corrected. The street performer shall appear before the finance committee to show cause why the business license should not be revoked. 
(2)  If, at the hearing before the finance committee, the street performer fails to show cause why the business license fee should not be revoked, the finance committee shall issue a cease and desist order revoking the business license. Such cease and desist order shall prevent the street performer from performing on public property, for a period of one (1) year from the date of the hearing. 
(3)  The hearing before the finance committee shall not be less than thirty (30) days after the notice provided in paragraph B(1), above, is mailed, via certified mail, to the address listed on the street performer business license application. 
(4)  An appearance may be made by counsel and the street performer charged with violating this section may present evidence and call witnesses to show cause why his license should not be revoked. 
(5)  Any street performer aggrieved by the decision of the finance committee may submit to the governing body a written petition for appeal. Such petition for appeal shall: 
(a)  Be submitted to the city clerk's office within thirty (30) days of the date the action appealed was taken by the finance committee. 
(b)  Set forth that such proceedings or assessments were in error in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the appeal. 
(c)  Be on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, during the evening session. Verbal or written notice shall be given to the appellant at least five (5) calendar days prior to the meeting of the governing body. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  8; Ord. #2011-39,  2; Ord. #2014-19,  3) 
23-8.8 - Review. 
    Section 23-8 SFCC 1987 shall be reviewed by the governing body no later than October 30, 2014. 
(Ord. #2009-50,  9; Ord. No. 2014-19,  4) 

Canyon Road Periphery Area 
(Subsection 23-5.1) 
(Ord. No. 2016-32) 

Chapter XXIV - TRAFFIC 
24-1 - CITY OF SANTA FE UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of SFCC 1981,  5-6-1 and Ordinance Nos. 1978-21, 1986-49, 1987-22, 1987-30, 1987-31, 1987-32, 1989-32, 1989-40, 1992-4, 1993-32, 1995-45, 2000-24, 2000-42, 2000-45, 2004-46, 2001-14, 2003-4, 2003-24 and 2004-19. 

24-1.1 - Adoption of City of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 
A.  The governing body hereby adopts the 2010 compilation of the city of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Ordinance ("Uniform Traffic Ordinance"). The traffic violation penalty assessment schedule and the parking violation fines schedule are included in the Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 
B.  Amendments to the Uniform Traffic Ordinance shall be adopted by an ordinance of the governing body. 
C.  The Uniform Traffic Ordinance is a separate compilation and is available for inspection during the normal and regular business hours of the city clerk. A copy of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is available to any individual upon request and payment of a reasonable charge as set by the city. 
(Ord. #2006-34,  4; Ord. #2007-49,  1; Ord. #2008-44,  1; Ord. #2009-11; Ord. #2010-2,  1; Ord. #2011-4,  3; Ord. #2014-3; Ord. #2014-26) 
24-1.2 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 24-1.2, Traffic Violation Penalty Assessment Schedule, containing Ordinance Nos. 2006-34, 2009-11 and 2010-2, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2011-4. This Schedule is found in the Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 
24-1.3 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 24-1.3, Parking Violations Fines Schedule, containing Ordinance Nos. 2007-32, 2009-11 and 2010-2, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2011-4. This Schedule is found in the Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 
24-2 - TRUCK, TRUCK TRAILER AND OTHER LARGE VEHICLE TRAFFIC RESTRICTIONS.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1992-28 and 1992-37. 

24-2.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Restrictions Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2006-14,  21) 
24-2.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city has determined that: 
A.  Heavy trucks, truck trailers and other larger vehicles are regularly traveling on primarily residential streets creating unacceptable noise, safety and pollution problems; 
B.  Such truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic detracts from the quality of life and constitutes impairment to the public health, safety and welfare; 
C.  Trucks, truck trailers and other large vehicles have exceeded posted speed limits in primarily residential areas; 
D.  In the past the city adopted individual ordinances imposing specific truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle restrictions on specific streets within many neighborhoods in the community; and 
E.  It is in the public interest to have one ordinance, imposing truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle restrictions on streets within the community, which may be amended to include additional restrictions as needed so that public safety officers can enforce restrictions on a city wide basis by citing a single code section. 
(Ord. #2006-14,  22) 
24-2.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to prohibit through truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic on specific streets within the city by imposing a maximum vehicle weight limitation of five (5) tons for all trucks, truck trailers and other large vehicles. 
(Ord. #2006-14,  23) 
24-2.4 - Authority of the City of Santa Fe. 
    This section is adopted pursuant to  66-7-415 NMSA 1978, which authorizes the city to prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles, in addition to the general welfare and police powers conferred upon the city of Santa Fe by  3-17-1 et seq. and  3-18-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, and the Municipal Charter Act  3-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, which have been exercised by the city's adoption of its "Santa Fe Municipal Charter." 
(Ord. #2006-14,  24) 
24-2.5 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means any fire department vehicle, police vehicle, ambulance and any emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public utilities that are designated or authorized as emergency vehicles by the city of Santa Fe police department or the New Mexico state police division of the department of public safety. 
    Gross vehicle weight means the weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Large vehicle means recreational vehicles, non-school buses and any other vehicle not excepted by subsection 24-2.6 SFCC 1987 meeting the weight limitation for trucks and truck trailers. 
    School bus means any motor vehicle operating under the authority of the state board of education or private school or parochial school interests that is used to transport children, students or teachers to and from schools or to and from any school activity. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck trailer means any vehicle, without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(Ord. #2006-14,  25) 
24-2.6 - Restricted traffic. 
A.  Trucks, truck trailers and other large vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of five (5) tons or more are prohibited from traveling on the following streets except as set forth in paragraphs B. and C. below: 
(1)  Agua Fria Street, between Siler Road and Guadalupe Street except those vehicles making pickups or deliveries to addresses on adjacent dead end streets; 
(2)  Alamo Drive; 
(3)  Apache Street; 
(4)  Armenta Street; 
(5)  Arroyo Chamiso, Botulph and beginning at the eastern boundary of Zia Road; 
(6)  Calle Angelina; 
(7)  Calle Atajo; 
(8)  Calle La Resolana; 
(9)  Calle Sotero; 
(10)  Camino Carlos Rael between West Alameda Street and the city limits; 
(11)  Camino Carlos Rey between Cerrillos Road and Zia Road; 
(12)  Camino Consuelo; 
(13)  Camino de las Crucitas; 
(14)  Camino Encantado; 
(15)  Camino Lejo between Old Pecos Trail and Old Santa Fe Trail; 
(16)  Canyon Road; 
(17)  Catron Street; 
(18)  Circle Drive between Bishops Lodge Road and Camino Encantado; 
(19)  DeFouri Street; 
(20)  East De Vargas Street between Paseo de Peralta and Canyon Road; 
(21)  Escalante Street; 
(22)  Espinacitas Street between St. Michael's Drive and Jay Street; 
(23)  Fifth Street between St. Michael's Drive and Cerrillos Road; 
(24)  Fourth Street between Jay Street and Quapaw Street; 
(25)  Galisteo Street between Paseo de Peralta and St. Michael's Drive; 
(26)  Gonzales Road, between East Alameda and Hyde Park Road; 
(27)  Gonzales Road, north of Hyde Park Road; 
(28)  Governor Miles - those portions located within the city limits as follows: 
(a)  From just west of Chamisa Path Road to east of Dancing Ground Street; and 
(b)  From west of Nizhoni Drive to the terminus of Governor Miles Road located east of Camino Carlos Rey. 
(29)  Hillside Avenue; 
(30)  Hopewell Street between Second Street and Sixth Street; 
(31)  Jaguar Drive between NM 599 (Veterans Memorial Highway and Cerrillos Road); 
(32)  Jay Street; 
(33)  Jefferson Street; 
(34)  La Cieneguita; 
(35)  Lujan Street; 
(36)  Maez Road; 
(37)  Mann Street from Sixth Street to its terminus; 
(38)  Morelia Street between Cordova Road and Alta Vista Street; 
(39)  Navajo Street south of Taos Street; 
(40)  North El Rancho Road between West Alameda Street and Paseo De Vista; 
(41)  Osage Avenue; 
(42)  Placita de Oro; 
(43)  Quapaw Street; 
(44)  Richards Avenue between James Street and Siringo Road; 
(45)  Rio Vista Street; 
(46)  San Mateo Road from St. Francis Drive to Old Pecos Trail; 
(47)  Solana Drive; 
(48)  South Meadows to Camino Cesar E. Chavez (formerly Airport Road); 
(49)  Staab Street; 
(50)  Third Street between Hopewell Street and Jay Street; 
(51)  Valley Drive between Bishop's Lodge Road and Vallecita Drive; 
(52)  Via Antigua; 
(53)  Vitalia Street; 
(54)  West Alameda Street west of the landfill road to the city limits except those vehicles making pickups or deliveries to addresses on adjacent dead end streets; and 
(55)  Zia Road. 
B.  Trucks, truck trailers and other large vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of five (5) tons are not prohibited provided the following are met: 
(1)  The vehicle is making pick-up and deliveries or providing services to addresses on the specific streets or to addresses on adjacent streets served only by that specific street(s); or 
(2)  The vehicle is traveling to or from such addresses for the purposes of locating permanently or temporarily at such addresses provided they are in compliance with any other applicable city code. 
C.  Authorized emergency vehicles; any government or utility maintenance, service and transportation vehicles; and school buses, with a gross vehicle weight of five (5) tons or more, are permitted to travel on the streets specified above. 
(Ord. #2006-14,  26; Ord. #2006-63,  1; Ord. #2007-4,  1; Ord. #2007-22,  1; Ord. #2007-36,  1; Ord. #2007-42,  1; Ord. #2012-27; Ord. #2016-1; Ord. #2016-6; Ord. #2017-2,  1; Ord. # 2019-3 ,  1) 
24-2.7 - Notice. 
A.  The public works department shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provisions of this section at each end of that portion of any street affected and as it deems appropriate in conspicuous locations throughout the city in order to ensure that the public is notified of this section. 
B.  This section shall not be effective unless and until such signs are erected and maintained and notice thereof given in writing to the nearest officer or employee of the motor transportation division of the department of public safety authorized to issue special permits. 
(Ord. #2006-14,  27) 
24-2.8 - Penalty. 
    Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and the penalties for violation shall be those imposed by Section 66-8-7 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #2006-14,  28) 
24-3 - CAMINO ALIRE BRIDGE WEIGHT LIMIT. 

24-3.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Camino Alire Bridge Weight Limit Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1993-1,  1) 
24-3.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city has determined that: 
A.  A structural evaluation of the Camino Alire Bridge was made in December of 1992. 
B.  The results of the evaluation indicate that the bridge's load bearing capability is deteriorating, and reducing the traffic loading would increase the expected life of the bridge. 
C.  The results of the structural evaluation recommend that permissible vehicle weight loads be reduced to a maximum of five (5) tons. 
D.  Alternate routes exist for vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of more than five (5) tons to cross the Santa Fe River. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 66-7-415 NMSA, 1978 (1987 Repl. Pamp.) the governing body has the authority to restrict truck traffic upon the city's public streets. 
F.  This section does not exclude school buses, transit buses or emergency vehicles from using the Camino Alire Bridge over the Santa Fe River. 
(Ord. #1993-1,  2) 
24-3.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to extend the life of the Camino Alire Bridge over the Santa Fe River by restricting bridge traffic to vehicles with a gross weight of five (5) tons or less by imposing a weight limitation of five (5) tons for all vehicles. 
(Ord. #1993-1,  3) 
24-3.4 - Requirements. 
A.  The public works department shall forward a copy of this section to the state Motor Transportation Department as required by state law. 
B.  The public works department shall install weight limitation signs appropriately and conspicuously in advance of the bridge. 
(Ord. #1993-1,  4) 
24-3.5 - Penalty. 
    Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and the penalties for violation shall be those imposed by Section 66-87 NMSA 1978 (1991 Repl. Pamp.). 
(Ord. #1993-1,  5) 
24-4 - SANTA FE TRAFFIC OPERATIONS PROGRAM. 

24-4.1 - Short title. 
    Section 24-4 SFCC 1987 shall be referred to as the Santa Fe Traffic Operations Program or "STOP" and may sometimes be referred to as "this section." 
(Ord. #2008-47,  2) 
24-4.2 - Findings and intent. 
A.  The governing body finds that there is a significant risk to the health and safety of the community from drivers who exceed the posted speed limits. 
B.  The governing body finds that some drivers in Santa Fe repeatedly violate posted speed limits. The governing body finds that state law against speeding is inadequate to preserve public safety in Santa Fe. The governing body finds that photographic and electronic devices that measure speed are accurate and reliable. The governing body finds that implementation of enforcement of speed limits by means of photographic and electronic equipment will abate the nuisance of speeding. 
C.  The governing body declares that a vehicle used to violate this section is the instrumentality of a nuisance and shall be abated in the city. 
D.  The governing body declares that this section is a nuisance abatement section enacted pursuant to the city's inherent authority under state law and that the remedies are purely civil and not criminal in nature. 
(Ord. #2008-47,  3; Ord. # 2017-17 ,  1) 
24-4.3 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means the same as defined under NMSA 1978 66-1-4.1(E) (2001) as amended from time to time and, without limitation on the foregoing, shall mean any fire department vehicle, police vehicle, ambulance and any emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public utilities that are designated or authorized as emergency vehicles by the director of the New Mexico State Police Division of the Department of Public Safety or chief of police of the Santa Fe police department. 
    Camera, speed device or "CSD" means the instrument that detects a violation of this section. The definition includes but is not limited to electronic speed detection equipment reasonably relied upon by police officers. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe. 
    City clerk means the city clerk of the city of Santa Fe. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city of Santa Fe. 
    Contractor means a person or entity that enters a contract with the city to provide the city with photographic or electronic evidence of a violation through a CSD. 
    Default means the failure to pay a STOP fine or to timely pay a fine pursuant to a decision of a hearing officer under this section. 
    Delivery or delivered means the mailing of a STOP fine notification to a registered owner or nominee or personal service of a STOP fine notification or hearing officer decision on a registered owner or nominee. 
    Department means the police agency that employs the police officer who issued a STOP fine notification or caused a STOP fine notification to be issued. 
    Department of motor vehicles or DMV means the motor vehicle division of the taxation and revenue department of the state of New Mexico or its successor agencies. 
    Driver means the person operating a motor vehicle at the time of a violation. 
    Effective date means the date a STOP fine notification is mailed to the recipient by the contractor as indicated on the face of the STOP fine notification. 
    Finance department means the city department established as per Section 2-8 SFCC 1987. 
    Hearing officer means the city hearing officer, as appointed by the presiding judge of the civil division of the district court. The hearing officer shall be a licensed member of the New Mexico Bar. 
    Identify means to submit all information on a driver sufficient to allow the city to locate and notify the driver in lieu of the registered owner including but not limited to the name and address of the driver. 
    Nomination means identification of the actual driver of a car by the registered owner as the responsible party for a violation. 
    Nominee means the person or entity identified by the registered owner as the driver or responsible party. 
    Notice of default means a document delivered to the registered owner and stating that the registered owner is in default. 
    Nuisance means the act of operating a vehicle in violation of this section. 
    Owner's affidavit means a written statement signed under oath and submitted to the city or the city's contractor under penalty of perjury by the registered owner of a vehicle who asserts therein that the registered owner was not driving a vehicle at the time of a violation. 
    Police officer means a sworn member of the Santa Fe city police department, the Santa Fe county sheriff's office, the New Mexico state police, or any other public official with authority to stop a vehicle for a traffic violation in the city of Santa Fe. 
    Public safety aide means a public safety aide of the Santa Fe city police department. 
    Registered owner means the owner or owners of a vehicle according to the license plate number or information obtained from the department of motor vehicles, from similar motor vehicle agencies outside New Mexico, from information obtained from the Santa Fe municipal court, from the Santa Fe county magistrate court, from department records, from a CSD or from any other documentation or methods reasonably relied upon by police officers. The singular includes the plural. 
    Respondent means an accused violator who has received a STOP fine notification and requested a hearing. 
    School zone means a posted "safety zone" as that term is defined under NMSA 1978 66-1-4.16 (2001) as amended from time to time. 
    Stop fine notification means a written document mailed to the address of the registered owner or nominee stating that a violation has occurred and payment is due. 
    Violation means a violation of this section. 
(Ord. #2008-47,  4; Ord. #2009-28,  1; Ord. # 2017-17 ,  2) 
24-4.4 - Violation. 
    Any violation of Section 12-5-6 or Section 12-6-1.2 of the city of Santa Fe Traffic Code is a violation of this section. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles responding to an emergency. 
(Ord. #2008-47,  5; Ord. #2011-5,  1; Ord. # 2017-17 ,  3) 
24-4.5 - Enforcement. 
A.  Criminal Violation Observed by Police Officer. This section does not abrogate or impair enforcement authority of existing traffic laws by a police officer for a violation committed in their presence. Specifically, if a police officer personally and contemporaneously observes a traffic violation, the police officer may stop the vehicle and issue a citation under state law or the city of Santa Fe Traffic Code in the usual manner. 
B.  Violation Recorded by CSD. The contractor shall provide all evidence of a CSD recorded violation to a police officer. A police officer shall review all CSD evidence provided by the contractor. If the police officer determines that a violation has occurred, the police officer shall cause a STOP fine notification to be delivered to the registered owner. The registered owner is strictly and vicariously liable for the violation unless one (1) of the exceptions herein applies. If there is more than one (1) registered owner, all registered owners shall be jointly and severally liable. 
C.  STOP Fine Notification. 
(1)  Form and contents. The STOP fine notification shall state and contain the name of the registered owner or owners or nominee, the effective date of the STOP fine notification, the type of violation, the date, time, and location of the violation, a picture of the violation, the license number of the vehicle, the name and identification of the issuing police officer, the amount of the fine, whether the fine is a first or subsequent violation, the response due date and the address of the city clerk. The STOP fine notification shall conspicuously and in bold face type state; "Failure to pay this fine on time will lead to serious legal consequences including the assessment of additional fines and monies due. A second or subsequent STOP violation within two (2) years from the date of this STOP fine notification will lead to increasing fines and penalties." The STOP fine notification shall include an owner's affidavit form. The STOP fine notification shall contain a return envelope addressed to the contractor or the Santa Fe police department. The STOP fine notification shall inform the registered owner or the nominee of the right to request a hearing by so indicating in a space provided on the form and returning same to the city clerk within thirty-five (35) days of the effective date. 
(2)  Delivery. The STOP fine notification shall be delivered to the address of the registered owner according to the address registered with the department of motor vehicles or to the address of the nominee according to the owner's affidavit. The registered owner has a duty to timely notify DMV of a change of address and the failure to do so does not entitle the registered owner to assert the defense of inadequate notice. The mailing of a STOP fine notification to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle according to the records of DMV or to the address of the nominee according to the owner's affidavit is constructive notice of a STOP fine notification. 
D.  Response to a STOP Fine Notification. Within thirty-five (35) days from the effective date, the registered owner shall pay the fine, file an owner's affidavit making a nomination, or request a hearing. To pay the fine, the recipient shall deliver the STOP fine notification with payment to the city or to the contractor according to the instructions on the STOP fine notification. To make a nomination, the recipient shall return the STOP fine notification with a completed owner's affidavit to the contractor. To request a hearing, the recipient shall return the STOP fine notification with the request for hearing to the hearing officer. There is no fee to request a hearing. Three (3) days for mailing is not allowed and the response shall be actually received no later than thirty-five (35) consecutive days (including holidays) from the effective date. The department and hearing officer shall forthwith notify the contractor concerning the receipt of a request for hearing. If the fine has not been paid, there has been no nomination or a request for a hearing within thirty-five (35) days from the effective date, the contractor shall send written notice of default to the department and the registered owner or nominee or both. 
(1)  Payment of STOP fine. Upon receipt of the STOP fine notification, the recipient may elect to admit the violation and pay the fine. To proceed under this paragraph, the recipient shall admit the violation by signing and dating the STOP fine notification on a space provided and returning the STOP fine notification with payment to the contractor or to the city within thirty-five (35) days. The city may, but is not required to, adopt procedures for alternative methods of payment of fines using the internet or other on-line services. There shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for any payment tendered that is not honored or is returned for any reason. 
(2)  Appeal. The recipient of the STOP fine notification may request a hearing by so indicating and returning the STOP fine notification to the hearing officer within thirty-five (35) days of the effective date. There is no fee for a hearing. The hearing officer shall schedule a hearing. 
(3)  Nomination. Any registered owner who was not driving the car at the time of the violation may either accept the responsibility or identify the driver so the contractor can send a notice of violation to the driver. The nomination procedure described in this paragraph is available to any registered owner and is not limited to corporations and governmental entities. If the registered owner claims that another person was driving the vehicle at the time of the violation, the registered owner shall so indicate on the owner's affidavit and identify the person who was driving the vehicle. The contractor shall forthwith deliver the STOP fine notification and owner's affidavit to the department to the attention of the issuing police officer. The police officer may send a new STOP fine notification to the nominee or cause the contractor to deliver a new STOP fine notification to the nominee. The effective date of the STOP fine notification sent to the nominee is the day the STOP fine notification is issued to the nominee as indicated on the face of the new STOP fine notification. If the nominee successfully appeals the allegation that he or she was the driver or defaults the city may proceed against the registered owner by issuing a subsequent STOP fine notification to the registered owner with the effective date being the date so indicated on the face of the subsequent STOP fine notification. If the city cannot assert jurisdiction over the nominee, the registered owner is responsible, subject to the remaining defenses available in this section. Any registered owner who submits an owner's affidavit does so under penalty of perjury. If the registered owner operates a business that uses a fleet of one (1) or more vehicles and nominated the driver on a previous violation and the driver paid the fine or otherwise cleared the violation, a subsequent violation pertaining to the fleet vehicle shall not be considered a second, third or subsequent violation regarding that vehicle unless driven by the same driver. Without limitation on the foregoing, nomination may be used when: 
(a)  The registered owner is the United States of America, state of New Mexico, county of Santa Fe, city of Santa Fe or any other governmental entity that owns a vehicle that was being driven by a natural person who was an employee, contractor or agent of the governmental entity at the time of the alleged violation. Said entities shall nominate and identify the driver. 
(b)  The registered owner is a place of business, corporation or other non-natural entity that owns a vehicle that was being driven by a natural person who was the employee, contractor or agent of the business, corporation or other non-natural entity at the time of the alleged violation. Said entities shall nominate and identify the driver. 
(c)  The registered owner is an automobile rental business, automobile dealership or other business entity that, in the ordinary course of business, leases vehicles to others and the lessee was driving the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Said entities shall nominate and identify the driver. 
(d)  The registered owner was not driving the vehicle at the time of the violation. To assert the defense mentioned in this paragraph, the registered owner shall identify the actual driver and comply with the nomination provision above to assert this defense. 
E.  Default. If the city does not receive payment of the fine, a nomination or a request for a hearing within thirty-five (35) days from the effective date, the registered owner is in default. Default automatically results in liability to the registered owner for the violation and the registered owner is barred from requesting or obtaining any hearing on the merits of the STOP fine after the date of the default. A default results in an additional penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The department shall cause the contractor to mail the notice of default to the defaulting party. The notice of default shall inform the recipient that they have twenty (20) days from the date of mailing of the notice of default to pay the fine and default penalty or request a hearing from the hearing officer. If the default is not cured, the city may pursue all remedies for collection of a debt and is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred. An uncured notice of default shall be entered into the records of the department. The registered owner is liable for a default by a nominee. 
F.  Hearing. In the event of a demand for a hearing, the hearing officer shall hold a hearing within ninety (90) days from the date of the request for hearing unless a continuance is granted pursuant to the consent of the parties. The hearing does not need to be held within ninety (90) days if a continuance is granted. The hearing officer is in charge of the proceedings and may exclude any person for inappropriate conduct. The hearing shall be conducted following the rules of evidence and civil procedure for the district courts. The department has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation occurred. The respondent has the burden to prove any defenses by a preponderance of the evidence. A photograph, videotape or other electronic evidence of a violation is authentic, is not hearsay and shall be admitted into evidence by the hearing officer. The respondent may challenge the weight or accuracy of the evidence. If the department prevails, the respondent shall pay the fine. The hearing officer shall render a decision in writing in ten (10) days and provide the decision to the department and the finance department. A determination by the hearing officer shall not impose a total amount of penalties, fines, fees and costs in excess of that provided in this section. The hearing officer may refer the respondent to teen court according to the municipal court's procedures for teen court referrals. Failure to pay a fine as ordered by the hearing officer within twenty (20) consecutive days from the date of the decision is a default and will apply against the vehicle without service of a notice of default. Following a hearing, the respondent may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to district court within thirty (30) days of the decision and may recover the costs of filing the appeal if successful. 
G.  Defenses. The respondent may present the following defenses in addition to any other defenses available under law and has the burden of proof concerning the defenses: 
(1)  The vehicle was stolen or otherwise being driven without the registered owner's knowledge or permission at the time of the alleged violation. The registered owner shall have a police report pertaining to the theft to avail the owner of this defense. 
(2)  The ownership of the vehicle had lawfully been transferred and conveyed from the registered owner to another person before the time of the alleged violation. To assert this defense, the registered owner shall identify the transferee and provide proof of conveyance. 
(3)  The evidence does not show that a violation was committed involving the subject vehicle. 
(4)  The registered owner was not driving the vehicle at the time of the violation. To assert the defense mentioned in this paragraph, the registered owner shall identify the actual driver and comply with the nomination provision above to assert this defense. 
(5)  The vehicle should not be assessed an increased fine for a subsequent violation because the registered owner owns or operates a fleet of vehicles in a business and nominated the actual driver who satisfied payment of the fine on the previous violation. 
(6)  The registered owner did not receive notice because the STOP fine notification was not mailed to the address of record with the department of motor vehicles. 
H.  Fine. Except as set forth in paragraph (3) below, the following fines are prescribed for all violations including those imposed by the hearing officer. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the department from entering into pre-hearing settlement agreements with respondents. 
(1)  For the first violation, the fines for speeding are as follows: 
(a)  More than five (5) miles per hour over the speed limit in school and construction zones: one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(b)  More than ten (10) miles per hour over the speed limit: fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  For subsequent violations within two (2) years of the preceding violation, the fines for speeding are as follows: 
(a)  More than five (5) miles per hour over the speed limit in school and construction zones: one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00); 
(b)  More than ten (10) miles per hour over the speed limit: one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(3)  The hearing officer may allow service to the city as an alternative to payment of fines. A violator who elects to avail themselves of the option of service to the city in lieu of payment of a fine does so voluntarily and is entitled to none of the benefits conferred upon city employees, including, without limitation, workers compensation. The city is not responsible for damages incurred except as otherwise provided by law. The person seeking relief hereunder shall timely request the option of service to the city in lieu of payment of a fine by requesting a hearing before a hearing office at which to demonstrate that the person eligible for the option and shall not be in default on payment of other fines, fees, or liens levied by the city of Santa Fe. Respondents ordered to perform community service in lieu of payment of a fine shall complete such community service within thirty (30) days from the date of hearing. No person who cannot pass the background check to qualify as a volunteer may obtain relief under this paragraph. The services shall be performed with approved organizations or city departments. Services shall be rendered in not less than full hour increments and shall be credited against the fine payable at a rate consistent with the city of Santa Fe Living Wage Ordinance, Section 28-1.5(B) SFCC 1987. The city manager or designee shall establish procedures for administering this paragraph including, but not limited to, the nature of services performed. 
(Ord. #2008-47,  6; Ord. #2009-28,  2; Ord. #2011-4,  2; Ord. # 2017-17 ,  4) 
24-4.6 - Administration. 
A.  The city shall install advance signal warnings as required by Section 66-7-103.1 NMSA 1978. 
B.  The department shall be responsible for administration of this section. Reasonable rules and regulations may be promulgated by the city manager or his designee to carry out the intent and purpose of this section. 
C.  The city manager may establish a STOP ombudsman to address and resolve citizen grievances with STOP procedures and technical issues regarding automated enforcement technology. 
D.  The revenue generated through STOP shall be retained and distributed as follows: 
(1)  Each month, or other period set by contract, the city shall retain from the gross total amount of penalties, fines, fees and costs assessed and collected that month or period an amount subject to audit that is equal to the sum of the setup, maintenance, support and processing services fees charged for that month or period pursuant to contractual terms by a vendor providing systems and services including, but not limited to, all costs associated with the hearing officer, that assist the city in imposing penalties or fines and costs or fees as provided in subsection 24-4.5 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  Less the retention authorized in paragraph (1) above: 
(a)  One-half (1/2) of the net total amount assessed in penalties, fines, fees and costs by the city shall be remitted to the state treasurer and credited in accordance with  3-18-17 NMSA 1978; and 
(b)  One-half (1/2) of the net total amount assessed in penalties, fines, fees and costs shall be retained by the city for city traffic safety programs and to offset the city's reasonable costs directly related to administering the STOP program. 
(3)  In fiscal year 2009, and annually thereafter, the city shall cause an audit of the STOP program in accordance with  3-18-17 NMSA. 
E.  The police department shall present a monthly report to the public safety committee in such a format as to assist in evaluating the effectiveness of STOP in preventing accidents. The report shall include, without limitation: 
(1)  Statistical information regarding the number of violations that have been issued through STOP; and 
(2)  Types of accidents that have occurred at the intersections where STOP has been implemented; and 
F.  The police department shall report back to the governing body one (1) year after the effective date of this ordinance regarding the implementation and enforcement of this ordinance; and to present any amendments to this ordinance. 
(Ord. #2008-47,  7; Ord. #2009-28,  3) 
24-5 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-5, Hillside Avenue Truck and Truck Trailer Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-10, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  3. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-6 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Section 24-6, Camino Encantando Truck and Truck Trailer Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-24 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  4. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-7 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-7, Casa Solana Area Street Truck and Truck Trailer Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-40, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  5. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-8 - RESTRICTED USE OF GOLF CARTS. 

24-8.1 - Short title. 
    This section shall be known as the "Golf Cart Ordinance." 
(Ord. #1997-18,  1) 
24-8.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section: 
    Designated roadways mean Paseo de Peralta, and the Streets within the Paseo de Peralta Loop, excluding St. Francis Drive. 
    Golf cart means any motorized vehicle designed for operation on golf courses, principally to carry golfers and golfing equipment, but does not include any farm implement or any military law enforcement vehicle. 
    Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of the operation of a golf cart. 
    Owner means every person holding record of title to a golf cart and entitled to the use or possession thereof, other than a lien-holder or other person having a security interest only. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, and any other body or group of persons, whether incorporated or not, and regardless of the degree of formal organization. 
    Recyclable materials means items which can be reused or reprocessed for reuse. Such items may include, but are not limited to corrugated cardboard, paper, aluminum, steel, metals, glass, plastic, wood and cloth. 
    Slow-moving vehicle means any vehicle which is ordinarily moved, operated or driven at a speed less than twenty-five (25) miles an hour. 
    Trailer means a vehicle without motive power, measuring six feet wide by eight feet long by two feet in depth (6' x 8' x 2'), designed for carrying recyclables and for being drawn by a golf cart, and so constructed that no significant part of its weight rests upon the golf cart. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  2) 
24-8.3 - Unlawful operations. 
    It is a violation of this section for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this section. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  3) 
24-8.4 - General provisions, equipment and operation. 
A.  Golf carts will be permitted upon the designated roadways of the city of Santa Fe, only for the purpose of picking up recyclable materials, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. 
B.  The operator of a golf cart, when operating on the designated roadways, shall do so in conformance with all traffic and safety laws of the state of New Mexico and the city of Santa Fe. 
C.  At no time shall golf carts be operated upon sidewalks or in lawfully posted areas. 
D.  The operator of a golf cart emerging from an alley, driveway or building, or upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area, shall before entering a roadway yield the right of way to all vehicles and pedestrians approaching said roadway. 
E.  Any person operating a golf cart upon a designated roadway must possess a valid driver's license. 
F.  Every golf cart moved, operated or driven upon a designated roadway shall display a "slow moving vehicle" emblem or a flashing amber light in accordance with Section 66-3-887 NMSA 1978. 
G.  The golf cart may tow a trailer for the purpose of carrying recyclable materials. The operator of a golf cart towing a trailer on the designated roadways, shall do so in conformance with all traffic and safety laws of the state of New Mexico and the city of Santa Fe. The operator of the golf cart shall ensure that the trailer is equipped with: 
(1)  A "slow moving vehicle" emblem or flashing amber light which shall be mounted on the rear of the trailer, in accordance with Section 66-3-887 NMSA 1978; and 
(2)  At least one (1) tail lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear, two (2) red reflectors, one (1) at each side and one (1) red or amber stop lamp; and 
(3)  Mechanical or electrical turn signals. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  4) 
State Law reference- NMSA  66-6-3, 66-3-805, 66-3-807, 66-3-813, 66-3-824, and 66-3-828 regarding trailers. 
24-8.5 - Liability insurance. 
    The owner of a golf cart that is operated upon the designated roadways for any duration or distance is required to have liability insurance as provided for in the Mandatory Financial Responsibility Act [66-5-208 NMSA 1978] of the Motor Vehicle Code. A certificate of insurance shall be carried in the golf cart at all times and shall be presented by the operator of the golf cart to any law enforcement officer requesting proof of such insurance in the course of his duties. The operator of a golf cart shall ensure that such insurance coverage exists before operating a golf cart upon any roadway. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  5) 
24-8.6 - Accidents and accident reports. 
    Any operator of a golf cart involved in an accident on city of Santa Fe roadways resulting in injuries to any person, the death of any person, or resulting in damage to public or private property to the extent of five hundred dollars ($500.) or more, shall immediately notify a city law enforcement officer or the city police department of the accident and the facts in relation to the accident. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  6) 
24-8.7 - Enforcement. 
    Law enforcement officers of the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county or the New Mexico state police, displaying his badge of office, have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Golf Cart Ordinance within the city of Santa Fe, and may issue citations for any violations of the provisions of the Golf Cart Ordinance. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  7) 
24-8.8 - Penalties. 
    A violation of any section of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine, imprisonment or both as follows: 
A.  For any violations occurring upon the public highways or roadways, as provided by law for such violations applying to persons owning or operating motor vehicles according to the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance, as adopted and amended by the city of Santa Fe. 
B.  For any other violation, or for any violation not covered by the above section, the violator shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.), or imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. #1997-18,  8) 
24-8A - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Section 24-8A, Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) Waste Transportation, adopted by Ordinance No. 1997-33 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1998-14. 
24-9 - VEHICLE FORFEITURE ORDINANCE. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-9, Galisteo Street, Morella Street, Escalante Street, Catron Street, Jefferson Street and Staab Street Truck and Truck Trailer Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1997-34, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  6. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 

24-9.1 - Authority; title. 
    Section 24-9 SFCC 1987 is adopted pursuant to the statutory grant of authority contained in Sections 3-17-1 and 3-18-17A NMSA 1978 and shall be referred to as the Vehicle Forfeiture Ordinance. This section shall be effective and enforced within the geographical boundaries of the city of Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  2) 
24-9.2 - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the governing body by adopting this section: 
A.  To abate motor vehicle nuisances, in order to protect the physical and emotional health, safety, and financial interests of the public placed at risk by persons who drive while under the influence of alcohol or drugs in violation of law, or who drive in violation of driver's license restrictions, including any required ignition interlock equipment. Among the dangers created by these types of unlawful activities are the potential for serious bodily injury and loss of life to innocent persons and families, as well as considerable property damage. 
B.  To remedy the substantial risk of harm the public is faced with when vehicles are driven by repeat offenders who have not been deterred by lesser sanctions. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  3) 
24-9.3 - Vehicle nuisance. 
    A motor vehicle is hereby declared to be a public nuisance if it is: 
A.  Operated by a person who is arrested for a DWI offense; or 
B.  Operated by a person whose license is currently revoked or denied as a result of a DWI arrest or conviction prohibiting them from driving, and/or whose license is conditioned upon the use of an ignition interlock device, and the terms and conditions of the restrictions are violated. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  4) 
24-9.4 - Vehicles subject to forfeiture. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any motor vehicle which has been declared to be a public nuisance as defined in this section shall be subject to civil temporary seizure or permanent forfeiture proceedings as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  5) 
24-9.5 - Seizure; forfeiture proceeding. 
A.  Motor vehicles subject to forfeiture under this section may be seized by any police officer of the city upon an order issued by the district court. 
B.  Seizure without such order may be made if seizure is incident to an arrest of the driver of the vehicle either for driving while intoxicated or for driving while his or her license is suspended or revoked as result of a DWI arrest or conviction. 
C.  A vehicle temporarily seized under this section shall not be subject to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the police department seizing it subject only to the orders and decrees of the district court. The police department may take custody of the vehicle and remove it to appropriate and official locations within the district court's jurisdiction for disposition in accordance with this section. The police department shall establish reasonable towing and storage fees for vehicles temporarily seized in accordance with this section. 
D.  At the time of seizure, the police department shall serve a copy of the notice of forfeiture upon the operator of the vehicle. A copy of the notice of forfeiture shall be mailed postage prepaid to the lawfully registered owner as verified by the New Mexico motor vehicle division on the next city business day following the arrest. The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  The license plate number, make, type and color of the vehicle; 
(2)  The location from which the vehicle was temporarily seized; 
(3)  A statement that the vehicle has been taken into custody and stored; 
(4)  The reason for temporary seizure; 
(5)  A name, phone number and title of the city employee from whom the owner can obtain further information; 
(6)  A statement that daily storage charges shall be assessed in addition to a towing charge; 
(7)  A statement that the owner has the right to contest the validity of the impoundment by requesting a hearing in writing within fifteen (15) city business days of the date of mailing of the notice of forfeiture; and 
(8)  A copy of this section. 
E.  The owner may request that a hearing be scheduled before a hearing officer, appointed by the city manager or request an alternative as set forth in subsection 24-9.6 SFCC 1987. The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) city business days of receipt of the request unless the hearing is continued with agreement of the parties. The hearing shall be informal and not bound by the technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer shall only determine whether the police officer had probable cause to arrest the operator of the vehicle and probable cause to seize the vehicle pursuant to this section. The hearing officer shall mail or deliver written notice of his or her decision to the owner within two (2) city business days of the hearing. 
F.  If the hearing officer finds that the police officer did not have probable cause to arrest the operator and seize the vehicle, the vehicle shall be released. The hearing officer shall provide a written certificate of release to the owner of the vehicle. Upon receipt of the owner's copy of such certificate, the city shall release the vehicle to its owner or the owner's agent and storage fees shall be waived. If the owner fails to present such certificate to the city employee having custody of the vehicle within seventy-two (72) hours of its receipt, excluding non-city business days, the owner shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. The certificate shall advise the owner of such requirement. Any vehicle not recovered by the owner within thirty (30) calendar days after being notified by the city that such vehicle has been released by the city shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 291-1-4, NMSA 1978. 
G.  If the hearing officer determines that there was probable cause to arrest the operator of the vehicle and that the vehicle was properly seized, the city shall promptly file a verified petition in district court to abate the public nuisance and forfeit the vehicle pursuant to Section 30-8-8 NMSA 1978. 
H.  Any person who, pursuant to the records of the motor vehicle division of the state taxation and revenue department, has an ownership or security interest in the vehicle subject to forfeiture shall be served with notice of the verified complaint in district court. 
I.  When property is forfeited pursuant to a district court judgment, the police department shall sell the motor vehicle, and the proceeds shall be used to carry out the purpose and intent of this section. Any proceeds that exceed the costs of administering this section shall be used for DWI enforcement, prevention and education. Any proceeds from the sale of abandoned vehicles seized pursuant to this section shall also be used to carry out the purpose and intent of this section. However, the police department may keep up to six vehicles at a time for official police department purposes as set forth in department policies approved by the city manager. 
J.  Any owner of a forfeited vehicle shall not be permitted to purchase the vehicle when offered for sale by the city. 
K.  At any time subsequent to seizure and prior to the entry of a district court judgment, the owner of a motor vehicle seized under this section may retrieve personal property (other than the motor vehicle) from the motor vehicle. The police department shall allow an owner to retrieve personal property within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding non-city business days, of contacting the police department. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  6; Ord. #2012-9,  1) 
24-9.6 - Alternatives to forfeiture. 
A.  The following procedures shall apply if the owner of the vehicle was not the operator of the vehicle subject to the forfeiture: 
(1)  There shall be no forfeiture if the operator had no prior DWI history. 
(2)  Upon the first seizure of the vehicle, if the owner demonstrates by notarized affidavit that the owner of the vehicle had no prior knowledge of the operator's DWI history, no action shall be taken against the vehicle. The affidavit shall remain on file with the city. 
(3)  Upon the second seizure of the same vehicle, if the owner demonstrates by notarized affidavit that the owner of the vehicle had no prior knowledge of the operator's DWI history, the vehicle shall be immobilized for a period of thirty (30) calendar days and shall not be forfeited. 
(4)  Upon the third seizure of the same vehicle, the vehicle shall be subject to the forfeiture under this section if the operator is arrested for DWI or for driving on a license revoked or denied as a result of an arrest or conviction for DWI. 
B.  The following procedures shall apply to an owner who is properly licensed but is arrested for driving while intoxicated. 
(1)  An owner who has never been convicted of DWI may elect in lieu of forfeiture to have installed at the owner's expense an ignition interlock device approved by the New Mexico Department of Transportation Traffic Safety Bureau and/or to have the vehicle immobilized for the period of time during which the charges are pending, and, if convicted, for as long thereafter as required by the court. 
(2)  An owner whose arrest for DWI does not result in a conviction for DWI shall not have his or her vehicle forfeited. 
(3)  If the records of the activity of the ignition interlock device prior to adjudication of the DWI charge show alcohol use by any operator, regardless whether it is the owner whose use was originally declared to be a nuisance, the vehicle shall be returned to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours of notification to the owner by the police department, to be impounded until the DWI charge is resolved, and the police department may assess additional towing and storage charges. If the owner fails to return the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours after notification of an ignition interlock violation, the owner shall be deemed to have abandoned all alternatives to forfeiture and the vehicle shall be subject to forfeiture proceedings. 
C.  The following procedures shall apply to an owner who is not properly licensed but is arrested for driving on a license revoked or denied as a result of a DWI arrest or conviction, and is not also arrested at the same time for a second or subsequent DWI: 
(1)  An owner who, according to the records of the New Mexico motor vehicle division at the time of arrest, had completed the period of revocation imposed by the motor vehicle division and was eligible to have his or her license reinstated with or without an ignition interlock, may elect in lieu of forfeiture to obtain a valid license (which may contain an ignition interlock restriction) within thirty (30) calendar days of arrest and within that time pay towing, storage and administrative fees set by the police department to have the motor vehicle returned to the owner. 
(2)  If the owner needs to install an ignition interlock in the motor vehicle to obtain an ignition interlock license: 
(a)  The ignition interlock shall be installed at the police department impound lot; 
(b)  The owner shall sign an agreement with the police department allowing the owner to remove the motor vehicle from the lot for the purpose of obtaining the ignition interlock license within twenty-four (24) hours of removal of the motor vehicle, which agreement shall confess forfeiture of the motor vehicle upon any default by the owner of any terms of the agreement. The agreement shall provide, in addition to any other reasonable provisions, that: 
(i)  The owner shall report within twenty-four (24) hours of removal whether the owner has obtained the required interlock license; 
(ii)  If the interlock license has not been obtained, the owner shall have the remainder of the thirty (30) days to attempt to get the interlock license; 
(iii)  If it is not possible to obtain the interlock license, the vehicle shall be subject to forfeiture and may be seized by the police department if not returned within twenty-four (24) hours of removal; and 
(iv)  If the records of the activity of the ignition interlock device during the period of time required by the motor vehicle division show alcohol use by any operator, regardless whether it is the owner whose use was originally declared to be a nuisance, the vehicle shall be returned to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours of notification to the owner by the police department, to be immobilized for a period of sixty (60) days for a first incident of alcohol use, and the police department may assess additional towing, storage and immobilization charges. If the owner fails to return the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours after notification of an ignition interlock violation, or if there is a second incident of alcohol use, the owner shall be deemed to have abandoned all alternatives to forfeiture and the vehicle shall be subject to forfeiture proceedings. 
(3)  An owner who has previously had his or her motor vehicle returned under this section shall be ineligible to have that or any other motor vehicle returned under this section. 
D.  Immobilization may be accomplished by an immobilization device (boot) at the owner's designated location within the city limits, or by impoundment at a secure facility, in accordance with procedures established by the police department. 
E.  The operator or owner shall pay towing and storage fees and all fees associated with the immobilization or interlock device. 
F.  If a vehicle is determined by the police department to be so seriously damaged that it cannot be driven without extensive repairs and if the vehicle is not impounded as evidence, the police department may have the vehicle towed to a private towing company lot. The owner of the vehicle may recover the vehicle by a payment of two hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) to the police department and payment of any towing and storage charges to the private towing company. In the alternative, the owner may convey his or her interest in the vehicle to the police department and the owner shall not be charged any fees. If an owner does not choose either of these two (2) options within thirty (30) days of impoundment, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of by the police department. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  7; Ord. #2012-12,  2) 
24-9.7 - Property interest not subject to forfeiture. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions above, any forfeiture shall be subject to the interest of: 
(1)  Any owner or co-owner of the vehicle not listed or named on the title or registration with the operator who caused the vehicle to become a nuisance, who did not have knowledge of, nor consented to, the use of the vehicle by the operator who caused the vehicle to become a nuisance, provided that upon establishment of a prima facie case of lack of knowledge or consent by the owner or co-owner, the burden or proving knowledge and consent shall be upon the city. 
(2)  Any secured party, to the extent of the security interest, if the secured party establishes the security interest was acquired in good faith with no knowledge or reason to believe that the vehicle would be used by the operator of the vehicle declared to be a public nuisance as set forth in this section. 
B.  If the secured interest is greater than the value of the vehicle, title shall be transferred to the secured party upon approval of the district court. Any secured party acquiring an interest after the vehicle is in the custody of the police department shall have the burden of intervening in the forfeiture proceeding to protect such interest. Any interest in the vehicle shall be properly filed with the New Mexico motor vehicle division in accordance with Sections 66-3-201 and 66-3-202 NMSA 1978 before the date of incident leading to the seizure. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  8; Ord. #2012-9,  3) 
24-9.8 - Severability clause. 
    If any section, paragraph, word or phase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this section. The governing body hereby declares that it would have passed this section and each subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase thereof irrespective of any provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  9) 
24-9.9 - Effective date. 
    This section shall take effect January 22, 2007. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  10) 
24-9.10 - Review. 
    The governing body shall review this section one (1) year after the effective date in order to review enforcement and consider any amendments. 
(Ord. #2007-1,  11) 
24-9A - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-9A, North El Rancho Road Between West Alameda Street and Paseo De Vista Truck and Truck Trailer Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1998-1 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  7. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-10 - REGULATION OF SPEED AND TRAFFIC CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE ROADS. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-10, Lujan and Vitalia Streets' Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  8. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle restrictions. 

24-10.1 - Authority. 
    Pursuant to Section 3-49-1 NMSA 1978, the city may regulate the speed and traffic conditions on private property with the written consent of the owner. 
(Ord. #2006-52,  2) 
24-10.2 - Regulation of speed and traffic conditions on private roads. 
A.  Private property owner(s) or homeowners' associations may request that the city regulate the speed and traffic conditions on private roads owned by said private property owner(s) or homeowners' association. 
B.  The private road shall: 
(1)  Be located within the city limits; 
(2)  Connect directly to an existing public road within the city limits; 
(3)  Be officially shown as a private road or access easement on an approved plat; 
(4)  Provide access to no less than four (4) individual lots; and 
(5)  Be no less than five hundred (500') feet in length unless otherwise approved by the governing body. 
C.  The private property owner(s) or homeowners' association shall enter into an agreement with the city for such police services. Such agreement shall: 
(1)  Be prepared by the private property owner(s) or homeowners' association in a format acceptable to the city; 
(2)  Be signed by all property owners or homeowners' associations adjacent to, in control of or legally benefiting from the private road; 
(3)  Include a provision wherein the private property owner(s) or homeowners' association shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city against any and all injury, loss, or damage, including, without limitation, costs of defense, court costs and attorney's fees, arising out of the acts, errors, or omissions of the private property owner(s) or homeowners' association; 
(4)  Include a map of the area to be policed in a format acceptable to the city; and 
(5)  Be reviewed by the police department and the city attorney's office and approved by the governing body. 
(6)  Indicate that an engineering study has been conducted by a traffic engineer in accordance with established traffic engineering practices to establish a legally enforceable speed limit. The speed limit shall be within five (5) mph of the 85th percentile speed of free-flowing traffic, consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The 85th percentile speed is defined in the MUTCD as the speed at or below which eighty-five percent (85%) of the motor vehicles travel. The private property owner(s) may contract with the city to have such a study done at the owner(s)' cost. 
D.  A fiscal impact report shall be prepared by the police department for review by the governing body. 
E.  Private roads for which there is an agreement to provide such police services shall be indicated on a map maintained by the ITT department and available to the public at the police department headquarters. 
F.  The police department shall regulate the speed and traffic conditions on the private roads for which there is an agreement approved according to this section. 
G.  This section shall be reviewed by the governing body one (1) year after its effective date. 
(Ord. #2006-52,  3) 
24-11 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-11, Apache Street Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1999-35, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  9. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-11A - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-11A, Arroyo Chamiso, Botulph and Beginning at the Eastern Boundary of Zia Road Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2000-39, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  10. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-12 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-12, San Mateo Road from St. Francis Drive to Old Pecos Trail Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2001-1, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  11. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-13 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-13, Quapaw Street Between Second Street and Sixth Street; on Hopewell Street Between Second Street and Sixth Street; on Mann Street from Sixth Street to its Terminus; on Espinacitas Street Between St. Michael's Drive and Jay Street; on Third Street Between Hopewell Street and Jay Street; on Jay Street between Second Street and Fourth Street; on Fourth Street Between Jay Street and Quapaw Street; on Fifth Street Between St. Michael's Street and Cerrillos Road Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2000-43, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  12. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-14 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-14, Camino Consuelo and Calle La Resolana Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2000-35, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  13. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer or other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-15 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-15, Jaguar Drive Between Country Club Road and Cerrillos Road and South Meadows to Airport Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2000-34, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  14. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-16 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-16, Calle Atajo Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2001-2, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  15. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-17 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-17, Camino Carlos Rey Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2005-6, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  16. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-18 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-18, Circle Drive Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2005-20, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  17. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-19 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-19, Camino Lejo Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2005-32, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  18. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
24-20 - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Section 24-20, Governor Miles Road Truck, Truck Trailer and Other Large Vehicle Traffic Restriction, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2005-41, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-14,  19. See Section 24-2 for truck, truck trailer and other large vehicle traffic restrictions. 
EXHIBIT A - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Exhibit A, amendments to the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Code and City of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Code, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2006-34, 2007-32, 2007-49 and 2009-11, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-2. 
EXHIBIT B - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Exhibit B, Traffic Violation Penalty Assessment Schedule, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2006-34 and 2009-11, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-2. 
EXHIBIT C - RESERVED. 
Editor's note- Former Exhibit C, Parking Violation Fines Schedule, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2006-34, 2007-32 and 2009-11, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-2. 
CHAPTER XXV - WATER 
25-1 - GENERAL 
REGULATIONS. 

25-1.1 - Definitions.[1] 
    As used in this section: 
    Affordable housing means housing meeting the criteria for affordability as certified by the city's office of affordable housing including, but not limited to, housing opportunity program units, Santa Fe homes program units, low priced dwelling units as defined in Chapter XXVI SFCC 1987, affordable units located in city sponsored projects.* 
    Applicant means the person or entity seeking to transfer water rights to the city's permit for dedication to a development in satisfaction of its water budget or for deposit in the city's water bank.* 
    Building means a structure or parts of a structure covered and connected by a permanent roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure. As defined here, a building may be attached to other buildings provided it is separated from other buildings by fire resistive construction. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city of Santa Fe or his designee. 
    Construction means any new residential, commercial or industrial construction and/or renovation, including but not limited to any townhouse, hotel, motel or commercial unit not completed or under construction on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Consumptive use water rights means that portion of the consumptive use amount determined by the office of the state engineer upon transfer that can be put to beneficial use by the city under an approved permit.* 
    Cool-season grass means grass species that have active growth between fifty and eighty degrees (50 and 80) Fahrenheit, earlier germination, later dormancy and higher water requirements. Species include but are not limited to: Kentucky Bluegrass, Ryegrass, Tall Fescue and Bentgrass. 
    Development project means an application for a development or a phase of development for which an infrastructure financial guarantee has been posted requiring compliance with Section 25-12 SFCC 1987.* 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the same structure and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. A dwelling unit may include, but is not limited to, a single family house, an apartment unit, condominium unit, mobile home, or a guest house. It does not include a motel or hotel unit or similar transient lodging or rest homes, nursing homes or similar institutional facilities. 
    Effluent for purposes of this chapter means treated wastewater whether publicly or privately owned. 
    Excess water rights means water rights which have been designated for a particular development water budget but which would exceed the actual requirements of that development.* 
    Golf course means the turf area used primarily for golf that includes play areas such as greens, tees, fairways, and roughs. 
    Grey water means household wastewater other than from water closets and kitchen sinks. 
    Irrigation means the intentional application of water for purposes of sustained plant growth and/or optimized production. 
    Irrigation meter means an additional meter installed primarily for irrigation or other outdoor uses such as, but not limited to, pool or spa filling or vehicle washing. 
    Occasional flow means weekly residential or commercial applications of water for specific washing or cleaning purposes where the water specifically used for that purpose is monitored through the use of quick-acting positive shutoff hose nozzle by the responsible party and allowed to flow into adjacent property or public or private right-of-way or easement. 
    Private right-of-way means paved or unpaved streets, alleys, drainage or other private easements and lined or unlined drainage channels, which comprise or impact the local or municipal storm drainage system. 
    Public right-of-way means paved or unpaved streets, alleys, drainage, or other public easements and lined or unlined drainage channels, which comprise the municipal storm drainage system. 
    Responsible party means the owner, manager, supervisor, or person in charge of the property, facility or operation during the period of time the violation(s) are observed. 
    Santa Fe watershed means that area owned by the city or the U.S. Forest Service lying east of the Santa Fe grant, maintained for the city's water supply. 
    Sports field means a turf area used primarily for organized sports such as football, soccer, baseball, etc. 
    Sub-meter means a device owned by the property owner and installed for the purpose of measuring the consumption of water for individual dwelling units as set forth in Rule 18 of Exhibit A, Chapter XXV SFCC 1987. 
    Transferor means a person or entity to which the city has issued a water transfer certificate following successfully transferred water rights to the city's permit and conveyance of water rights title to the city.* 
    Undesignated water rights mean water rights which have not been designated for credit on a development water budget.* 
    Warm season grass means grass species that have active growth above seventy degrees (70) Fahrenheit, later germination, earlier dormancy and less water required. Species include but are not limited to: Buffalo Grass, Blue Grama Grass, Zoysiagrass, St. Augustine Grass and Bermudagrass. 
    Wastewater for purposes of this chapter means the liquid and water carried waste or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions whether treated or untreated. 
    Water means water provided through any system through which the residents of the city receive their water or any extensions thereof over which the city has jurisdiction. 
    Water credit means a consumptive use water right that has been transferred to the city's permit, title to which has been conveyed to the city, and which is held in the city's water bank in the name of a transferor.* 
    Water service connection means the physical connection of a property to the city water system. 
    Water shortage means a condition wherein the real availability of the supply of water is less than the projected demand for water as defined by the city upon review of available data. 
(Ord. #1991-4,  1; Ord. #2001-33,  1; Ord. #2003-25,  27; Ord. #2003-26,  2; Ord. #2005-2,  3; Ord. #2006-53,  1,2; Ord. #2006-60,  5; Ord. #2009-38,  9; Ord. #2010-30,  1) 
Editor's note- The definitions affordable housing, applicant, consumptive use water rights, development project, excess water rights, transferor, undesignated water rights and water credit in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987 shall be effective on January 1, 2010. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Previous subsection 25-1.1 pertaining to the prohibition of leaky appliances and Code 1953,  27-1; Code 1973,  35-1 and SFCC 1981,  4-14-1 was repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1991-4. 

25-1.2 - Compliance with Chapter XXV. 
    All city water service customers shall comply with the provisions of Chapter XXV SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-54,  1) 
25-1.3 - Compliance with Chapter XIV. 
A.  Legislative Findings. 
(1)  The city has limited water supplies. Much of the city's water supply is dependent on annual precipitation, and in times of shortage or drought, this dependence can create significant variability in the seasonal and annual water supply available to the city and its water customers. 
(2)  The governing body has recognized through the adoption of different ordinances concerning water supply and demand that it needs to aggressively pursue available avenues for increasing the city's water supply. 
(3)  The governing body recognizes that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of all customers of the city's water system that the city continue to take steps necessary to: adopt water management policies that conserve and plan for enhancements to its supply and storage of water; accurately determine the level of demand on the city's water system; ensure that the current and future water needs and priorities of the city and its water customers are met; and ensure that legal obligations of the city in operating the city water system are met. 
(4)  The development of land has significant impacts on the city's overall water consumption and conservation as well as the city's water delivery system. Potential city water customers must comply with the city's development processes and code in order for the city to adequately plan for its water supply and delivery to all customers. 
B.  All applicants for city water service requiring a water service agreement or written contract as set forth elsewhere in this chapter shall agree, as a matter of contract, that future development of the property shall require compliance with all provisions of Chapter XIV SFCC 1987 (Land Development). This provision shall apply to all agreements or contracts entered into after December 21, 2009. 
C.  Except for the requirements of Development Water Budgets, subsection 14-8.13 SFCC 1987 and Impact Fees, subsection 14-8.14 SFCC 1987, this section does not apply to: 
(1)  Public post-secondary educational institutions, as defined in, and for the express purposes found in, the Post-Secondary Educational Planning Act, Section 21-2-2 NMSA 1978; or 
(2)  Santa Fe public school projects if the Santa Fe public school district and the city have entered into a memorandum of understanding regarding the development of public school projects within the presumptive city limits. 
(Ord. #2009-54,  2; Ord. #2012-3; Ord. # 2013-3) 
25-1.4 - Enforcement. 
A.  The water division director and/or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. The director may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations to carry out the intent and purposes of the chapter. 
    B. Enforcement. There shall be five (5) modes of enforcement for enforcement of this chapter: payment of administrative fees; discontinuance of water service; prosecution of petty misdemeanors through the municipal court; injunctive relief in the district court; or determination of a public nuisance. All violations on a single date at a single customer address shall constitute a single offense for purposes of enforcement of this chapter. However, if the city instructs the water user to cease the water use that is causing the violation and the water user fails to comply, the water user may be subject to double the administrative fees. 
(1)  Administrative fees. The following administrative fees shall be assessed for violations of the provisions in Chapter XXV by customers of the municipal water system, whether inside or outside the city limits. Fees shall be assessed on the customer's utility bill. Except as otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, the fees within a calendar year shall be: twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first violation at a given customer's address; fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second violation at the same customer address; one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third violation at the same customer address, and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the fourth and each additional violation. 
(2)  Discontinuance of water service. When a violation of this chapter occurs, and the water division director or his or her designee determines that the specific circumstances of the violation are of such a serious nature as to require immediate measures and abatement, the director or designee may take steps to temporarily shut off the water source or discontinue the water service pursuant to a twenty-four-hour notice as set forth in Rule No. 9 of Exhibit A of this chapter.* The city may affect such measures by entry upon private premises if the water service or city water meter is located on private premises. Any violation which depletes the water available to the water system during a water emergency management implementation stage shall be deemed to deplete water essential to maintain fire flows and shall be cause for discontinuance of water service. 
(3)  Municipal court. 
(a)  For water users within the city limits but not a municipal water system customer, violations shall be a petty misdemeanor subject to prosecution in the municipal court. 
(b)  For municipal water system customers, depending upon the specific circumstances of the violation, the city may choose not to apply administrative fees and instead file a complaint in municipal court. 
(4)  Injunctive relief. In addition to any other relief, the city may seek injunctive relief in the district court and shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(5)  Public nuisance. The city may, in addition to any other relief, seek to abate any violation that constitutes a public nuisance as set forth in Section 10-9 SFCC 1987. 
(Code 1953,  27-5; Code 1973,  35-5; SFCC 1981,  4-14-4; Ord. #2001-34,  3; Ord. #2003-25,  29; Ord. #2006-53,  3) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
25-1.5 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-1.5, Utility Company to Furnish Water Supply Information, previously codified herein and containing portions of Code 1953,  27-4; Code 1973,  35-4; SFCC 1981,  4-14-5 and Ordinance No. 1991-4, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  30. 
25-1.6 - Inspection. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the city has probable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the city may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Code 1953,  27-6; Code 1973,  35-6; SFCC 1981,  4-14-6; Ord. #1991-4,  4; Ord. #2003-25,  31; Ord. #2006-53,  4) 
25-1.7 - Illegal use of hydrants or connections to water sources. 
    It is unlawful to turn the water on or off at any hydrant or connection without permission from the owner of the hydrant or the fire department. 
(Code 1953,  27-7; Code 1973,  35-7; SFCC 1981,  4-14-7; Ord. #1991-4,  5) 
25-1.8 - Fluoridation of water supply. 
A.  The water supply of the city shall be fluoridated by the addition of sufficient fluoride ion to raise the concentration of fluoride ion reaching each customer to an optimal level on one (1) part per million parts of water. The fluoride ion level shall be maintained between a minimum of eight-tenths (.8) part per million parts and a maximum of one and two-tenths (1.2) parts per million parts of water. 
B.  The city shall monitor fluoride ion levels in representative sample locations at least once per month. 
(Ord. #1955-4,  1, 2; Code 1973,  35-8; SFCC 1981,  4-14-8; Ord. #1991-4,  6; Ord. #2003-25,  32) 
25-1.9 - Santa Fe river watershed; prohibited uses; posting of notices. 
A.  Trespassing, bathing, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, picnicking, the grazing of all domestic livestock and unauthorized shooting, within the Santa Fe watershed are forbidden. 
B.  The properties of the water reservoir system owned by and under the control of the city of Santa Fe and the U.S. Forest Service shall be posted with notices warning all persons against violation of any of the ordinances of the city and county of Santa Fe, of the laws of the state of New Mexico, the United States government or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, which provide for the protection of any reservoir, or properties of the water impounding system. 
C.  All officials and employees of the city water utility of the city of Santa Fe are hereby vested with authority to enforce all laws, orders, rulings and regulations enacted for the protection of these waters and the properties pertaining thereto. 
D.  Any violation of this subsection or any violation of the rules and regulations jointly agreed on by the U.S. Forest Service and the governing body shall be punished as provided in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
(Code 1953,  27-8; Code 1973,  35-9; SFCC 1981,  4-14-9; Ord. #1991-4,  7; Ord. #2003-25,  33) 
25-1.10 - Regulations for the drilling of new domestic water wells. 
A.  This subsection is enacted pursuant to the authority of NMSA 1978, Section 3-53-1.1 and Section 3-53-2 and the city's home rule powers under N.M. Constitution, Article X, Section 6. 
B.  No new domestic water wells shall be drilled within the municipal boundaries of the city of Santa Fe except pursuant to a domestic water well permit issued by the city's water division director. 
C.  An application for a city domestic water well permit may only be filed subsequent to approval of a state domestic water well permit issued by the state engineer pursuant to NMSA 1978, Section 72-12-1.1. The city shall act upon all domestic water well permit applications for properties within the municipal boundaries within thirty (30) days of the request. 
D.  Subject to paragraph E below, the domestic water well permit application shall be denied if the applicant's property is within the city's municipal boundaries and the nearest property boundary is within three hundred feet (300') of a water distribution line. Water service on said property shall be provided by the city within ninety (90) days of the denial of said permit application and subject to the city's standard charges and rate schedules. However, the domestic water well permit shall be issued if the city is unable to provide water service within the ninety-day period due to city ordinance, rules, regulations or actions, but due to no fault of the applicant. 
E.  If any applicant's total cost of connection to the water system, including costs incurred by extending the service line, purchasing a meter (not to include utility expansion charges or similar charges) and physically connecting to a residence is greater than the cost of drilling a new domestic water well, the domestic water well permit application shall be approved regardless of the property's distance from the city water distribution lines. The applicant is responsible for demonstrating the cost of drilling a domestic water well on the subject property and shall present to the city a written quote by a well driller licensed by the state of New Mexico. The city shall determine whether the bid and cost analysis submitted are reasonable. Upon completion of any well drilled under this exemption, the applicant shall not use any water from the well before a sworn affidavit by the well driller is submitted to, and accepted by, the city showing the actual costs of drilling the well. If the actual cost of drilling the well exceeds the total cost of connection to the city water system, the well shall be capped and the city shall provide water service to the property. All applicable fees and costs of connection shall be paid by the applicant. 
F.  For domestic water well permit applications approved within the municipal boundaries the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  The well shall be metered to city specifications and monthly usage shall be recorded and reported annually to the city water division. 
(2)  In certain parts of the city, as delineated by the city water division, the well shall be drilled a minimum of fifty feet (50') into the Tesuque formation and a seal constructed to prevent the mixing of water between the Tesuque and Ancha formations. 
(3)  The well shall be constructed to standards established by the city of Santa Fe and shall be drilled by a licensed well driller. 
(4)  The well owner shall agree to dedicate a ten to twenty foot (10'-20') wide easement along the necessary property lines for the installation of future infrastructure, as delineated by the city water division. 
(5)  The well owner shall be subject to all city ordinances and penalties governing the amount and usage of water extracted from domestic water wells as set forth in this chapter. 
(6)  The well owner shall be subject to subsection 14-8.12F(3) SFCC 1987, requiring the well owner to demonstrate that the water demand created by the use of the structures for which the domestic water well is sought will be entirely offset in accordance with the annual water budget procedures and subsection 14-8.13F prior to use of the well. 
(7)  The city may impose further conditions as necessary to implement the city's ordinances, to prevent waste and conserve the supply of water and for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. 
G.  Any violation of this subsection shall be subject to penalties and enforcement as provided under this chapter. 
H.  The applicant may appeal the written decision of the city's water division director to the public utilities committee as set forth in Rule No. 22, paragraphs B, C, and D of Exhibit A of this chapter.* Any applicant aggrieved by the final decision of the governing body may appeal the decision to district court pursuant to the New Mexico rules of civil procedure and relevant statutes. 
I.  Staff shall report to the governing body within one (1) year on the operation of this ordinance, suggested improvements for monitoring and regulations. 
(Ord. #1999-3,  1; Ord. #2004-7,  1) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the of this chapter. 
25-1.11 - Properties outside city limits. 
A.  Purpose. The governing body has determined the following: 
(1)  The city is facing water planning issues in the region outside of the city municipal limits; 
(2)  The city is experiencing a regional drought and is actively implementing programs and policies to define the water supply and demand in the Santa Fe region; 
(3)  Existing customers of the city water system, as well as future customers, must have an adequate, safe and reliable water supply; and 
(4)  Regulations are necessary to limit the connection of city water services outside the city municipal limits. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Presumptive city limits is defined in the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county and other parties dated May 19, 2008. 
C.  Connection Prohibited. Connection to the city's water system shall be prohibited outside the presumptive city limits except as set forth in this section. 
D.  Existing Agreements. Water service connections for which there is a valid, written agreement obligating the city to allow connection to the city's water system shall be reviewed by the city attorney and may be implemented by the water division director. Existing agreements also include the extension of the utility service area by approved ordinance. 
E.  Property Owners. This section shall apply to properties owned by private property owners as well as to properties owned by county, state or federal agencies to the extent allowed by law. 
F.  Areas of Water Service. 
(1)  Requests for water service connections submitted after October 29, 2008, (date of adoption of this Ordinance) for properties located entirely within the areas to be annexed, as defined in the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county and other parties dated May 19, 2008, shall be processed in the same manner as requests for properties within the current city limits. This paragraph shall not apply to those requests described in paragraph D. above. 
(2)  Request for water service connections for properties outside the presumptive city limits including the Agua Fria traditional historic community and the county of Santa Fe fairgrounds shall be processed pursuant to paragraph I. below. For the purpose of meeting water utility regulatory requirements, new connections outside the areas described in this paragraph may be approved by agreement of the governing bodies of the city of Santa Fe and Santa Fe county. 
G.  Affordable Housing. Subsection 14-8.11 SFCC 1987 regarding the Santa Fe homes program shall apply. 
H.  Conditions of Service. 
(1)  Properties receiving city water service shall connect to the city's sewer system. If a property does not connect to the city's sewer system, the property shall not be connected to the city's water system. 
(2)  Water service approved under this section shall be only for the specific use and amount for which the application was approved. 
(3)  The property owner shall disconnect and abandon all existing wells according to the rules and regulations established by the water division. Proof of compliance with such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the water division within thirty (30) days of connection to the city's water system. 
(4)  The property owner and all future owners of the property obtaining city water service under this section shall be required to pay all applicable rates, charges and fees for city water service. 
(5)  Requirements set forth in Chapters XIV and XXV SFCC 1987 and all other rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the city's water service are also a condition of service. 
(6)  The property owner shall be required to bring water rights or retrofits pursuant to subsection 14-8.13 SFCC 1987. 
(7)  The property owner shall agree not to join the Agua Fria traditional historic community. 
I.  Water/Wastewater Review Team. 
(1)  All applications for city water service connections for properties outside the presumptive city limits shall be reviewed by the water/wastewater review team (WWRT). The team shall meet regularly and shall be made up of city and county staff from the water division, the wastewater division, the city attorney's office, the county attorney's office, the land use departments and the office of affordable housing. The team shall evaluate the completeness of the application and its compliance with this section. Applications shall include the following: 
(a)  A map of the proposed project in relation to the existing city limits and the presumptive city limits; 
(b)  A detailed description of the proposed development including the type and size of proposed land uses; 
(c)  The health, safety, public welfare or other legal reason for the connection; 
(d)  A site water budget; 
(e)  Documentation from the county of Santa Fe that county water service is not available; 
(f)  Documentation from the wastewater division regarding sewer availability; and 
(g)  A certified Santa Fe homes proposal as set forth in subsection 14-8.13 SFCC 1987 if applicable. 
(2)  If the WWRT finds the connection feasible and the legal reasons compelling, it shall submit a report to the public utilities committee of the city, the governing body and the board of county commissioners for consideration of an agreement between the city of Santa Fe and Santa Fe county pursuant to Section 2.m. of the settlement agreement and mutual release of claims entered into by the city of Santa Fe, Santa Fe county and other parties dated May 19, 2008. 
J.  Water Service Agreement. The property owner shall enter into a water service agreement with the city prior to obtaining city water service under paragraph F(1) of this section. The applicant shall agree to not oppose the annexation of the property upon the request of the city in accordance with the applicable regulations regarding such annexations. The agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney's office and the water division director. The document, which includes a legal description of the property, shall apply to the property and all future owners and shall be recorded at the county clerk's office and retained at the city clerk's office. No connection to the city's water system shall be provided until a copy of the recorded document is provided to the water division director. The requirement to agree to not oppose the annexation of the property shall not apply to property located entirely within the boundary of the Agua Fria traditional historic community. 
(Ord. #1999-42,  10; Ord. #2003-25,  34; Ord. #2005-30(A),  27; Ord. #2006-60,  6,7; Ord. #2007-45,  30; Ord. #2008-53,  3) 
25-1.12 - Annual water budget applicability. 
    The annual water budget is established as set forth in subsection 14-8.13 SFCC 1987 and shall apply accordingly. 
(Ord. #2003-36,  15) 
25-2 - COMPREHENSIVE WATER CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1978-9, 1991-4, SFCC 1981  4-15-1-4-15-5. 

25-2.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Comprehensive Water Conservation Requirements Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1997-17,  2) 
25-2.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide the city the means to reduce per capita water demands by requiring its citizens and businesses to comply with prescribed water conservation regulations and by establishing financial incentives for water conservation. 
(Ord. #1997-17,  3) 
25-2.3 - Scope. 
    There is established a city of Santa Fe comprehensive water conservation requirements ordinance that shall apply to all water whether potable or effluent, and all customers of the city water or wastewater utility wherever situated to the extent legally permissible. 
(Ord. #1997-17,  4; Ord. #2001-34,  1; Ord. #2006-53,  5) 
25-2.4 - Declaration of policy. 
A.  The governing body finds and determines that encouraging and requiring the adoption of water conservation strategies is an effective and low cost means to balance water demands with limited available water supplies and production capabilities. The governing body further recognizes that as a consequence of implementing water conservation regulations, reduction in water use provides the following benefits to the city and its citizens: 
(1)  Potential for reduction of individual residential and commercial customers' water and sewer bills. 
(2)  Serves as a critical interim source of supply while additional supply sources are being brought on line. 
(3)  Reduces peak summer demands thereby reducing short and long-term system costs. 
(4)  Enhances the local environment by minimizing transport of fertilizer, pesticide, and other contaminants from runoff to surface waters and deep percolation to ground waters. Enhances the global environment by reducing energy consumption associated with water production, treatment, and distribution. 
B.  It is hereby declared, because of the city's immediate and long-term limited water supplies and the overall benefits of water conservation, that the city promote and require water use efficiency strategies for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. #1997-17,  5) 
25-2.5 - Conservation signage and literature distribution. 
A.  Public, semi-public, and governmental restroom and shower facilities shall post not less than one (1) water conservation sign in each restroom and shower facility, the size of which shall not be less than eight and one-half (8.5") inches by eleven (11") inches. Such entities may use a city-provided sign or develop their own sign using city-provided text, the text of which shall cite this section. A "public facility" shall not include those facilities solely used by the entity's employees. A "semi-public facility" shall include all private clubs and fraternal organizations. 
B.  Hotels, motels, and other lodging facilities shall provide a water conservation informational card or brochure in a visible location in each guest room. Such facilities may use city-provided literature or develop their own using city-provided text. Lodging facilities shall not provide daily linen and towel changing for those guests staying multiple nights unless the guest specifically requests each day that the linen and towels be changed. 
C.  Retail plant nurseries shall provide their "end-use customers" with city-provided low water use landscape literature and water efficient irrigation guidelines at the time of sale of any outdoor perennial plants. An "end-use customer" is the person or persons who will ultimately own the plant material. A landscape contractor or architect is not an end-use customer. In order to facilitate the purchasing of low water use plants, nurseries are strongly encouraged to tag or sign their low water use plants that require little to no supplemental watering once established. For the sale of all turf or grass seed or sod, the customer shall be given city-provided literature indicating the restrictions to planting water consumptive turf, per Chapter XIV. 
D.  Landscape contractors, maintenance companies and architects shall provide their prospective clients with city-provided low water use landscape literature and water efficient irrigation guidelines at the time of presenting a service contract to the prospective client. Landscape professionals are strongly encouraged to educate their customers regarding the operation of their timed irrigation systems. 
E.  Title companies and others closing real estate transactions shall provide the entity purchasing a home, business, or property with city-provided indoor and outdoor conservation literature at the time of closing. 
F.  City departments shall provide indoor and outdoor conservation literature to: 
(1)  All persons applying for a building permit from the permit and development review division. 
(2)  All customers initiating new water service from the city water division. 
(Ord. #1997-17,  6; Ord. #2001-34,  2) 
25-2.6 - Indoor conservation. 
A.  Minor water system leaks, as determined by the city, from private water lines shall be repaired by the owner or property manager within fifteen (15) days of initial notification by the water division or utility billing section. A severe leak, as determined by the city, shall be repaired immediately. Failure to do so may result in discontinuance of service as set forth in Rule No. 9, Exhibit A of Chapter XXV SFCC 1987*. Proof of repair shall be provided to the water division or utility billing section upon completion of the repair. 
B.  For all new and remodeling construction and all replacements of existing plumbing fixtures, the water conservation plumbing standards set out below shall be met. In addition, with the exception of item (4), all existing nonresidential water users shall retrofit their facilities such that the plumbing fixtures noted below are in place by January 1, 2003. Any property with more than three (3) rental units shall retrofit their facilities such that the plumbing fixtures noted below with the exception of items (2) and (4) are in place by August 28, 2007, (one (1) year from the date of adoption of this subsection). Other residential water users are exempt from this retrofit requirement. 
(1)  Water closets. Water closets, either flush tank, flushometer tank, or flushometer valve operated, shall have an average consumption of not more than one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons six and one-tenth (6.1) liters) of water per flush. Water closets that use a "quick closing" flapper to limit the flush to one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons per flush shall not be used to satisfy this requirement. 
(2)  Urinals. Urinals shall have an average water consumption of not more than one (1.0) gallon (three and eight-tenths (3.8) liters) of water per flush, with the exception that, if approved by the inspection and enforcement division, blowout urinals may be installed for public use in stadiums, race courses, fairgrounds, and other structures used for outdoor assembly and for similar uses. 
(3)  Non-metered faucets. Lavatory and kitchen faucets shall be equipped with aerators and shall be designed and manufactured so that they will not exceed a water flow rate of two and one-half (2.5) gallons (nine and one-half (9.5) liters) per minute. 
(4)  Metered faucets. Self-closing or self-closing metering faucets shall be installed on lavatories intended to serve the transient public, such as those in, but not limited to, service stations, train stations, airports, restaurants, and convention halls. Metered faucets shall deliver not more than one-quarter (0.25) gallons (ninety-five one-hundredths (0.95) liter) of water per use. 
(5)  Shower heads. Shower heads shall be designed and manufactured so that they will not exceed a water supply flow rate of two and one-half (2.5) gallons (nine and one-half (9.5) liters) per minute. Emergency safety showers are exempted from this provision. 
(6)  Installation. Water-conserving fixtures shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers' instructions to maintain their rated performance. 
(7)  Certificate of compliance. For all new and remodeling construction, all of the requirements regarding water conserving devices mentioned in subsections 25-2.6B(1) SFCC 1987 through 25-2.6B(6) SFCC 1987 shall be certified by a certificate of compliance by a licensed mechanical contractor or plumbing permittee before or at the time of the final plumbing inspection. 
(8)  Authority to permit exceptions. The city water division director upon advice of the city plumbing inspector shall have the authority to permit exceptions to subsections 25-2.6B(1) through 25-2.6B(7) SFCC 1987 in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards. 
(9)  Existing nonresidential water users failing to retrofit their facilities by September 8, 2003, and existing properties with more than three (3) rental units failing to retrofit their facilities by February 28, 2008, (eighteen (18) months after the adoption of this subsection), shall be subject to four (4) times the administrative fees set forth in subsection 25-1.4A(1) SFCC 1987. After a citation for failing to retrofit has been issued, the water user shall have sixty (60) days to obtain such retrofits. During that sixty-day period, no further citations shall be issued. After that sixty-day period, the water service shall be discontinued following notice as set forth in Exhibit A, Rule No. 9, paragraph D(3) of this chapter.* 
    C. Eating Establishments. All public and private eating establishments shall provide water or other beverages only upon request. Eating establishments serving beverages in single-serving containers shall only serve an accompanying glass if specifically requested by the customer. These provisions shall be clearly communicated to the customer in at least one (1) of the following manners: on the menu, by use of a "table tent" or similar signage on the table, or posting in a location clearly visible to all customers. All catering and banquet operations shall comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
    D. Lodging Restrictions. Lodging facilities shall not change the sheets and towels more than once every four (4) days for guests staying more than one (1) night unless there is a justified public health reason. Guests shall be informed of this requirement in writing at the time of check-in. 
(Ord. #1977-17,  7; Ord. #2001-34,  3; Ord. #2003-31,  1; Ord. #2006-53,  6) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
25-2.7 - Outdoor conservation. 
    A. Outdoor Irrigating Periods. Outdoor irrigation is prohibited between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from May 1 through October 31. It is recommended that outdoor irrigation be limited to no more than three (3) days per week, recognizing that low-water use plants and native vegetation require less irrigation. The use of grey water meeting applicable standards or water harvested from precipitation is encouraged. 
B.  Exemptions: 
(1)  Nursery stock. Plants being irrigated for retail or wholesale sale are exempt from paragraph A, above. 
(2)  Licensed landscape maintenance and contracting companies. All manual watering by landscape maintenance and contracting companies licensed with the state of New Mexico construction industries division and registered with the city of Santa Fe business registration unit are exempt from paragraph A, above. Landscape companies setting timed irrigation systems shall ensure that the systems comply with paragraph A. 
(3)  Acequias. Irrigation from acequias is exempt from paragraph A, above. 
C.  Potable Water Use for Certain Construction and Landscaping Purposes. For those construction and landscaping purposes permitted by the New Mexico environment department to use treated wastewater, potable water use from a fire hydrant is prohibited. Treated wastewater from the city's effluent fill station or other facility shall be used for such purposes. 
D.  Swimming Pools. Swimming pools located outside shall be covered when not in use. Kiddy pools less than twelve inches (12") in depth and less than five feet (5') in diameter are exempt from this provision. 
E.  Vehicle Washing: All manual car washing shall use a hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle. 
(1)  All vehicle washing at residences is limited to once-per month per vehicle; and 
(2)  Commercial car sale lots and other commercial and governmental entities with on-site vehicle washing facilities are limited to washing each vehicle one (1) time per month unless there is a demonstrated public health or safety reason for more frequent washings. Commercial car sale lots shall be allowed to wash cars at time of sale and prior to placing in a showroom. 
F.  Hard Surface Cleaning. Using water to clean hard surfaces with a hose or power washer, including but not limited to, the cleaning of tennis courts, sidewalks, driveways, walls, parking areas and outdoor eating areas is prohibited except to prevent or abate public health, safety or accident hazards when alternative methods are not available. 
G.  Turf. The planting of cool season grass is strongly discouraged. For further restrictions see subsection 14-8.4F(4) SFCC 1987. 
H.  Authority to Permit Exceptions. The city water division director has the authority to permit exceptions to this subsection provided the water conservation objective is not compromised. 
(Ord. #1997-17,  8; Ord. #2001-34,  4; Ord. #2003-12,  1; Ord. #2006-53,  7) 
25-2.8 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-2.8, Water Conservation Surcharges, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1997-17, 2001-26, 2003-25 and 2005-2 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-53. 
25-2.9 - Turf Restrictions. 
A.  Turf requirements for sports fields and golf courses shall comply as follows: 
(1)  Sports fields or golf courses created after August 25, 2003, shall not install turf grass sod or turf grass seed mixes. 
(2)  Sports fields or golf courses created prior to this date which have artificial turf shall not convert to natural turf. 
(3)  Sports fields or golf courses created prior to this date which have natural turf may be permitted to rehabilitate the natural turf if the area needing to be rehabilitated does not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the turf area. Rehabilitation of more than seventy-five percent (75%) shall not be permitted. Such turf areas in excess of seventy-five percent (75%) shall be replaced with artificial turf. 
B.  This section shall apply to all customers of the city water system except city owned sports fields or golf courses or to sports fields or golf courses which are part of a public or private preschool, elementary school, junior high school, high school, college or university. 
C.  As appropriate, violations of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. In addition, the city may discontinue water service following a twenty-four-hour notice as set forth in Rule No. 9 of Exhibit A, Chapter XXV SFCC 1987* or pursue enforcement of these specific performance requirements in an appropriate court of law. 
(Ord. #2003-28,  3) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
  
Former subsection 25-2.9, Effective Dates, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1997-17, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2001-34. 
25-2.10 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-2.10, Rainwater Harvesting Barrel Rebate Program, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2003-29 and 2006-53 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2008-50. 
25-2.11 - Other water conservation programs. 
    The governing body may adopt other water conservation programs, including but not limited to, rebates or vouchers for water saving devices. Such programs shall be adopted by resolution and shall not exceed funds allocated by the governing body each fiscal year. No water user shall be eligible for both a rebate or voucher and a retrofit credit for any specific water saving device. 
(Ord. #2003-29,  2) 
25-2.12 - Domestic water leak repair loan program. 
A.  Legislative Findings. The governing body has determined the following: 
(1)  The city has limited water resources especially in years of drought; 
(2)  The city of Santa Fe encourages the community to conserve water in various ways; 
(3)  Leaking toilets, leaking water service lines, and leaking fixtures may account for a significant portion of residential water consumption; and 
(4)  The costs associated with water leak repair can prove discouraging or prohibitive for many residential water customers. 
B.  The city shall provide loans for the purpose of water leak repair provided the following are met: 
(1)  The loan recipient shall be a residential customer of the city water system; 
(2)  Loans are available on a first come, first serve basis until all dedicated funds are expended; 
(3)  Each city water customer shall be limited to a one-time loan; 
(4)  The loan recipient shall be solely responsible for employing and settling with the leak repair contractor; 
(5)  The contractor performing repair work shall be licensed in New Mexico for residential plumbing; 
(6)  The city does not warrant, endorse, or assume liability for the quality or performance of the repair performed; 
(7)  The loan amount shall be within the city's adopted range; 
(8)  The loans shall be extended at zero percent interest; 
(9)  The loans shall be repaid according to established terms including minimum monthly payments and penalties for nonpayment; 
(10)  The city may file a lien in the amount of the loan on the property for which the loan is applied for. The city may assess a fee for the placement of the lien. The lien shall be removed upon full loan repayment; 
(11)  The amount of the lien shall be increased by eighteen percent (18%) per annum in the event that the loan is not repaid in the agreed upon time period; 
(12)  The loan recipient shall agree to allow the city access to inspect the premises in order to verify repair; 
(13)  Loans for leak repair shall comply with city program guidelines as adopted. 
C.  The total of all loans shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body each fiscal year. 
D.  A tracking mechanism shall be utilized to evaluate the cost and water savings of the leak repair program. The water conservation committee shall annually evaluate the program's effectiveness and propose program improvements. This information shall be reported annually to the governing body. 
(Ord. #2004-15,  1) 
25-3 - WATER WASTE. 

25-3.1 - Applicability. 
A.  Section 25-3, regarding water waste, shall apply to the following: 
(1)  All water customers of the city water system whether located within the city limits or not; 
(2)  All city effluent customers whether located within the city limits or not; 
(3)  All customers of the city waste water system whether located within the city limits or not; or 
(4)  All private well users located within the city limits. 
B.  The use of the word water in Section 25-3 shall mean potable water, stormwater, grey water and effluent. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  11) 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1991-4 and 2001-33. 
25-3.2 - Wasting water prohibited. 
A.  No person, firm, corporation, or county, state, or federal facility or operation, to the extent allowed by law, or municipal facility or operation shall waste water. Wasting water shall include the following: 
(1)  The pumping, flow, release, escape, or leakage of any water from any pipe, valve, faucet, irrigation system or facility onto any hard surface such that water accumulates as to either create individual puddles in excess of ten (10) square feet in size or cause flow along or off of the hard surface or onto adjacent property or the public right-of-way, arroyo, or other water course, natural or manmade; 
(2)  During the irrigation of landscaping, the escape or flow of water away from the landscaping plants being irrigated even if such flow is not onto a hard surface; or 
(3)  The nonbeneficial use of water including, but not limited to, leaks to indoor and outdoor plumbing system (faucets, hose bibs, showerheads, toilets, etc.) in excess of one-quarter (0.25) gallons per minute. Residential water users, both single family and multifamily are exempt from the indoor plumbing aspect of this restriction. 
B.  The following are not considered wasting water. However, water used in such a manner shall be minimized: 
(1)  The incidental runoff caused by vehicle washing provided that a shut-off-nozzle is used; 
(2)  The periodic draining of swimming pools and spas; 
(3)  Flow resulting from temporary city water system failures or malfunctions; 
(4)  Water applied, such as in the cleaning of hard surfaces, to prevent or abate public health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available. The washing of outdoor eating areas and sidewalks is not included in this exemption; 
(5)  Flow resulting from vandalism, high winds, emergencies, and acts of God; 
(6)  The occurrence of an unforeseeable or unpreventable failure or malfunction of plumbing or irrigation system hardware, prior to the issuance of a formal warning notice issued to the water user as set forth in subsection 25-1.4 SFCC 1987; 
(7)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities; 
(8)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(9)  Flow resulting from a routine inspection or maintenance of the city water system; 
(10)  Water used by the city of Santa Fe in the installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of public facilities and structures including but not limited to traffic control devices, storm and sanitary sewer structures and road or street improvements; or 
(11)  Water used by contractors or utilities including but not limited to saw cutting of pavement, compaction, or other use required under terms of their contract. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  13) 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1991-4 and 2001-33 
25-3.3 - Warnings. 
    For unforeseeable or unpreventable violations, the city shall generally issue a formal warning notice prior to taking enforcement action. Prior to taking formal enforcement action, the city may instruct the water user to not operate the faulty system until it is appropriately repaired. If operating the system is integral to the operation of the facility the city may at its discretion provide a fifteen (15) calendar day time period in which to remedy the violation prior to commencing formal enforcement action. Once a warning notice has been issued, subsequent water waste events shall be subject to enforcement action. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  15) 
25-3.4 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-3.4, Administration of the Chapter, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1991-4 and 2003-25, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  16. 
25-3.5 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-3.5, Scope, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2001-33 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  17. 
25-4 - SANTA FE MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM.[3] 
    The purpose of this section is to adopt rules and regulations and rates governing the operation of the Santa Fe municipal water system and providing for certain procedures with respect to the water system. 
(Ord. #1995-19,  1) 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The exhibits referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 

25-4.1 - Rules and regulations adopted. 
    Rules and regulations governing water service by the Santa Fe municipal water system are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this chapter as Exhibit A.** (Ord. #1995-19,  1; Ord. #2005-2,  5-11; Ord. #2006-53,  36; Ord. #2010-5,  1; Ord. #2011-13,  1) 
25-4.2 - Rates and charges adopted. 
A.  Rates and charges related to water service by the Santa Fe municipal water system are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this chapter as Exhibit B. 
(Ord. #1995-19,  1; Ord. #2000-01,  1; Ord. No. 2001-11,  1; Ord. #2002-24,  4; Ord. #2004-18,  1; Ord. #2004-29,  1; Ord. #2005-2,  12-16; Ord. #2006-53,  37-43; Ord. #2007-40,  15; Ord. #2008-7; Ord. #2009-2,  1; Ord. #2010-6,  1; Ord. #2013-27,  1; Ord. No. 2016-39  11) 
25-4.3 - Commercial water user rebate regulations. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide rebate incentives for commercial water users to lower water consumption through the installation and use of high-efficiency water-saving equipment or technology. 
B.  Commercial Water User. For purposes of this subsection, a commercial water user is a City of Santa Fe water division customer with a commercial sector designation within the current billing system that has installed high-efficiency water-saving equipment. Commercial water users include schools and governmental entities. 
C.  Applicability of Commercial Water User Rebate. 
(1)  The city water conservation office shall apply the one-time rebate to an applicant's bill after one (1) year of water use monitoring and an evaluation of water savings. For new commercial customers, the one (1) year monitoring period will begin after the water saving equipment or technology is installed, not at the time water service is established. 
(2)  The rebate shall be applicable to water saving hardware or systems and for complex or untested measures which shall be verified by the city. 
(3)  An applicant shall coordinate with the water conservation office prior to the installation of retrofits or high efficiency water saving equipment. 
(4)  The rebate amount shall be based on the amount of water the high efficiency water saving equipment has saved. 
D.  Application for Commercial Water User Rebate. A new or existing commercial water user may apply for a rebate, regardless of meter size. An applicant for a commercial water user rebate shall provide the following information on the application: 
(1)  The address and account of the commercial water user to show that the commercial water user is a city of Santa Fe water utility customer; 
(2)  The high-efficiency water-saving measures, including hardware or systems that relate to the commercial water user's commercial water processes that minimize water use and eliminate water waste; 
(3)  Data to show that at least eighty percent (80%) of water fixtures are water efficient and free of leaks; and 
(4)  An estimate of the amount of water the commercial water user has saved as a result of the high-efficiency water-saving measures. 
E.  Application Evaluation. 
(1)  An applicant for a commercial water user rebate shall: 
(a)  Participate in a pre-application meeting with the water conservation office for a water use evaluation prior to installation of the equipment or technology. 
(b)  Participate in a post-installation inspection of the high efficiency water saving equipment with the water conservation office. 
(c)  Provide original receipts for the purchase of the equipment that the rebate is being applied for. 
(2)  The city water conservation office shall monitor water consumption of the applicant over the course of the first year after the application has been submitted to determine whether the overall water consumption per unit has decreased. If after one (1) year an applicant's water consumption shows no indication of water savings then the rebate shall not be applied to the account. 
F.  Administrative Procedures. 
(1)  The city shall establish administratively minimum standards of water-use efficiency for qualifying rebates for commercial fixtures, appliances and landscape efficiencies, which include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Replacement of water-cooled equipment with new air-cooled equipment 
(b)  Process water reclamation systems 
(c)  Elimination of water intensive phases of industrial processes 
(d)  Cooling tower modifications 
(e)  Industrial laundry equipment upgrades or reuse 
(f)  Large scale irrigation improvements (when applying under this category, monitoring of water savings will be two (2) watering seasons). 
(2)  All rebates are given in the form of a credit that is applied to the customer's water bill. 
(3)  The city shall also establish administratively the quantity of water conserved by each piece of high-efficiency water-saving equipment and the amount that the water bill will be rebated. 
(Ord. #2013-27,  2) 
Editor's note- The exhibits referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter. 
25-4.4-25-4.9 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsections 25-4.4 through 25-4.9, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1995-19, 2002-2 and 2002-3 were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25. 
25-5 - WATER EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-16, 1996-20, 2000-30, 2000-40, 2002-17, 2003-12, 2005-2. 

25-5.1 - Short Title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Water Emergency Management Plan Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2006-53,  19) 
25-5.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide the city the means to implement measures for controlling water use in response to water-system-related emergencies or water emergencies due to catastrophic events or prolonged drought that may disrupt systems operations or the sources of water supply. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  20) 
25-5.3 - Policy. 
    Because of the conditions prevailing in the city of Santa Fe, the general welfare requires that the city maximize the beneficial use of its available water resources to the extent to which it is capable, and that the conservation of water is to be practiced with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof and to avoid waste or unreasonable use, in the interest of the citizens of the city of Santa Fe and for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  22) 
25-5.4 - Declaration of water emergency. 
    The city manager is authorized to determine and declare that a water emergency exists in any and/or all parts of the city or county of Santa Fe that is served by the city water system if any of the following occur: 
A.  The water division director reports the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  A general water supply shortage due to increased demand or limited supply; 
(2)  Distribution or storage facilities of the city water system are inadequate to meet demand or minimum quality standards; or 
(3)  A disruption of the supply, storage, or distribution facilities of the city water or wastewater systems. 
B.  An unforeseeable disaster or water emergency such as an earthquake, or other catastrophic event affecting the Santa Fe or Rio Grande river watershed, or groundwater supply, or other major disruption in the water supply. 
C.  A foreseeable water emergency, such as extended drought conditions. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  24) 
25-5.5 - Water emergency management plan. 
    There is established a city of Santa Fe water emergency management plan that shall apply to all water customers of the city water system whether located within the city limits or not and to all private well users located within the city limits. 
A.  Regulations, Rules and Conditions. Upon the determination that a water emergency exists, the city manager is authorized to promulgate such regulations, rules and conditions relative to the time of using water, the purpose or purposes for which it may be used, and such other necessary limitations as will, in the city manager's opinion, relieve the water shortage in any such section or sections of the water service area. 
B.  Water Emergency Implementation Stages. In addition to the regulations, rules and conditions set forth in subsection 25-5.5A SFCC 1987, the city adopts the following water emergency implementation stages. The water use restrictions and fines of each stage apply to all higher stages unless the higher stage has a more stringent requirement. At no time shall water be wasted or used unreasonably. 
(1)  "Water Warning - Orange" implementation stage is incorporated into Chapter XXV SFCC 1987 as Exhibit "C"*; and 
(2)  "Water Crisis - Red" implementation stage is incorporated into Chapter XXV SFCC 1987 as Exhibit "D".* 
(Ord. #2006-53,  26, 44, 45; Ord. #2011-38,  1, 2) 
Editor's note- *Exhibits C and D, referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
25-5.6 - Implementation of water emergency management plan. 
A.  Upon the city manager's determination and declaration that a water emergency exists as set forth in subsection 25-5.4 SFCC 1987, the city manager shall determine which provisions of the water emergency management plan are necessary to implement in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to prudently plan and supply water to the city water system's customers. 
B.  Upon the city manager's determination that implementation of the water emergency plan is necessary, the city manager is authorized and directed to implement the provisions of the water emergency management plan, as follows: 
(1)  The city manager may implement the promulgation of rules, regulations and other conditions relative to the time of using water, the purpose or purposes for which it may be used, and such other necessary limitations as will, in the city manager's opinion, relieve the water shortage in any such section or sections of the water service area; and 
(2)  The city manager is authorized to implement the "Water Warning-Orange" water emergency implementation stage as shown on Exhibit "C" or the "Water Crisis - Red" water emergency implementation stage as shown on Exhibit "D" at the end of this chapter; 
C.  If the severity of a water emergency lessens, the city manager may, upon recommendation of the water division director, rescind or lower the water emergency implementation stage. 
D.  Depending upon the nature of the water emergency in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizen's of Santa Fe and to protect public and private property, the governing body may upon a majority vote of those present adopt temporary water rate surcharges above those rates set forth in Exhibit B of this chapter.* 
(Ord. #2006-53,  28) 
Editor's note- *Exhibits B, C and D referred to herein, may be found at the end of this chapter. 
25-5.7 - Water emergency management plan applications. 
A.  The water division director shall provide data, comparing the operational water system supply to the operational water system demand, to the city manager by April 15 of each year or as necessary to determine the appropriate water management plan. 
B.  If the operational water system supply as determined by the water division director's sole discretion, equals between eighty percent (80%) and ninety-nine percent (99%) of operational water system demand, the city manager may declare a "Water Warning - Orange" water emergency implementation stage. If the operational water system supply as determined by the water division director's sole discretion, is less than eighty percent (80%) of operational water system demand, the city manager may declare a "Water Crisis - Red" water emergency implementation stage. 
C.  For purposes of determining the appropriate water emergency implementation stage, operational water system supply is defined as the sum of the following sources of supply according to the administrative procedures established by resolution of the governing body: 
(1)  Canyon Road treatment plant; 
(2)  City wells; 
(3)  Buckman wells; and 
(4)  Buckman direct diversion treatment plant. 
D.  For the purposes of determining the appropriate water emergency implementation stage, the operational water system demand shall be determined according to the administrative procedures established by resolution of the governing body and in a manner consistent with the long-range water supply program upon its adoption. 
E.  The administrative procedures for determining the operational water system supply and demand shall be available at the city's water division. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  30) 
25-5.8 - Announcement and publication of water emergency management plan. 
    Upon the implementation of the water emergency management plan as set forth in subsection 25-5.6 SFCC 1987, the city shall give public notice by public announcement and by publishing a notice giving the extent, terms and conditions respecting the use and consumption of water a minimum of once a day for three (3) consecutive days in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Santa Fe. The provisions of the water emergency management plan to be implemented shall become effective immediately upon public announcement. Upon such public announcement and publication of notice, proper notice shall be deemed to have been given to each customer of the city water system or other party affected by the water emergency management plan. 
(Ord. #2006-53,  32) 
25-5.9 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-5.9, Penalty, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-16, 1996-20 and 2000-30, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  33. 
25-5.10 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-5.10, Severability, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-16, 1996-20 and 2000-30, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  34. 
25-5.11 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-5.11, Emergency Water Regulations; Publication of Terms of Water Use, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-16, 1996-20 and 2000-30, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  35. 
25-5.12 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-5.12, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-16, 1996-20 and 2000-30 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  44 and 45. 
25-5.13 - Regulation of domestic wells. 
    All domestic wells within the jurisdiction of the city of Santa Fe shall be governed by this section as authorized by Sections 3-53-1 and 3-53-2 NMSA 1978. 
(Ord. #1996-20,  13; Ord. #2000-30,  13) 
25-5.14 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 25-5.14, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1996-16, 1996-20 and 2000-30 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  44 and 45. 
25-6 - SAFE DRINKING WATER AND SOURCE-WATER PROTECTION.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Former Section 25-6, Treated Effluent Management, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1999-50 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2003-19. For Treated Effluent Management see Section 22-13. 

25-6.1 - Title. 
    Section 25-6 may be cited as the "Safe Drinking Water and Source-Water Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2005-4,  2) 
25-6.2 - Legislative findings; purpose. 
A.  Pollution of the city's drinking water supply constitutes a menace to public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Pollution of the city's drinking water supply is harmful to the environment and impairs domestic, commercial, industrial, recreational and other beneficial uses of water resources. 
C.  Pollution of the city's drinking water supply creates a public nuisance. 
D.  The purpose of this section is to prohibit the discharge of any pollutant to the ground surface or the subsurface in order to protect, preserve, maintain and conserve existing and future potable well water supplies and source-water resources. 
E.  This section together with Section 13-2 SFCC 1987 serves to implement the relevant and applicable policies, principles and standards inherent in federal legislation and state policy pertaining to source-water protection. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  3) 
25-6.3 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Abate means to bring to a halt, eliminate or, where that is not possible or feasible, to suppress, reduce, or minimize. 
    Best management practices means the best combination of structural and nonstructural facility management practices and controls working together to reduce impairments to water quality. Structural practices may include the construction of diversions, sediment basins, terraces, etc. Nonstructural practices include the manner in which resources and facilities are selected, designed, implemented, maintained and managed. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Hazardous material means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution to the surface or groundwater. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil, anti-freeze, and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing or remodeling a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, mud, plasters, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the human-made or human-induced degradation of the water quality by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the source water used by the city for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
    Premises means any lot or combination of contiguous lots held in single ownership and the buildings, structures or other appurtenances thereon. 
    Source-water pollutant discharge means the spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping of a substance containing pollutants in a location and manner where there is a reasonable probability that the discharged substance will reach surface or subsurface water, including, but not limited to, such discharges onto the ground surface, into the ground, into a well, or into a water source that cause or contribute to a violation of local, state or federal water quality standards. Source-water pollutant discharges do not include illicit discharges into the city's stormwater system which are regulated by Section 13-2 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  4) 
25-6.4 - Responsibility for administration. 
    The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated in writing by the city to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. # 2005-4,  5) 
25-6.5 - Prohibition of source-water pollutant discharges. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any direct or indirect source-water pollutant discharge as defined in subsection 25-6.3 SFCC 1987. 
B.  Discharges into the city's stormwater system regulated by Section 13-2 SFCC 1987 are specifically excluded from this section. 
C.  The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a proper federal or state permit, waiver, exemption or order provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, exemption, or order and other applicable laws and regulations. If requested, a copy of said permit, waiver, exemption, or order shall be provided to the city within ten (10) days of request. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  6) 
25-6.6 - Requirement to notify the city of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that results or may result in source-water pollutant discharges in violation of subsection 25-6.5 SFCC 1987, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge. In the event of such a discharge of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city's public utility department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. As a result of notice the city may seek remedies identified in subsections 25-6.7-25-6.13 SFCC 1987. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city's public utility department within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  7) 
25-6.7 - Authority to inspect. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this section, or whenever the city has probable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of this section, the city may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to source-water pollutant discharge compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  8) 
25-6.8 - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
    During any inspection as provided herein, the city may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. In the event the owner or occupant denies permission to sample, establish sampling devices, and test, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such samples, sampling devices, or tests. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  9) 
25-6.9 - Requirement to eliminate source-water pollution discharges. 
    The city may require by written notice that a person responsible for a source-water pollution discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinues the discharge and, if necessary, implement best management practices, to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future source-water pollution discharges. Best management practices shall be as outlined by the city's safe drinking water and source-water protection administrative regulations and procedures adopted by resolution of the governing body. The city shall make available to the public the safe drinking water and source-water protection administrative regulations and procedures. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  10) 
25-6.10 - Violations; penalties, and enforcements. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Source-Water Protection Ordinance. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated or is violating a requirement of the section, the city may: 
(1)  Issue a written notice of violation; 
(2)  File a citation in municipal court as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987; 
(3)  Commence a civil action in district court for appropriate relief, including injunctive relief; 
(4)  Determine that the violation is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is therefore declared a nuisance, and as such may be abated as set forth elsewhere in this code. 
C.  A notice of violation shall state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation and set forth a deadline for correction of the violation pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice. The notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to correct the violation pursuant to the requirements, the city will take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and and/or restore the property and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to subsection 25-6.12 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  11) 
25-6.11 - Abatement by city. 
    If after the notice is issued, the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in said notice, the city or a contractor, designated by the city, shall request permission to enter upon the subject private property and if granted, is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and abate has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  12) 
25-6.12 - Charging cost of abatement/liens. 
    Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation by the city, the city shall notify the owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) days, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The city may assess a fee for the placement of the lien. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  13) 
25-6.13 - Exigent circumstances abatement. 
    The city, pursuant to its police powers, is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this section that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the city, the city and/or its agents are authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation for the protection of the community. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this section. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  14) 
25-6.14 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart, or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose of detecting and eliminating source-water pollution discharges. 
(Ord. #2005-4,  15) 
25-7 - WATER RIGHTS ACQUISITION FUND. 

25-7.1 - Title; authority. 
A.  Section 25-7 SFCC 1987 shall be known as the "Water Rights Acquisition Fund" and is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to enact ordinances pursuant to its police power (Section 3-17-1B NMSA 1978) and pursuant to legislation that recognizes and promotes the public welfare and the conservation of water within a municipality and the right of a municipality to acquire and hold unused water rights in an amount no greater than its reasonable needs within forty (40) years (Section 72-1-9 NMSA 1978). It is also adopted pursuant to the city of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter, adopted effective March 15, 1998, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act, sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978, and Article 10,  6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
B.  The city of Santa Fe is a charter municipality, empowered to make and enforce all laws concerning municipal affairs, subject to limitations of the city charter and the constitution and laws of the state of New Mexico. A reasonable exercise of municipal authority includes planning for the operation and growth of the municipal water utility, and planning for orderly urban development. Such planning includes the regulation of the amount and types of uses of water from the city's system to ensure that a reliable source of water exists to meet water requirements of the existing customers and that additional supplies of water in the system are provided for and allocated in a manner consistent with priorities established by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2006-28,  2) 
25-7.2 - Legislative findings, purpose and intent. 
A.  The city has limited water supplies. Much of the city's water supply is dependent on annual precipitation, and in times of shortage or drought, this dependence can create significant variability in the seasonal and annual water supply available to the city and its water customers. 
B.  The governing body recognizes, as set forth in subsection 14-8.13 SFCC 1987, Annual Water Budget, that it needs to aggressively pursue available avenues for increasing the city's water supply. These include, but are not limited to the: 
(1)  Construction of a direct diversion from the Rio Grande to make use of the city's rights to water under that certain lease agreement with the bureau of reclamation for waters from the San Juan diversion project; 
(2)  Increase in conservation efforts, including the mandating of water catchments, cisterns, drip irrigation and other water saving strategies; 
(3)  Purchase of additional water and or water rights; 
(4)  Use of "return flow credits" (if, and/or when available); 
(5)  Adoption of individual water customer budgets for all existing and new customers; 
(6)  Rehabilitation and improvement of existing infrastructure and building new infrastructure for water delivery and effluent distribution; 
(7)  Adoption and implementation of regulations for the use of "gray water"; and 
(8)  Maintenance of existing infrastructure and resources to maximize their potential. 
C.  Through the efforts of city staff in conducting a utility demand analysis, there exists the need to obtain and prioritize water rights that augment the city's current water rights. 
D.  The governing body also recognizes that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of all citizens of Santa Fe that the city immediately takes the steps necessary to adopt water management policies that conserve and plan for enhancements to its supply and storage of water. 
(Ord. #2006-28,  3) 
25-7.3 - Water rights acquisition. 
A.  The city shall, as a regular part of its annual budgetary process, allocate a percentage of all revenues received from the delivery of water services to the purchase, acquisition, long-term leasing of consumptive water rights in quantities sufficient to meet the total water demand for the city. 
B.  The city may allocate up to five percent (5%) of the annual operating budget for the water division to the purchase, acquisition, long-term leasing of consumptive water rights in quantities sufficient to meet the total water demand for the city. 
C.  The city shall make public on at least an annual basis regular reports of all funds allocated and all purchases, acquisition, leases of water rights made as a result of this fund and status as to the deficit or surplus in terms of the city's long range water plan. 
(Ord. #2006-28,  4) 
25-8 - VOLUNTARY RIVER CONSERVATION FUND. 

25-8.1 - Title; authority. 
A.  Section 25-8 SFCC 1987 shall be known as the Voluntary River Conservation Fund and is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to enact ordinances pursuant to its police power (Section 3-17-1B NMSA 1978) and pursuant to legislation that recognizes and promotes the public welfare and the conservation of water within a municipality and the right of a municipality to acquire and hold unused water rights in an amount no greater than its reasonable needs within forty (40) years (Section 72-1-9 NMSA 1978). It is also adopted pursuant to the city of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter, adopted effective March 15, 1998, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act, sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978, and Article 10,  6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
B.  The city of Santa Fe is a charter municipality, empowered to make and enforce all laws concerning municipal affairs, subject to limitations of the city charter and the constitution and laws of the state of New Mexico. A reasonable exercise of municipal authority includes planning for the operation and growth of the municipal water utility, and planning for orderly urban development. Such planning includes the regulation of the amount and types of uses of water from the city's system to ensure that a reliable source of water exists to meet water requirements of the existing customers and that additional supplies of water in the system can be allocated for the care, conservation, and preservation of the waterways that pass by and through the city, in a manner consistent with priorities established by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2006-28,  6) 
25-8.2 - Voluntary river conservation fund. 
A.  The city shall create a voluntary contribution program/voluntary check-off provision on its monthly utility billing statements for the citizens to donate money to the city for deposit in the voluntary river conservation fund. 
(1)  Money deposited in the voluntary river conservation fund before March 16, 2013, shall be dedicated to the purchase, acquisition, long-term leasing of consumptive water rights in quantities sufficient to sustain the total water demand for either a living Santa Fe river or for the preservation and continuation of sufficient water flowing through the Rio Grande. 
(2)  Money deposited in the voluntary river conservation fund after March 16, 2013, shall be dedicated to projects that improve the flow of water in the Santa Fe river in ways that enhance the ecosystems of the Santa Fe river and its riparian corridor. 
B.  The governing body shall review for approval projects that are to be funded with voluntary river conservation funds. 
C.  The city shall make public on at least an annual basis regular reports of all funds allocated and all purchases, acquisition, leases of water rights made and proposed, ongoing and completed projects resulting from the use of the voluntary river conservation fund. 
D.  Subject to the Bateman Act, the city shall appropriate sufficient funding that matches (on a dollar-for-dollar basis) on an annual basis all money that is contributed by the public to the voluntary river conservation fund. 
(Ord. #2006-28,  7; Ord. No. 2013-9) 
25-9 - CITY WATER BUDGET.[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- This section is effective January 1, 2010. 

25-9.1 - Short title. 
    Section 25-9 SFCC 1987 shall be referred to as the "City Water Budget Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2009-38,  11) 
25-9.2 - Authority. 
A.  This Section 25-9 SFCC 1987 and related Sections 25-10, 25-11 and 25-12 SFCC 1987 are enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to enact ordinances pursuant to its police power (Section 3-17-1B NMSA 1978) and the power of municipalities to acquire and hold water rights in order to plan for reasonable development pursuant to Section 72-1-9 NMSA 2006. 
B.  Such articles are also adopted pursuant to the city of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter, adopted effective March 15, 1998, as amended effective May 5, 2008, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act, Sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978, and Article 10,  6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
C.  A reasonable exercise of municipal authority includes planning for the operation and growth of the municipal water utility, and planning for orderly urban development in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. Such planning includes the regulation of the amount and types of uses of water from the city's system to ensure that a reliable source of water exists to meet water requirements of the existing customers and that any additional supplies of water in the system are allocated in a manner consistent with priorities established by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  12) 
25-9.3 - Legislative findings. 
A.  The city has the responsibility to consider the nature of its water supplies. Some of the city's water supplies are dependent on annual precipitation, and in times of shortage or drought, this dependence may create significant variability in the seasonal and annual water supply. The city's groundwater supplies are reliable if not overused. 
B.  The governing body recognizes that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of all citizens of Santa Fe that the city take the steps necessary to accurately determine the level of demand on the city's water system to ensure that the current and future water needs and priorities of the city and its citizens are met and that the legal obligations of the city in operating the city water system are being and will continue to be met. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  13) 
25-9.4 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of adopting Section 25-9 SFCC 1987 is to promote the following principles: 
A.  The city should not allow increased demand on the water system without adequate supply to meet this demand. 
B.  The city's water supplies should be used as efficiently as possible. 
C.  Anyone seeking new land use development should be responsible either for offsetting new demand through conservation measures or transferring to the city an equivalent amount of water rights that can be diverted through the city's infrastructure. 
D.  Water that is made available as a result of the city's water rights purchases, leases, offsetting conservation measures such as retrofitting high-use fixtures and appliances with low-use fixtures and appliances and increased water supply from city-related infrastructure projects allowing reuse of water or return flow credits should be allocated to uses and projects meeting the city's priorities including creation of a living Santa Fe river. 
E.  The city should use in its water planning accurate quantifications of the city's water supply and the demands upon the city's water supply. 
F.  The city should manage its water resources to maintain its ability to provide a stable, predictable, and adequate water supply. 
G.  The city shall make every reasonable effort to maintain a minimum flow in the Santa Fe river and to sustain a healthy riparian ecosystem. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  14) 
25-9.5 - Annual water budget. 
    On an annual basis, the water division shall conduct an evaluation of the city's total water system supply and total water system demand, effective for the twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31. The water division shall summarize this evaluation in the water budget report and present the report to the public utility committee at the regularly scheduled April meeting and to the governing body at the regularly scheduled May meeting. The report shall include: 
A.  The city's current total water supplies, under the present water resource management policies, including: 
(1)  Water rights available to the city; 
(2)  Long-term sustainable yield from those water rights; 
(3)  Effect that a range of drought conditions would have on that sustainable yield; and 
(4)  Wet water available that year; 
B.  The total water demand including: 
(1)  Actual demands upon the city's water service itemized into amounts to serve current customers, city uses, line loss and other actual current demands; 
(2)  Utility reserve; 
(3)  Anticipated demands upon the city's water service from future customers with valid written agreements that will require water service within the twelve-month period; 
(4)  Special contractual demands (e.g., Las Campanas, county of Santa Fe); and 
(5)  Non-revenue water demands including total system losses set out by categories of loss; 
C.  Water system annual operating plan estimating water production from the city's various supplies to meet projected annual demand; 
D.  Water resource annual management plan describing the impacts on the city's water resources resulting from the annual operating plan, as well as any planned actions to mitigate those impacts; 
E.  Twenty-year supply-demand projection, including near- and long-term anticipated demands upon the city's water service based on current growth projections and anticipated demands of future customers with valid written agreements; 
F.  The quantity of water, if any, by which the sustainable water supply exceeds committed demand; 
G.  Status of the city's water conservation credit and water rights transfer programs; and 
H.  Quantification of all water credits held in the city water bank, pursuant to Section 25-10 SFCC 1987, including water rights belonging to the city resulting from water rights purchases and leases, water conservation credits pursuant to Section 25-11 SFCC 1987, water held for affordable housing, and water held to meet the anticipated long-range surface water supply gap resulting from water right permit offset requirements. 
(Ord. # 2009-38,  15; Ord. No. 2013-8) 
25-9.6 - Allocation of city's available water. 
A.  Upon review of the annual water budget, the governing body shall determine if water is available for allocation. Water available for allocation shall be derived only from the following sources: 
(1)  The portion of surplus sustainable water supply in excess of committed demand that the governing body has transferred to the city water bank; 
(2)  City's water rights purchases and leases deposited in the city water bank; 
(3)  Retrofit rebate conservation credits deposited in the city water bank under the water conservation credit program set forth in Section 25-11 SFCC 1987; 
(4)  Conservation credits donated to the city rebates under the water conservation credit program set forth in Section 25-11 SFCC 1987; and 
(5)  Infrastructure projects allowing reuse of water or return flow credits. 
B.  The water available for allocation shall be held in the city water bank established pursuant to Section 25-10 SFCC 1987. 
C.  The governing body may allocate by resolution some or all of the water available for allocation to both city and other uses and projects that meet the city's priorities. 
D.  In making allocations, the governing body shall give priority to the following uses: 
(1)  Annual allocations of water to affordable housing shall be made for at least three (3) consecutive future years, and each year's allocation shall be set aside in a separate affordable housing account in the city water bank. When a specific development receives final approval, the water division shall debit the appropriate year's affordable housing account in the city water bank, as set forth in Section 25-10 SFCC 1987, for the water necessary to serve the affordable housing in the development and issue a water allocation approval form for that project. At the time of each annual allocation, the governing body shall adjust allocations made in previous years to account for changes that may have occurred in previously identified affordable housing projects in the intervening year and return to the city's pool of available water any water that is not being used as a result of proposed affordable housing project's being withdrawn or a reduction in its anticipated water demand. 
(2)  Water available from retrofit rebate conservation credits in the water bank shall be allocated for sale to developers of small development projects as set forth in subsections 14-8.13E(2)(b) and (d). The city shall maintain in the water bank a reserve of 25 AFY from retrofit rebate conservation credits for sale to water customers to remedy violations of restrictions under alternative development water budgets or water conservation contracts pursuant to subsection 14-8.13D(4). 
(3)  Water right permit offset requirements, accounted for in the long-range surface water supply gap account held in the city's water bank; 
(4)  City projects including, but not limited to, parks and open space, affordable housing, water for the Santa Fe river, city buildings and other city facilities; 
(5)  Other projects in which the city is a partner; and 
(6)  Private or non-city public uses and projects which recognize other city priorities such as economic development and stability, energy efficiency, job growth and community health. 
E.  After the governing body has approved an annual water allocation for a specific project, the water division shall debit the city's account in the city water bank and credit a special account for that specific project. When the specific project is ready to obtain building permits, the developer shall withdraw the water credits from the special account, dedicate them to meet all or part of the approved development water budget for the development, as documented by a dedication form from the Water Division, and provide that water dedication form to the land use department. That dedicated water shall become a permanent portion of total water system demand calculations unless it shall expire or be relinquished as provided in subsection 25-9.6F(3) SFCC 1987 below. 
F.  A water allocation by the governing body: 
(1)  Only satisfies a development water budget; it creates no other land use approvals or right to approval of the requested number of lots, units or commercial development, or commercial buildings, building permits or water meters for a proposed development project. The actual number of lots or units, or the amount and type of commercial development or the number of building permits or water meters that may be approved shall be determined by the appropriate development, permit or meter application review process. 
(2)  Is issued for specific developments, building permits or water hook-ups and specific geographic sites and they shall not be moved, sold, traded, transferred or exchanged in any way for different developments, building permits or water hookups. 
(3)  If not dedicated to an approved development plan or building permit within two (2) years of the allocation approval, or by some other date approved by the governing body, shall revert back the city's credit in the water bank. An applicant may reapply for the previously allocated water credits when the previously designated development project is ready to proceed to the appropriate stage in the development permitting process. An applicant may relinquish allocated water credits at any time and the water credits shall revert back the city's credit held in the city's water bank. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  16) 
25-10 - CITY WATER BANK.[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- This section is effective January 1, 2010. 

25-10.1 - Short title. 
    Section 25-10 SFCC 1987 shall be referred to as the "City Water Bank Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2009-38,  18) 
25-10.2 - Purpose; creation of city water bank. 
A.  The purpose of the City Water Bank Ordinance is to establish a city water bank consisting of various accounts holding water rights, water credits and water conservation credits. 
B.  In the city's account shall be placed consumptive use water rights purchased by the city or leased by the city, water conservation credits obtained by the city under the water conservation credit program pursuant to Section 25-11 SFCC 1987, and consumptive use water rights obtained through infrastructure projects allowing reuse of water or return flow credits. 
C.  In separate accounts in the name of the person or entity transferring water to the city shall be placed consumptive use water rights transferred to the city pursuant to Section 25-12 SFCC 1987 the water rights transfer program and office of the state engineer policies, guidelines and procedures, and water conservation credits transferred to the bank by customers pursuant to Section 25-11 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  19) 
25-10.3 - Water bank transactions. 
A.  Consumptive use water rights, water credits and water conservation credits may be transferred to the city water bank by any of the following entities: 
(1)  The city to hold consumptive use water rights derived from water rights purchases, leases and water conservation credits obtained from retrofit rebates and from donation from customers signing conservation contracts; and infrastructure projects allowing reuse of water and return flow credits; 
(2)  Water customers to hold water conservation credits transferable within the city of Santa Fe's water system obtained through water conservation contracts as set forth in the water conservation credit program pursuant to Section 25-11 SFCC 1987; and 
(3)  Water rights transfer program transferors to hold water credits consisting of consumptive use water rights transferred to the city as set forth in Section 25-12 SFCC 1987 and pursuant to the office of the state engineer policies, guidelines and procedures which credits may be applied to new development projects requesting service from the city's water system. 
B.  All water rights, water credits and water conservation credits held in the city water bank shall be accounted for in units of acre feet per year. 
C.  Upon request of an entity in whose name water rights, water credits or water conservation water credits are on deposit in the city water bank, the city water bank shall: 
(1)  Transfer the water rights, water credits or water conservation credits to another entity as directed; 
(2)  Issue a water dedication form that applies those water rights, water credits or water conservation credits to a specific development water budget; or 
(3)  Issue a water dedication form that applies the water rights, water credits or water conservation credits to the public purpose as directed. 
D.  Water rights or water conservation credits in the city's account may be designated for specific purposes pursuant to resolution of the governing body adopted under the city water budget process set forth in subsection 25-9.5B(1) SFCC 1987 and applied to that purpose by a water dedication form. 
E.  Banked water credits or water conservation credits may be sold or assigned at any time by the owner, providing the owner notifies the city in writing of such a change in ownership. If the owner's assign does not have a water bank account established, the city shall establish a water bank account in the assign's name for the purpose of water credit or water conservation credit assignment. 
F.  If, in the event the city no longer requires developers to offset the anticipated demand of their development project, water credits held by water rights transfer program transferor and water conservation credits held by water customers under the water conservation credit program in the city water bank can be sold to the city at current market value. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  20) 
25-10.4 - Water bank public posting. 
    The water division shall post on the city's website a public listing of the identity of each person or entity that holds water rights on deposit in the water bank that requests listing and the amount of water rights held by that person or entity. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  21) 
25-11 - RESERVED.[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2017-16 ,  1, adopted August 9, 2017, repealed Section 25-11, which pertained to water conservation credit program and derived from Ord. #2009-38,  23-27. 

25-12 - WATER RIGHTS TRANSFER PROGRAM.[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- This section is effective January 1, 2009. 

25-12.1 - Short title. 
    Section 25-12 SFCC 1987 shall be referred to as the "Water Rights Transfer Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2009-38,  29) 
25-12.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the city's water rights transfer program is to administer water right transfers designated for development projects as required by subsection 14-8.13 SFCC 1987 and water rights transfers designated for the city water bank as provided for in Section 25-10 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  30) 
25-12.3 - Designating water right transfers. 
A.  The applicant shall notify the city, in writing, at the time of the initial tender of water rights for city review and possible acceptance, whether the water rights are to be dedicated to a development water budget or whether the water right is designated for the city water bank. At any time after their tender, water rights initially designated for the water bank can be dedicated to a development by written notification provided by the applicant to the city. 
B.  Section 25-12 SFCC 1987 shall not apply to development for which an annexation agreement has been approved by the governing body prior to July 27, 2005, which specifically addresses water demand offset and the transfer of water rights to meet such water demand. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  31) 
25-12.4 - Tender of water rights. 
A.  Water rights proposed to be transferred to the city's water system for dedication to a development shall be tendered to the city attorney at whichever review stage is applicable and occurs first in the review of a particular development, according to the following requirements: 
(1)  Not later than sixty (60) days after the final approval by the land use department, the planning commission or the governing body of the final subdivision plat, except for parcels within a commercial subdivision for which actual use with attendant water budget has yet to be determined; 
(2)  Not later than sixty (60) days after the final land use approval of the final development plan by the land use department, the planning commission or the governing body; or 
(3)  For developments located outside the city limits, prior to execution of an agreement with the city to construct and dedicate water lines. 
B.  In the case of phased development, water rights tendered for the first development phase shall adhere to subsection 25-12.4A SFCC 1987 above, and water rights for a subsequent phase of the development shall be tendered to the city attorney at the time that the infrastructure financial guarantee is posted for that phase of development. 
C.  Water rights designated for the city's water bank may be tendered at any time. 
D.  The information contained in the tender shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the current owner(s) and/or seller(s) of the water rights; 
(2)  A description of the development project(s) for which the water rights are designated, or direction that the water rights are designated for the city's water bank; 
(3)  Proof of ownership of the water rights in the form of: a declaration of water rights; the most recent change of ownership form for the water rights; and any deeds regarding the water rights in the county where the water rights are located; 
(4)  A title search or title report for the property to which the water rights are appurtenant; 
(5)  Any permits, licenses, or court orders for the water rights, together with a description of the place and purpose of use and point of diversion for the water rights; 
(6)  A copy of the agreement between the seller(s) and applicant under which the applicant intends to acquire the water rights; a copy that redacts the price may be acceptable; however, if the applicant uses a letter of credit or escrow pending application approval, however, the city may require an unredacted copy; 
(7)  An affidavit from the seller(s) to the effect that the water rights are free and clear of all encumbrances and liens, or that encumbrances shall be released before or at closing and furthermore an affidavit to the effect that no part of the water rights has not been lost through abandonment or forfeiture; and 
(8)  Such other documentation as the city may reasonably require related to the water rights. 
E.  Upon tender of water rights for the city's review, the applicant, and not the applicant's representative, shall sign an agreement prepared by the city attorney acknowledging that the applicant shall abide with the conditions of this Section 25-12 SFCC 1987. 
F.  Upon tender of water rights to the city for review, the applicant shall pay a deposit of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars to be applied against the hydrologic due diligence review of the tendered water rights. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  32) 
25-12.5 - Due diligence review procedure and city fee. 
A.  The city shall review the documentation provided within a sixty-day due diligence review period and determine in its sole discretion whether the water rights are acceptable to the city for its use in its system and whether the transfer of the rights to a point of diversion acceptable to the city is feasible. 
B.  During the review period, the city may request from the applicant additional documentation to aid in the city's determination. Upon such request, the review period shall be tolled until the additional documentation is provided to the city. 
C.  If the city determines that any or all of the water rights are acceptable to the city for purposes of the transfer, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the total amount of consumptive use acre-feet per year acceptable to the city and the parties shall proceed to subsection 25-12.6 SFCC 1987. 
D.  If the city determines that the water rights are not acceptable, then it shall notify the applicant in writing, specifying the reason(s) for the city's determination and whether the city believes the applicant can cure the reason for unacceptability. Upon notice to the applicant that any or all of the water rights may be cured, a new review period shall commence, and the applicant shall within the new review period provide a cure as specified by the city in its written notice. If the city rejects the water rights, the applicant may tender other water rights for transfer. Upon such tender, a new review period shall commence for the city. This process may be repeated until the city accepts tender of all water rights required by the city. 
E.  Applicant shall reimburse the city for its hydrologic due diligence review of the tendered water rights by paying the actual costs as evidenced by invoices from consultants prior to the city's final written acceptance of water rights into the water rights transfer program. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  33) 
25-12.6 - Acceptance of water right into the city water right transfer program. 
    Upon payment of the fees due from the applicant for the city's due diligence review and determination that tendered water rights are acceptable to the city, the city shall issue to the applicant the final written acceptance of the water rights into the water rights transfer program, specifying the total amount of consumptive use in acre-feet per year that the city has approved. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  34) 
25-12.7 - Water right transfer application procedure and payment of fees and costs. 
A.  After city acceptance of water rights into the water rights transfer program, the applicant shall prepare a draft application to the office of the state engineer to transfer the water rights to the city's designated point of diversion. The draft application shall show the city as a co-applicant. The draft application shall include no less than the total number of consumptive use acre-feet accepted by the city. The applicant shall publish all necessary legal notices in appropriate newspapers. 
B.  The content of the water rights transfer application shall be determined by the applicant and the city and completed in a manner acceptable to the office of the state engineer. The final water rights transfer application shall be executed by the seller, if applicable, the applicant, and the city. Following the execution and submittal of the transfer application to the office of the state engineer by the applicant, the applicant shall not file any subsequent office of the state engineer application with regard to those water rights without the written consent of the city. 
C.  The city and the applicant shall reach mutual agreement regarding the application. The city shall have the discretion to modify or withdraw the application and to discontinue the transfer process if proceeding threatens exercise of the city's water rights under Permit No. RG-20516 et al. The applicant may also withdraw the application, provided the applicant notifies the city in writing one (1) week in advance of any such withdrawal. 
D.  The applicant shall pay applications fees required by the office of the state engineer and legal notice publication fees and costs incurred in any administrative hearing as well as subsequent appeals, if pursued. The city shall receive notice of any hearings and may participate in the hearings as it deems appropriate. The city has ultimate decision-making authority regarding any conditions of approval that any protestant or the office of the state engineer may offer that affect the city's existing permit, RG-20516 et al. The applicant has ultimate decision-making authority regarding any conditions of approval that any protestant or the office of the state engineer might offer that affect the validity and extent of the water rights being transferred. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  35) 
25-12.8 - Financial guarantee procedure for issuance of a building permit prior to completion of water rights transfer and conveyance. 
A.  These financial guarantee provisions shall apply to all water rights designated for development projects within the city limits. These financial guarantee provisions may also apply to water rights designated for development projects connecting to the city water system outside the city limits. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued before water rights transfer completion and the conveyance of water rights to the city, as set forth in subsections 25-12.10 and 25-12.11 SFCC 1987, except as provided in this section. 
C.  The applicant may apply for a building permit before water rights transfer completion and conveyance of water rights to the city if the city has accepted the water rights as set forth in subsection 25-12.6 SFCC 1987 and a water right transfer application has been filed with the office of the state engineer as set forth in subsection 25-12.7 SFCC 1987. The applicant may obtain such a building permit only if escrow funds or an irrevocable letter of credit is provided to the city in a manner acceptable to the city. The purpose of this provision is to secure the applicant's obligation to transfer water rights that can either be used for the city's water right permit compliance or diverted and delivered by the city water utility in such a manner that the development, based upon the approved development water budget, does not increase the demand on the city's water utility. 
D.  The escrow funds or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the current value of the water rights sought to be transferred by the applicant and shall be provided at the time of building permit application. 
E.  The current value of the water rights shall be presumed to be the current fair market value of pre-1907 consumptive use water rights from the Middle Rio Grande Basin. The city shall have the sole discretion to determine the current value of the water rights, which determination shall be reasonably made based upon the known market for such rights and upon the purchase price of the water rights, as evidenced by the purchase agreement required in Section 25-12.4(D) SFCC 1987. 
F.  Upon completion of the water right transfer and issuance of the city's water rights transfer certificate as set forth in subsection 25-12.10 SFCC 1987 for the full amount accepted by the city, the city shall release the irrevocable letter of credit. In the case of escrow, upon completion of the water right transfer of the full amount accepted by the city and issuance of the city's water rights transfer certificate as set forth in subsection 25-12.10 SFCC 1987 the city shall return to the applicant the balance of escrow funds, as well as any accrued interest on this amount. 
G.  If the amount of water rights approved by the office of the state engineer for transfer is less than the amount of water rights the tender of which was accepted by the city, the applicant shall have ninety (90) days from a final, non-appealable order within which to make up the difference by conveying to the city the balance of required water rights or water credits. If the applicant does not convey the required water rights or water credits within this time, the city shall transfer to the water division's operating budget a portion of the applicant's escrow fund or irrevocable letter of credit equal to the proportion of the water rights for which the office of the state engineer denied transfer. The transfer of the funds shall be in lieu of the requirement on the applicant to transfer any additional water rights. Upon such transfer of funds to water division, the applicant shall be deemed to have fulfilled its requirement to transfer water rights and the city shall release the portion of the letter of credit or return to the applicant the portion of the escrow fund that represents the percentage of the accepted water rights required to be transferred for the development water budget as compared to the amount of water rights that were actually transferred to the city, less any unpaid transaction costs owed by the applicant, as well as any accrued interest on this amount. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  36) 
25-12.9 - Office of state engineer's approval of the water right transfer, appeals, and conveyance of water rights title to city. 
A.  A water right transfer shall be deemed complete once the office of the state engineer has approved a transfer of all or a portion of the water right to the new point of diversion(s) and the new place and purpose of use and has issued a final permit for the transfer that is not appealed, or the permit is appealed but the permit becomes a non-appealable, final order by the office of the state engineer. 
B.  The city, as the lead applicant, shall have final decision-making authority regarding appealing any conditions of approval that affect Permit No. RG-20516 et al. unless the applicant or the city chooses to withdraw the application and can do so in such a way that there will be no effect from the application process on Permit No. RG-20516 et al. The applicant shall have final decision-making authority regarding appealing any decisions affecting the validity and extent of the water rights being transferred. The party that decides to appeal shall pay the cost of the appeal. 
C.  If the application is denied and is not appealed, then a new tender period shall commence for the applicant. 
D.  When water rights are dedicated to a specific development water budget under subsection 25-12.3A SFCC 1987, upon completion of the water right transfer, the applicant shall within ninety (90) days, convey to the city all right, title and interest to the transferred water rights, at no additional cost, free and clear of all encumbrances and with special warranty covenants. Within this same ninety-day period, the applicant shall execute and file all appropriate documentation with the Santa Fe county clerk and with the office of the state engineer in order to effectuate timely issuance of the office of the state engineer final permit, pursuant to Section 72-1-2.1 NMSA 1978. If the applicant fails to do so, the city shall disallow use of water from the city's system for the applicant's development unless the applicant has provided a letter of credit or escrow funds as set forth in subsection 25-12.8 SFCC 1987 in which case the letter of credit or the escrow funds shall be retained by the city. The applicant shall reimburse the city for all water rights transfer application transaction costs borne under subsection 25-12.6 SFCC 1987. Unpaid transaction costs shall be treated as utility charges as set forth in subsections 15-1.4 and 15-1.5 SFCC 1987. 
E.  When water rights have not been designated for a specific development water budget, upon completion of the water right transfer, the water rights shall be held as undesignated water rights in the water bank in the applicant's name. At such time as the water rights are designated for a specific development water budget, the applicant shall convey legal title to the city and file an appropriate change of ownership with the OSE and the Santa Fe county clerk as required in paragraph D above. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  37) 
25-12.10 - Issuance of city of Santa Fe water rights transfer certificate. 
    Upon completion of the transfer of the water rights to the city's permit as set forth in subsection 25-12.9 SPCC 1987 and issuance of the office of the state engineer's final permit, the water division shall deposit the water rights in the city water bank in the applicant's name and issue to the applicant a water rights transfer certificate evidencing the deposit. If the water rights were tendered for application to a specific development under subsection 25-12.3A, that shall be indicated on the water rights transfer certificate and the water bank's records. Upon issuance of the water division's water rights transfer certificate, the water rights transfer applicant shall then be referred to as the water rights transferor. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  38) 
25-12.11 - Water rights dedication to obtain a building permit. 
A.  The water rights transferor or assigns may withdraw banked water rights from the bank for dedication to a development water budget. To dedicate water rights from the city's water bank to a development water budget, the transferor shall obtain a water dedication form from the water bank for the amount of water rights necessary for the development water budget and present that dedication form to the land use department. 
B.  For the purpose of issuing a building permit, the land use department shall accept the dedication of transferred water rights to meet an approved development water budget as shown on the water dedication form. That dedicated water shall become a permanent portion of total water system demand calculations. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  39) 
25-12.12 - Sale of water rights. 
    At any time before or during the approval and transfer process, the applicant may sell and assign any or all of the applicant's interest in tendered water rights to the city or any other party, based upon a fair market price to be negotiated between applicant and the purchaser, providing the applicant notifies the city in writing of such a change in ownership. Sale and change of ownership of a water right tendered to the city for a particular project shall not change the designation of the water right for dedication to that development water budget, as specified in subsection 25-12.3A SFCC 1987, without written city approval. A water rights transferor may sell or assign to another any or all of the transferor's water rights on deposit in the water bank that are not designated for a particular project. The water bank shall transfer the water rights to the account of the assignee. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  40) 
25-12.13 - Relation to other requirements and approvals. 
A.  The transfer of water rights to the city, whenever applicable, in no way limits, abolishes, or in any way mitigates any other requirements imposed by the city such as, but not limited to, utility expansion charges, impact fees, connection fees, or any other requirements related to the city's water delivery system. 
B.  The successful transfer and conveyance of water rights to the city does not guarantee approval of other city development requirements. Water rights which have been successfully transferred for developments that fail to meet other required approvals shall not be rescinded, but shall remain in the city's water bank in the name of the transferor or the transferor's assigns as set forth in Section 25-10 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2009-38,  41) 
25-13 - SANTA FE RIVER TARGET FLOW. 

25-13.1 - Short title. 
    Section 25-13 may be cited as the "Santa Fe River Target Flow Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2012-10,  2) 
25-13.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body finds that: 
A.  Through the adoption of Resolution No. 2009-47, Resolution No. 2010-15 and Resolution No. 2011-28 the governing body authorized the city to support a living Santa Fe river by allowing water to bypass McClure and Nichols reservoirs in 2009, 2010 and 2011. 
B.  The Santa Fe river is an important element of the city of Santa Fe and the city's origin was due to the existence of the river. 
C.  There is widespread community support for maintaining a living Santa Fe river for recreational and cultural purposes. 
D.  A healthy river provides riparian habitat for wildlife and minimizes erosion and flood damage, removes pollutants from storm water and helps recharge groundwater. 
E.  The city has put to beneficial use its water right under Declaration No. 01278 and License 1677, (as issued by the state engineer) and intends to continue to put that water to beneficial use, and the adoption of this ordinance will not adversely affect the city's water right under Declaration No. 01278 and License 1677. 
F.  Implementation of this ordinance will not cause the city to operate the municipal water utility in any way that is inconsistent with any local, state or federal rules, regulations or laws. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  3) 
25-13.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of Section 25-13 SFCC 1987 is to formalize the city's commitment to provide for a target flow within the Santa Fe river in order to enhance and further the objective of restoring the Santa Fe river as a living river by committing to use up to one thousand (1,000) acre-feet per year (AFY) of the city's water supply, depending upon hydrologic conditions in the Santa Fe river watershed. This section shall be interpreted to further this objective. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  4) 
25-13.4 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 25-13 SFCC 1987: 
    Administrative procedures means the administrative procedures for the Santa Fe River Target Flows Ordinance, adopted by resolution of the governing body, that describe how city staff will implement Section 25-13 SFCC 1987 in order to provide up to one thousand (1,000) AFY in target flows to the Santa Fe river. The administrative procedures shall include the following: 
A.  The operations of the city's water division and other city staff necessary to provide for the up to one thousand (1,000) acre-feet target flow below Nichols reservoir; 
B.  Target flow hydrographs that support the city's identified ecological and social outcomes; 
C.  Adjustments to the target flows and target hydrograph under less than average anticipated watershed yield; 
D.  Provisions to adaptively manage the target flows based on ecological and social outcomes because of precipitation events, stream flows and effects; 
E.  Adjustments to the target flow due to emergencies; 
F.  Requirements for monitoring, accounting, and reporting target flow; and 
G.  Other operational and administrative procedures that may be required to fulfill the purpose of this section. 
    Anticipated watershed yield means the expected annual yield of water to the Santa Fe river and the municipal reservoirs within the Santa Fe river upper watershed, expressed as the percentage of the historical average; the anticipated watershed yield is estimated as of April 15th using the best available information including the amount of snow, both as depth (in inches) and snow-to water equivalent (in inches) at the weather stations in the upper watershed (Santa Fe and Elk Cabin); the Santa Fe basin forecast predictions from Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS); weather forecast from the National Weather Service and NOAA; and any other pertinent appropriate weather-related information. 
    Below Nichols gage means the stream gaging station 08316505 located below Nichols reservoir, or at a comparable location of measurement at or below the outlet from Nichols dam; this is the measuring point for target flows administration pursuant to the administrative procedures. 
    Bypass flow means, generally, water that flows past a diversion or storage facility. In the administrative procedures, it refers to water that the city chooses not to store in the municipal reservoirs and thus allows to flow to the Santa Fe river below Nichols reservoir provided that the rate at which the bypass flow is passed through the outlet works of Nichols reservoir dam is always equal or less than the stream inflow at the "above McClure" gage. 
    Hydrograph means a graphic representation of stream discharge, in cubic feet per second, plotted against time. 
    Target flow means the daily, seasonal or annual amount of water (as a volume or a rate) desired in the river as measured at the "below Nichols" stream gage or at a comparable location of measurement at or below the outlet from Nichols dam. The quantity is variably identified in several sections of the administrative procedures, depending upon the anticipated watershed yield. 
    Target hydrograph means the graphical representation of the daily target flow necessary to provide up to one thousand (1,000) AFY of bypass water in the Santa Fe river as measured at the below Nichols gage. The quantity of water is variably identified in several sections of the administrative procedures, depending upon anticipated watershed yield. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  5) 
25-13.5 - Santa Fe river target flow. 
    The city water division shall operate the city's system of reservoirs to ensure that a bypass target flow of up to one thousand (1,000) AFY of river water flows into the Santa Fe river below Nichols reservoir. In average and wet conditions, the target flows will be one thousand (1,000) AFY. In drier years, seventy-five percent (75%) of the average watershed yield or less, the target flows shall be scaled in such a way that the target flows will equal the percentage anticipated watershed yield multiplied by one thousand (1,000) AFY. When the anticipated watershed yield is equal or less than thirty percent (30%) average watershed yield, the target flows will be three hundred (300) AFY. Additional information regarding the daily target flow pattern is provided for in the administrative procedures. Water that is released and/or spilled for flood management will count toward the daily target flows and target hydrograph when the flows are within the daily target flows of the target hydrograph. If water greater than the daily target flows is released or spilled into the river, the quantity of water that exceeds the daily bypass target flow will not be counted toward the target hydrograph. Except for flood management as described above, the water for the target hydrograph shall not include water released for any other purpose at the time of release, provided that nothing in this section shall require the release of bypass water if the release might jeopardize the city's water right under License 1677 and Declaration 01728. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  6) 
25-13.6 - Coordination with Santa Fe river community events. 
    When possible, target flows and target hydrographs shall be patterned to support community events scheduled along the Santa Fe river. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  7) 
25-13.7 - Water emergency target flow adjustment. 
A.  Pursuant to subsection 25-5.6 SFCC 1987, upon declaration of a water emergency, the city manager is authorized to adjust target flows to the Santa Fe river. 
(1)  For the "Water Warning - Orange" implementation stage, target flows to the Santa Fe river may be suspended. 
(2)  For the "Water Emergency - Red" implementation stage, target flows to the Santa Fe river shall be suspended. 
B.  The administrative procedures provide the detailed process for adjusting target flows to the Santa Fe river during a declared water emergency. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  8) 
25-13.8 - Reporting and review. 
    Annually city staff shall provide a report to the governing body summarizing the previous year's target flows and projection for the next year's target flows. The annual report shall provide the governing body the opportunity to review this section. Additional information regarding accounting and reporting is provided for in the administrative procedures. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  9) 
25-13.9 - Effective date. 
    This section shall become effective five (5) days after publication of adoption. 
(Ord. #2012-10,  10) 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
EXHIBIT A 
(Subsection 25-4.1) 
RULES AND REGULATIONS - WATER SERVICE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Title of Rule Rule No. Preamble to Rules and Regulations 1 Definitions and Explanations 2 Character of Service 3 Application of Service 4 Reserved 5 Reserved 6 Reserved 7 Service Connection 8 Discontinuance and Denying Restoration of Service 9 Responsibility for Water Service Equipment 10 Interruption of Service 11 Reserved 12 Acceptable Standards 13 Reserved 14 Unauthorized Connections 15 Stoppage or Obstructions of Service 16 Temporary and Special Services 17 Meters 18 Line Extension Policy 19 Limitations and Restrictions of Use of Water 20 Reserved 21 Customer Complaint Procedures 22 Reserved 23 Customer's System 24 Requirements of Contracts 25 Reserved 26 Location of Meter 27 Fire Hydrants 28 Fire Protection Service 29 General Rules with Respect to Large Users of Water 30  
Amended: July 9, 2003 (Ordinance 2003-25,  46-59) 
February 9, 2005 (Ordinance 2005-2,  5-11) 
August 28, 2006 (Ordinance 2006-53,  36) 
March 31, 2010 (Ordinance 2010-5,  1) 
May 25, 2011 (Ord. 2011-13,  1) 
1. PREAMBLE TO RULES AND REGULATIONS 
    These Rules and Regulations address water service furnished by the city of Santa Fe in the areas described below. These rules are intended to promote safe and adequate service to the public and to provide standards for uniform and reasonable practices. The rules herein established shall remain in effect until amended or superseded by other Rules and Regulations. 
    SERVICE AREA : Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. The city of Santa Fe does not assume any responsibility to serve or extend its water facilities to serve additional customers located outside the service area boundaries identified above. 
2. DEFINITIONS AND EXPLANATIONS 
    The following definitions are applicable wherever these terms are used in these Rules and Regulations: 
A.  CITY - The water utility owned and operated by or on behalf of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico, called the Sangre de Cristo Water Division and whose business office is at 801 West San Mateo, Santa Fe, New Mexico. Also known as the Santa Fe Municipal Water System. 
B.  CHRONICALLY DELINQUENT - The status of a customer who during the prior twelve (12) months has been disconnected by the City for nonpayment, or who during the prior twelve (12) months has not paid a bill by the date that a subsequent bill is rendered on three (3) or more occasions. 
C.  COMMERCIAL SERVICE OR USE - The provision of or use of water for all types of establishments not otherwise classified as residential. 
D.  CROSS-CONNECTION - Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other of unknown or questionable safety, whereby water may flow from one system to the other, the direction of the flow depending on the pressure differential between the two (2) systems. 
E.  CUSTOMER - Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or any agency of the federal, state, or local government, being supplied with, and/or responsible for payment for, water services by City. 
F.  DELINQUENT - The status of a bill rendered to a customer for utility service which remains unpaid 15 calendar days following the "due" date on the customer's utility bill. 
G.  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE - An intentional cessation of service by the City which was not requested by a customer. 
H.  ESTIMATED BILL - A bill for utility service which is not based on an actual reading of the customer's meter, or other measuring device, for the period billed. 
I.  GOVERNING BODY - The Mayor and City Council of the city of Santa Fe as defined in subsection 2-1.1 SFCC 1987. 
J.  POINT OF DELIVERY - The point of delivery shall be the point where the facilities of the City connect to the facilities furnished by the customer. 
K.  PRESSURE - The range of fifty (50) to one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds which can ordinarily be made available in the area contiguous to existing lines. 
L.  PRESSURE REGULATING DEVICE - A device that maintains a constant water pressure at its immediate downstream side which is less than the inlet pressure to the device, unless the pressure on the inlet side is lower than the pressure setting for the downstream side. 
M.  Reserved. 
N.  RATE SCHEDULE - A description of the charges, conditions of services and other similar information associated with the provision of water service to a given class or type of customer. 
O.  RECONNECTION CHARGE - A charge made by the City at the time application is made for reconnection of water service at a place where water service has been previously disconnected. 
P.  Reserved. 
Q.  RESIDENTIAL SERVICE OR USE - The provision of or use of water for household or domestic purposes, and as further described in Rule 3, Exhibit A of Chapter XXV SFCC 1987. 
R.  SERVICE LINE - The pipe connection from a distribution water main to the water meter. 
S.  SPECIAL SERVICE - A service provided to a customer by the City which is not subject to a rate schedule. 
T.  UTILITY CHARGES - The billing or charges for the provision of utility service and other charges authorized by the governing body pursuant to approved rates. 
U.  WATER PRESSURE - The gauge pressure of water within a pipe measured in pounds per square inch above atmospheric pressure and abbreviated herein as "pounds." 
V.  WATER SERVICE - The general term for furnishing the customer with water. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  46, 47; Ord. #2005-2,  5) 
3. CHARACTER OF SERVICE 
A.  Water service will be furnished under conditions as stated in these Rules and Regulations. Service to a customer will be provided at the rates set forth in the rate schedule in Exhibit B, of this chapter which is applicable to the character of service set forth below. 
B.  The customer shall provide the city information regarding the type of use and number of units if applicable. The city reserves the right to determine the character of service based upon the actual use of the water, the use of the property, the zoning of the property and such other relevant information. 
C.  The customer may request a change in the character of service provided the following are met: 
1.  All necessary piping changes that are required to conform to metering requirements of the rate schedule set forth in Exhibit B of this chapter shall be met. All necessary piping changes shall be made at the expense of the customer. 
2.  All applicable metering requirements as set forth Rule 18 Exhibit A of this chapter shall be met. All applicable metering requirements shall be made at the expense of the customer. 
3.  Any commercial rate customer may apply to the City to change to the multi-family residential rate provided the service meets the provisions of paragraph E below. The customer shall provide information regarding the number of dwelling units. Upon verification by the City, the change in classification will be completed. 
4.  A change of classification shall be permanent unless the use of the water no longer meets the description of residential service. 
5.  No retroactive credit shall be applied to a customer account for water consumption prior to the city's approval of an application for a change of classification. 
D.  SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. 
    Single family residential service shall apply where a single water meter serves only on dwelling unit for normal domestic water use. A dwelling unit is defined in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987. The meter may also serve uses commonly associated with the dwelling unit such as home occupations, as set forth in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 and licensed by the city, swimming pools, and spas and landscaping. 
E.  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SERVICE . 
    Multi-Family Residential service shall apply where a single water meter serves more than one dwelling unit for normal domestic water. A dwelling unit is defined in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987. The meter may also serve uses commonly associated with multiple dwelling units such as home occupations, as set forth in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 and licensed by the city, swimming pools, spas, landscaping and common rooms etc. provided that their use is limited to the residents and their guests and are not open to the general public or to memberships for persons not residing there. Golf courses are not considered a use commonly associated with multiple dwelling units. 
F.  COMMERCIAL SERVICE . 
    Commercial water service shall apply where the water meter(s) serves a use not classified as single family residential or multi-family residential service set forth above. Commercial water service shall also apply where the water meter(s) serves a combination of residential and commercial services. 
(Ord. # 2005-2,  6) 
4. APPLICATION FOR SERVICE 
A.  Applications for water service shall be made at the City business office, in person or by telephone. Applications shall be in a form prescribed by the City and shall include those customer requirements listed in Rule 10 B. The City shall have a reasonable time to provide water service, once the application has been accepted. Written contracts are required for all classes of service other than service to residential customers or commercial customers accepting service under the applicable Rate Schedule if no extension of facilities is required. Extensions of facilities made in accordance with Rule 19 or under Rate Schedule No. 9, Utility Expansion Charge, will require a written contract prior to the provision of service. 
B.  A reconnection fee shall be paid by an applicant for transfer of existing service or for service which has been previously disconnected by the City from any system operated by the City. In addition to the reconnection fee, the applicant shall pay all delinquent fees and charges owed to the City. 
C.  The conditions of piping and character of installation on the premises shall be subject to inspection by the City and be approved by the appropriate governmental inspection agency, and if such piping and/or installation is found to be faulty, the City may refuse to provide service until, and after, such faulty installation has been corrected to the satisfaction of such appropriate governmental agency or the City. The City does not, however, assume the responsibility for such inspections and shall not be held liable for failure of such piping or installations. 
D.  The City reserves the right to limit each lot to a maximum daily average usage. 
E.  To enable the City to provide adequate service facilities, the customer shall be required to provide load information on new construction or alterations sufficiently in advance of the date upon which the customer expects water service to commence. 
F.  The City shall supply service within a reasonable time after the application or agreement is approved, and after any necessary permits shall have been obtained. It is the responsibility of the customer to comply with all applicable codes and to obtain the necessary permits from governmental authorities. If, due to circumstances beyond the control of the City, service cannot be furnished within a reasonable length of time, the customer shall be advised promptly regarding the delay. 
G.  New or additional service will be limited to available unreserved capacity in production, transmission and distribution facilities, and commensurate with the City's available water rights. In all cases where such existing facilities are limited, the City may require a written contract for a suitable initial contract period, adequate to warrant the investment and reservation of capacity required to render such service. 
5. RESERVED 
6. RESERVED 
7. RESERVED 
8. SERVICE CONNECTION 
A.  A normal pressure within the range of fifty (50) to one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds can ordinarily be made available in areas contiguous to existing lines and at the pressures indicated for normal operations within established pressure zones. Where applications for service are received which would involve service to elevations either above or below the established elevation, special engineering and economic studies may be required which could result in other than normal equipment requirements to provide such service. All circumstances will be taken into account in determining the feasibility of rendering service and where feasible the extensions will be made subject to the provisions outlined in Rule No. 19, Line Extension Policy, or Paragraphs F. and G. below. 
B.  A separate service is required for each legal lot of record. Separate meters are required as set forth in Rule 18, Exhibit A of Chapter 25 SFCC 1987. 
C.  The customer shall install a stop and waste cock, or equivalent, on his/her yard line in order to control the water flow in his/her entire water system. Such valve shall be located in an accessible place for easy operation by the customer. 
D.  The entire cost of an installation required for customer fire protection service pursuant to Rule No. 30 for standby service or for irrigation service, shall be borne by the customer. The monthly minimum charge shall be made to cover normal customer accounting costs plus anticipated operating and maintenances costs for all City facilities required plus a reasonable capacity charge for off-site water facilities held in reserve for use on demand of the customer. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed by the customer in his/her fire, standby or irrigation line beyond the metering installation. 
E.  No cross-connection with any other source of water shall be made to a customer's piping which is connected to the City's lines. 
F.  Where the normal water pressure is determined by the customer to be less than his/her requirements, the customer shall install a booster pump and pressure storage tank. The design for any such installation, including an approved backflow preventer, shall be submitted to the City for approval, such approval shall be received prior to any construction. 
G.  Where the normal water pressure is determined by the customer to be greater than his/her requirements, the customer shall install an adjustable pressure regulating device in his/her piping system approved by all appropriate governmental agencies. 
H.  An adjustable pressure regulator approved by all appropriate governmental agencies shall be installed by the customer on all new services before water service will be connected and it shall be so located as to control the pressure in the customer's entire piping system. 
I.  All piping and plumbing installations made by the customer or under responsibility of the customer shall conform with applicable City codes or regulations. 
J.  All 3/4", 1", 11/2", and 2" services installed by the City shall be subject to the applicable base meter service charge as detailed in Rate Schedule 7. 
K.  Meters shall comply with Rule 18, Exhibit A of Chapter 25 SFCC 1987. 
L.  Use of the City's curb or meter shut-off valve by customer or customer's agent is prohibited. 
(Ord. # 2003-25,  51; Ord. # 2005-2,  7) 
9. DISCONTINUANCE AND DENYING RESTORATION OF SERVICE 
A.  The City shall not discontinue service for those situations described in subsection 15-1.7C SFCC 1987. 
B.  Discontinuance of service for delinquent accounts or for failure to comply with payment arrangements, as set forth in paragraph D.4 below, shall occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday and shall not occur less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to a holiday or weekend unless the City's designated business office is open for receipt of payment and City personnel are available to restore such service upon payment. All other discontinuance of service may occur as necessary. 
C.  Any customer whose service is discontinued under the provisions of this section shall be required to pay a reconnection fee in addition to all other applicable fees and charges before being reconnected. All reconnections shall be made in accordance with the reconnection provisions in this chapter. 
D.  The City may discontinue service when the following occurs: 
1.  Without prior notice: 
a.  A condition is determined by the City to be hazardous. 
b.  A customer tampers with, damages or destroys the equipment furnished and owned by the City. 
c.  There is unauthorized use of service or connection to service provided by the City. 
d.  There is a severe leak as determined by the City. 
2.  With twenty-four (24) hour prior notice: 
a.  When the City finds evidence of excessive waste of water by a customer. 
b.  If after the twenty-four (24) hour notice, the customer has failed to either correct the condition causing excessive use or to demonstrate to the City's satisfaction why the customer cannot correct the condition or comply with this time period, the City may discontinue service. 
3.  With three (3) day notice: 
a.  If the customer refuses to grant access at reasonable times to the City, after having been shown proper credentials and identification, to equipment installed upon the premises of the customer for the purpose of inspection, meter reading, maintenance or replacement. 
b.  There is a minor leak as determined by the City. 
c.  A customer fails to furnish such service, equipment, permits, certificates, and/or rights-of-way, as specified by the City as a condition to obtaining service, or in the event such equipment or permission is withdrawn or terminated. 
d.  A customer fails to fulfill contractual obligations for utility service and/or facilities other than payment arrangements. 
4.  With ten (10) day prior notice followed by a two (2) day contact: 
a.  If any charge remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days from the "due" date on the customer's utility bill or 
b.  If a customer fails to comply with the terms of a payment arrangement. 
c.  The City shall also take reasonable steps to communicate with a customer, by telephone or personal contact, at least two (2) days prior to the actual date of discontinuance of service in order to obtain payment. 
E.  Notices shall be as follows: 
1.  All notices shall be in writing in simple language in both English and Spanish and include the following: 
a.  A statement of the reason(s) why the City intends to discontinue service. 
b.  A statement that the customer may appeal the proposed discontinuance of service as set forth in subsection 15-1.8 SFCC 1987. 
c.  A statement of the cost of reconnection. 
d.  A statement that the City will not discontinue service to any residence where a seriously ill person or person whose life may be endangered by discontinuance of service resides. 
e.  A blank medical certificate, which shall permit a practitioner of the healing arts to indicate the expected duration of the residential customer's serious illness or life endangering situation. 
f.  A form for demonstrating how the residential customer with a serious illness or life endangering situation has inadequate financial resources to correct the condition causing discontinuance of service. 
2.  All ten (10) day notices shall also include the following: 
a.  The amount owed and the date by which the customer must pay the amount due or enter into a payment arrangement with the City if the customer has not already entered into one. The consumption period over which said amount was incurred, the date, and the amount of the last payment shall be available on request. 
b.  A statement that if the customer pays that portion of the bill which is not in a bona fide dispute, the customer may appeal the portion of the bill which the customer does dispute as set forth in subsection 15-1.8 SFCC 1987. 
c.  The title(s), address, telephone number(s) and working hours of the designated City staff responsible for carrying out the rights described in this section. 
3.  Notices shall be deemed effective as follows: 
a.  Twenty-four (24) and three (3) day notices shall be hand delivered to the service address and shall be deemed effective immediately upon delivery. 
b.  Ten (10) day notices shall be mailed to the customer's billing address and shall be deemed effective three (3) days from the date of the letter. 
F.  A properly executed medical certificate form shall be adequate to delay discontinuance of water service, as set forth in paragraphs D.2, D.3 or D.4 above, for at least thirty (30) days and, at the City's option, the City may delay discontinuance for up to one hundred twenty (120) days or for a longer period of time. The City shall promptly notify the residential customer in writing as to how long it deems the certificate to be valid; provided, however, that should the circumstances on which the certificate is based appear to have changed, the City may require additional certification. If service has been discontinued, the City shall reestablish service within twelve (12) hours of receipt of the medical certificate. 
G.  The city employee personally contacting a customer two (2) days prior to discontinuance, as set forth in paragraph D.3c. above, or the City employee sent to discontinue utility services, as set forth in paragraphs D.2, D.3 or D.4 above, shall note any information which is made known to the employee by the customer regarding any resident' s seriously ill or life endangering health condition, such as whether a resident is physically disabled, frail or elderly. Such information shall be immediately reported in writing to the City employee authorized to prevent discontinuance. That employee shall either delay the discontinuance order if it is apparent that a properly executed medical certificate will be received, or shall state in writing why such delay is not being affected. The City and City employee's noting of the information made known by the customer, and acting upon such information or failing to act on such information in good faith, shall cause the City and City employee to be held harmless for any error made or damages incurred. 
H.  If a residential customer has arranged with the City to participate in a third party notification program, as set forth in subsection 15-1.7B SFCC 1987, the City shall not discontinue service to the customer for delinquent accounts or failure to comply with payment arrangements without: 
1.  Contacting the designated person, organization or governmental agency by phone or in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the proposed discontinuance of service. 
2.  Determining that the designated person, organization or governmental agency has not made a commitment to assist payment of the delinquent account or compliance with the payment arrangement within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  52) 
10. RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE EQUIPMENT 
A.  RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CITY. 
1.  The City will design, install, own, operate and maintain the complete water system up to the point of delivery including meter setting and meter. 
B.  RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CUSTOMER. 
1.  The customer shall install, own and maintain all facilities beyond the point of delivery. 
2.  The customer or property owner must exercise due care for the protection of the property of the City on the customer's premises. 
3.  The customer agrees, in accepting service, that no one except the employees of the City shall be allowed to make an internal or external adjustment of any meter or any other piece of apparatus which is the property of the City, except as set forth in this paragraph. 
a.  If there is no water shut off available on the customer's property, the customer, or the customer's representative, licensed to work in the city, may temporarily shut off water service at the meter when there is a water emergency or the customer is doing planned plumbing work and to verify a leak. For the purposes of this paragraph, a water emergency exists on the property served by the meter when property damage would occur if the water service is not shut off immediately. 
b.  Prior to shutting off water service at the meter, the City's water division shall be contacted. After turning the water service back on, the City's water division shall be contacted, again. 
c.  Within 48 hours, the water division will inspect the water meter to determine if the water meter has been properly restored. If the meter has not been properly restored, the customer shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the city to make the necessary corrections. 
d.  City staff shall provide information to the public through the City's website regarding the proper method for shutting off water service at the meter. 
e.  This paragraph shall not authorize the adjustment of a meter for the purposes of obtaining water without proper payment. 
4.  Facilities or equipment necessary for any special requirements shall be installed and maintained by the customer. 
5.  The City shall have the right of access to the premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting, testing, repairing, installing or removing the property of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13,  1) 
11. INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE 
A.  The City reserves the right to interrupt service for a reasonable period for maintenance and repairs to its property or equipment. 
B.  The City will strive to furnish adequate, efficient and reasonable service. Interruption of service should be reported promptly by the customer to the City. The City will endeavor to restore service within a reasonable time. 
C.  The City will use reasonable diligence to furnish a regular and uninterrupted supply of water; however, interruptions or partial interruptions may occur or service may be curtailed or fail as a result of circumstances beyond the control of the City, including but not limited to those caused by public enemies, accidents, strikes, legal processes, damages to transmission or distribution facilities of the City, repairs or changes in the City's transmission or distribution facilities. The City will endeavor to give reasonable notice in advance of any planned shutoff. 
D.  Customers whose service requirements exceed those normally provided should advise the City and contract for additional facilities as may be required. The City will not, under any circumstances, contract to provide one hundred percent (100%) reliability. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  53) 
12. RESERVED [10] 
13. ACCEPTABLE STANDARDS 
    The City will adhere to the applicable state minimum design and construction standards as established under state law. 
14. RESERVED [11] 
15. UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS 
    Domestic water service furnished by the City to any customer shall be used only in connection with such customer's residence, dwelling, or building to which the City's water service is piped. No additional facilities or supplies shall be connected to the existing service nor shall service be piped from one residence, dwelling, or building to another residence, dwelling or building without first obtaining a written permit, authorization and/or statement of requirements from the City, and without first complying with any such requirements. 
16. STOPPAGE OR OBSTRUCTIONS OF SERVICE 
    The City shall not be responsible for the stoppage or obstruction or breaks in facilities or lines of the customer. 
17. TEMPORARY AND SPECIAL SERVICES 
A.  Where service connections are available, temporary service will be furnished under the City's established rules, regulations, and rates for the type of service required; provided, however, that the customer shall pay, in addition to the cost of service rendered under its applicable rate, the cost of installing and removing, or of connecting and disconnecting the necessary facilities required to provide such service. 
B.  The rate to be charged for water supplied under temporary service will be in accordance with the City's existing applicable schedules for commercial or residential service, as appropriate. Water service for specialized usage shall be considered as a special case when not covered by a specific filed rate schedule for the specialized usage. 
C.  Where water service is supplied directly to a trailer or other temporary or portable structure, the City may require that the Application for Service be in the name of the owner of the real estate on whose land the trailer or other portable structure is located. In such case, the monthly bill will be suitably identified as may be requested by the property owner, but it will be addressed to the property owner, and the property owner will be responsible for payment of same. For such temporary service, the applicable rate schedules shall apply. 
D.  Where water service is supplied to individual trailers, mobile homes and other portable structures, the customer shall pay for the installation and removal cost of providing this service. Payment shall be made in advance of construction in accordance with Rate No. 7. 
E.  The City reserves the right to furnish or not to furnish water for any type of temporary use and further, to define the conditions under which the water will be supplied. See Rule No. 20, Limitations and Restrictions of Use of Water. Continuous service under normal conditions to existing customers shall take priority over customers receiving temporary service. 
18. METERS 
A.  SEPARATE METERS REQUIRED - NEW APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE. 
Applications requesting service after March 11, 2005 shall comply with the following: 
1.  All dwelling units shall be separately metered except as set forth in this paragraph. A dwelling unit is defined in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987. 
a.  Where there are more than one dwelling unit in a building (multi-family buildings such as apartment and condominium complexes), each dwelling unit shall either be separately metered or the building shall have a master meter and each dwelling unit shall have a sub-meter. A sub-meter is defined in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987. If the building has a master meter, home owner associations, condominium boards, management companies, landlords and other such property owners shall comply with master meter requirements established by resolution of the governing body. 
b.  Mobile home parks where spaces are available to rent in existence prior to December 8, 2010 may have a master meter provided that each mobile home has a sub-meter. The owner/operator of the mobile home park shall comply with master meter requirements established by resolution of the governing body. 
2.  All new buildings shall be separately metered. All existing buildings, other than dwelling units, requiring water service for each part of the building, if the part is or may be occupied by a separate owner or tenant, may be separately metered. Building is defined in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987. 
3.  Separate meters shall be required for irrigation for commercial customers unless the total landscaped area on the lot is less than 1000 square feet. 
B.  SEPARATE METERS REQUIRED - BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS. 
The following building applications submitted to the City after March 11, 2005 shall comply with paragraph A above. 
1.  Additions or remodeling of existing structures that disturb greater than 1000 square feet of land area, or have a valuation over $80,000. 
2.  A dwelling unit as defined in subsection 25-1.1 SFCC 1987. 
3.  New tenant improvements within an existing shell building. 
C.  OWNERSHIP OF METERS. 
All meters used in connection with metered service shall be furnished, installed, maintained, and owned by the City. 
D.  LOCATION OF METERS. 
1.  The City shall specify the meter location and point of delivery to any premises, at the curb, property line or alley, and the City shall be contacted for exact information locating the point of delivery before any piping of customer's system has been started. If such information is not obtained by customer in writing, expensive changes in piping installation may result for which the City shall not be held liable in any way and will not assume any responsibility. 
2.  When a building or property includes more than one unit requiring separate meters, all of the meters shall be grouped adjacent to each other and shall be individually numbered and identified according to the units served. 
3.  In order to provide service from the nearest water main installed in public right-of-way, a customer's meter and the water line connecting the meter to a structure will be relocated when a water main is installed in a public right-of-way which abuts customer's property. This will only be required when the project is undertaken to improve the customer's water service and to eliminate water mains on private easements wherever possible. 
E.  UNAUTHORIZED SETTING OR MOVING OF METERS. 
No person shall set or move a water meter without first obtaining written permission from the water division and complying with any requirements of the City. 
F.  METER SIZE. 
The size of the water meter shall be as determined by the city water division based upon the nature of the customer classification and the proposed and/or potential use of the property. 
(Ord. # 2006-53,  36; Ord. #2010-5,  1; Ord. #2010-30,  2) 
19. LINE EXTENSION POLICY 
A.  Whenever an extension of City's water lines is required to serve an applicant, or group of applicants, extension will be made under the following terms and conditions. 
B.  All line extensions shall be sized to provide adequate domestic and fire protection service, including fire hydrants to meet requirements for fire protection. In the event that the system master plan requires a larger line size than is required to serve the applicant's needs, the City shall absorb the difference in investment between the applicant's required line size and the line size required by the plan; but in no event shall the extension be based on lines smaller than those needed for applicant's domestic and fire service requirements. Normal minimum distribution line size for adequate fire protection is six inches (6") diameter. In the event that it is determined that less than six inches (6") diameter facilities are necessary to provide adequate domestic and fire protection service, the applicant shall be charged on the basis of actual cost. The maximum distribution facilities to be charged to the applicant shall be eight inches (8") diameter facilities. The applicant shall be charged on the basis of actual cost. Meter and service lines are a portion of the distribution facilities to be paid by the applicant. The City shall be the sole judge of proper line sizing. 
C.  Investment in the line extension shall be based on extensions made to the furthest limit of the property to be served. The furthest limit shall mean that point at which the main exits from the property, then being served, as it continues its planned course. In the case of corner property, the City will exercise its judgment, in light of standard procedures for non-corner properties, as to the definition of that point, so as to avoid undue burden to the owner of the corner property. The extension will be made from the nearest adequately sized distribution main. 
D.  The investment in the line extension required to serve the applicant's domestic and fire protection requirements as specified by Paragraph B above will be paid in total by the applicant requesting the line extension. 
E.  The City shall not under any condition be required to make an extension that would be unprofitable and thereby cause undue hardship to existing customers. 
F.  All lines within incorporated cities, towns, and communities will be constructed in existing public roads, streets, City-owned land alleys, or easements. The applicant shall furnish such rights-of-way as are required without charge to the City over property owned by said applicant and shall assist the City in securing other rights-of-way necessary to provide service over property not owned by said applicant. 
G.  Where unusual circumstances exist and at the sole option of the City, an extension may be made under a special long-term contract providing the contract terms are such that no adverse affects will be imposed on City's existing customers. 
H.  Special conditions which affect the furnishing of water service to an applicant or group of applicants such as elevation, terrain, volume of water available in existing mains and other conditions resulting in increased costs to the City in providing water service shall be taken into consideration by the City and the cost thereof shall be included in estimating the cost of providing service. 
I.  The total construction cost for the line extension as set forth in Paragraph B above shall be paid as an advance in aid of construction by the applicant but it shall be subject to future refunds to that applicant if water service is provided to a new customer within ten (10) years from the date of the original line extension agreement between the City and applicant, provided the new customer's property abuts applicant's line extension (other than at the end of applicant's line extension) and (i) the City connects the service line or line extension for said new customer's water service to applicant's line extension, or (ii) applicant's line extension is necessary for domestic or fire flow service to said new customer. The determination of whether the service line or line extension for a new customer's water service should be connected to an existing line extension and, if so, the particular line extension to which it should be connected, and the determination of whether applicant's line extension is necessary for the City's provision of domestic or fire flow service to a new customer, shall be made by the City in its discretion, based on engineering considerations and the City's plans for the development of its water system. The amount of the refund to be made to applicant on account of a new customer's water service shall be determined by the City, based on a front foot basis for individual lots or on an acreage basis for undeveloped tracts, calculated as a percentage of the footage and/or acreage for the probable total parcels already connected and to be connected to applicant's line extension and the probable total parcels which already require or will require applicant's line extension for the City's provision of domestic or fire flow service. If a refund is determined to be required pursuant to the foregoing provisions, the City shall bill the new customer for the appropriate amount and, upon receipt thereof, shall refund said amount to applicant if it can be determined that applicant still exists and can be readily located. Refunds made under this provision shall not exceed the amount of applicant's contribution in aid of construction less that portion needed to serve applicant. The provisions of this paragraph apply to connections to, and the required provision of domestic or fire flow service from, all line extensions already in existence and all line extensions installed after the effective date of this rule. 
J.  Lines determined by the City to be primarily for purposes of a master plan will be installed by the City or at the City's direction. Customers causing subsequent connections or extensions for development to properties directly abutting or benefiting from such lines and future development areas to be serviced by this line which were undeveloped at the time of the extension, shall reimburse the City for a pro rata share of the line as follows: 
The pro rata costs shall be based on those size lines and appurtenances which would have been required to serve the development with adequate domestic and fire protection service. 
    Costs which are included in City's calculation of the Utility Expansion Charge are excluded from the provisions of this Line Extension policy. 
K.  Customers served from facilities that have been installed under Paragraph I. or J. will be charged in accordance with applicable Paragraphs B, C, D, and H. 
L.  "Property to be served" is defined as that property described by applicant in the application for building permit as required by the Uniform Building Code adopted by the City. 
20. LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS OF USE OF WATER 
A.  Before undertaking anything which will use unusually large quantities of water, the City shall be consulted for its approval of such additional service and for the terms and advice as to conditions under which the water will be supplied to the premises of the customer. 
B.  Resale of water service or the furnishing of water service to others by customers will not be permitted except where such resale or furnishing of service is provided for in the applicable rate schedule and in a written agreement between the customer and the City. 
C.  The City reserves the right to limit the size of service connections or openings through which its service is furnished and to prohibit the customer's waste or the flow of excessive quantities of water which exceed or strain the capacity of the City for supplying water to all customers. Noncompliance of this rule by any customer shall constitute grounds for discontinuing service in accordance with Rule No. 9, Discontinuance and Denying Restoration of Service. 
21. RESERVED [12] 
22. CUSTOMER COMPLAINT PROCEDURES 
A.  Except as set forth in paragraph E. below, inquiries or complaints concerning the application or interpretation of Chapter XXV may be made to the City either in person, by telephone or in writing. The customer shall direct the initial inquiry or complaint to those persons designated by the City to resolve such complaints on behalf of the water utility. In the event that the customer is not satisfied with the action of such City representative, the customer may direct a written complaint to the City's Water Division Director (Director). Such written complaints received by the Director shall be fully investigated and a written decision shall be provided to the customer by the Director. Any customer who does not file a written complaint with the Director within sixty (60) days of the decision or action of the City which is the subject of the complaint shall waive any right to contest such decision or action. 
B.  Should the customer not be satisfied with the written decision of the Director, the customer may then appeal that decision to the Public Utilities Committee (Committee), requesting a hearing at one of its regular meetings. Any customer who does not file a written appeal with the Committee within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of the decision of the Director regarding the customer's written complaint shall waive any right to contest such decision. The customer who submits a written appeal to the Committee shall be notified of the meeting of the Committee at which the customer is to appear and present the complaint to the Committee for its consideration and review. The Committee may affirm or change the ruling of the Director or make a recommendation for a variance to the governing body. Any affirmation or change of the ruling of the Director by the Committee shall be consistent with these Rules and Regulations. 
C.  Should the Committee find reasons for a variance from these Rules and Regulations, those reasons shall be stated in the official minutes of its meeting. The Committee shall refer the matter along with copies of its minutes and with its recommendation to the governing body in accordance with the governing body's procedures. Action of the Committee affirming or changing the ruling of the Director may be appealed by the customer or the Director to the governing body by submittal of a written appeal to the City Clerk stating the reasons of the appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of the Committee decision. The party appealing the Committee's decision shall give notice of the appeal to the other party. Failure to file written notice of appeal to the governing body within such thirty (30) days shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision of the Committee. 
D.  The governing body shall hear the appeal at a regularly scheduled public meeting and shall state the details of its decision in the official minutes of such meeting. 
E.  This section shall not apply to disputes or appeals regarding utility billing, payment arrangements or discontinuance of service as set forth in Rule No. 9 of these regulations. Appeals or disputes regarding these issues shall comply with subsection 15-1.8 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2003-25,  57) 
23. RESERVED [13] 
24. CUSTOMER'S SYSTEM 
    The piping system on customer's premises shall be inspected and approved by the appropriate governmental inspection agency before water service will be connected. Cross-connections and/or backfill possibilities revealed by any inspection shall be eliminated before water service is provided to a new customer or continued to an existing customer. The City does not assume the responsibility for piping inspections and shall not be held liable for failure of customer's piping or installation; however, the City will cooperate with both the customer and the responsible governmental agency to effect changes necessary in the piping system or installation, in order to provide or continue to provide water service without undue delay. 
25. REQUIREMENTS OF CONTRACTS 
A.  Special written contracts are normally not required from customers receiving service under the applicable residential or commercial Rate Schedule who do not require a line extension agreement. 
B.  All customers not covered by A. above will be provided service only after the customer executes either the City's standard agreement for water service or, in special cases, an appropriate contract. 
C.  All contracts between the City and its customers shall contain substantially the following clauses: 
    The City reserves the right to modify the rates set forth herein at any time, and from time to time, through the adoption of new rate schedules or rules and regulations by the governing body, and the rates, terms and conditions of service hereunder shall be deemed modified at such time as such rate schedules or rules and regulations become effective. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent or prohibit customer from asserting or claiming any right before any legally constituted body to which it may be entitled. 
D.  All customer installations shall comply with the Plumbing Code of the State of New Mexico and any other legally applicable codes. 
26. RESERVED [14] 
27. RESERVED [15] 
28. FIRE HYDRANTS 
A.  In order to assure proper operation of fire hydrants, no water shall be drawn through any fire hydrant for any other purpose than fire protection, except as provided by special permit from the City or in accordance with Rate Schedules No. 9. 
B.  In the event City's main line is inadequate to provide fire hydrant service as requested by the customer, refer to Rule No. 19, Line Extension Policy. 
C.  Refer to Rate Schedules No. 5 and 9 for fire hydrant charges. 
29. FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE 
A.  A customer desiring private fire protection service, in addition to regular water service, shall make such request in writing to the City prior to construction of the fire protection service. 
B.  If water main facilities are available for such service as determined by the City, the customer will install, at his/her own expense, a complete and separate piping system extending and connecting to the City's facilities. This may include a meter pit of sufficient size to house the necessary valves, meters, piping, etc., all of which shall be as specified by the City. The location of this pit will be determined by the City. 
C.  The City will furnish and install the necessary metering at the expense of the customer. 
D.  In the event the City's water mains are inadequate to provide the requested fire protection service or if extension of a main is required, refer to Rule No. 19, Line Extension Policy. 
30. GENERAL RULES WITH RESPECT TO LARGE USERS OF WATER 
A.  Before a customer proceeds with the purchase of any equipment which will necessitate the use of large quantities of water within short periods of time, the City shall be consulted for advice as to the best method of installation and for information concerning the conditions under which the water will be supplied to the premises of the customer. 
B.  In general, the City reserves the right to limit the size of service connections or openings though which its service is furnished for filling storage tanks, locomotive tenders, hydraulic equipment, private fire service, or other classes of service capable of drawing relatively large quantities of water and thereby causing undue fluctuations of pressures in portions of the City's system. 
C.  Service information will be supplied to the new customer upon application to the City for service. 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Rule No. 12, Rates Based on Meter Size, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2003-25 was repealed by Ordinance No. 2005-2,  8. 

--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Rule No. 14, City's Right to Ingress to and Egress from Customer's Property, previously codified herein was repealed by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  55. 

--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Rule No. 21, Settlement Agreements, previously codified herein, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  56. 

--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Rule No. 23, Estimated Bills, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2003-25 was repealed by Ordinance No. 2005-2,  10. 

--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Rule No. 26, Manner of Serving Notice to Customer, previously codified herein, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2003-25,  59. 

--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- Rule No. 27, previously codified herein was repealed by Ordinance No. 2005-2,  11. 

EXHIBIT B 
(Subsection 25-4.2) 
WATER SERVICE RATE SCHEDULES 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Title
  Rate
Schedule
NumberMonthly Service Charges and Monthly Volume Rates Effective March 1, 2009 through December 31, 2009 1A Effective January 1, 2010 through December 31, 2010 1B Effective January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011 1C Effective January 1, 2012 through December 31, 2012 1D Effective January 1, 2013 1E Private Fire Hydrant Service 5 Fire Service Line 6 Base Meter Service Charges 7 Utility Expansion Charge 8 Municipal Fire Hydrant Service 9 Conservation Program Charge 10 Potable Water Fill Station 11 EFFECTIVE: JULY 1, 1995 AMENDED: JANUARY 12, 2000 
APRIL 11, 2001 
MAY 9, 2001 
SEPTEMBER 24, 2001 
JANUARY 16, 2002 
MAY 8, 2002 
AUGUST 11, 2004 
FEBRUARY 9, 2005 
AUGUST 28, 2006 (EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2007) 
OCTOBER 29, 2007 
JANUARY 9, 2008 
JANUARY 28, 2009 (EFFECTIVE MARCH 1, 2009)  
RATE SCHEDULE 1A 
Effective March 1, 2009 through December 31, 2009 
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY COMMERCIALMeter Size Monthly Service Charge ?" or 3/4" $13.44 1" $26.88 11/2" $53.75 2" $107.51 3" $215.02 4" $389.71 6" $860.06 8" $1,531.98  
MONTHLY VOLUME CHARGERESIDENTIAL All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter MULTI-FAMILYAll meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$15.84/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$15.84/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter COMMERCIAL?" or 3/4" 
meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter 1" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 14,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 20,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter COMMERCIAL-CONITNUED11/2" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 28,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 40,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter 2" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 56,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 80,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter 3" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 112,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 160,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter 4" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 203,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 290,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter 6" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 448,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 640,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter 8" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 798,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.43/1,000 gallons for first 1,140,000 gallons 
$15.84/1,000 gallons thereafter  
*(utility billing date) 
RATE SCHEDULE 1B 
Effective January 1, 2010 through December 31, 2010 
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY COMMERCIALMeter Size Monthly Service Charge ?" or 3/4" $14.54 1" $29.08 11/2" $58.16 2" $116.33 3" $232.65 4" $421.67 6" $930.58 8" $1,657.60  
MONTHLY VOLUME CHARGERESIDENTIAL All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter MULTI-FAMILY All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$17.14/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$17.14/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter COMMERCIAL ?" or 3/4" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter 1" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 14,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 20,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter COMMERCIAL-CONTINUED11/2" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 28,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 40,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter 2" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 56,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 80,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter 3" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 112,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 160,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter 4" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 203,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 290,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter 6" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 448,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 640,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter 8" meter Sept. - 
April* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 798,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $04.79/1,000 gallons for first 1,140,000 gallons 
$17.14/1,000 gallons thereafter  
*(utility billing date) 
RATE SCHEDULE 1C 
Effective January 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011 
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY COMMERCIALMeter Size Monthly Service Charge ?" or 3/4" $15.73 1" $31.46 11/2" $62.93 2" $125.87 3" $251.73 4" $456.25 6" $1,006.89 8" $1,793.52  
MONTHLY VOLUME CHARGERESIDENTIAL All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter MULTI-FAMILY All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$18.55/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$18.55/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter COMMERCIAL ?" or 3/4" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 1" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 14,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 20,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter COMMERCIAL-CONTINUED11/2" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 28,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 40,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 2" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 56,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 80,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 3" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 112,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 160,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 4" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 203,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 290,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 6" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 448,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 640,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 8" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 798,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.18/1,000 gallons for first 1,140,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter  
*(utility billing date) 
RATE SCHEDULE 1D 
Effective January 1, 2012 through December 31, 2012 
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY COMMERCIALMeter Size Monthly Service Charge ?" or 3/4" $17.02 1" $34.04 11/2" $68.09 2" $136.19 3" $272.37 4" $493.66 6" $1,089.45 8" $1,940.59  
MONTHLY VOLUME CHARGERESIDENTIAL All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter MULTI-FAMILY All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$20.07/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$20.07/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter COMMERCIAL ?" or 3/4" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter 1" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 14,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 20,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter COMMERCIAL-CONTINUED11/2" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 28,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 40,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter 2" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 56,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 80,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter 3" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 112,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 160,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter 4" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 203,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 290,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter 6" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 448,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 640,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter 8" meter Sept. - 
April* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 798,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 1,140,000 gallons 
$20.07/1,000 gallons thereafter  
*(utility billing date) 
RATE SCHEDULE 1E 
Effective January 1, 2013 
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY COMMERCIALMeter Size Monthly Service Charge ?" or 3/4" $18.42 1" $36.83 11/2" $73.67 2" $147.36 3" $294.70 4" $534.14 6" $1,178.78 8" $2,099.72  
MONTHLY VOLUME CHARGERESIDENTIAL All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter MULTI-FAMILY All meter sizes Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$21.72/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.60/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons per dwelling unit 
$21.72/1,000 gallons per dwelling unit thereafter COMMERCIAL ?" or 3/4" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 7,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 10,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter 1" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 14,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 20,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter COMMERCIAL-CONTINUED 11/2" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 28,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 40,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter 2" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 56,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 80,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter 3" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 112,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $05.60/1,000 gallons for first 160,000 gallons 
$18.55/1,000 gallons thereafter 4" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 203,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 290,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter 6" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 448,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 640,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter 8" meter Sept. - 
April* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 798,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter May - 
Aug* $06.06/1,000 gallons for first 1,140,000 gallons 
$21.72/1,000 gallons thereafter  
*(utility billing date) 
APPLICABILITY: The water rate schedules reflect an increase of 8.20% per year. Any federal or state funds that are received for water projects covered in the water division's 10 year plan adopted by Resolution No. 2009-17 shall be used solely for reducing the rate increases that are planned for the four years subsequent to adoption of Ordinance No. 2009-2. None of these funds shall be used for plan expansion. The applicable rate shall be based upon the character of service as set forth in Rule 3 of Exhibit A, Chapter 25 SFCC 1987. Service will be furnished in accordance with the City's Rules and Regulations covering water service, available at the City's offices and on file with the office of the City Clerk of the city of Santa Fe, which Rules and Regulations or subsequent revisions thereof are a part of this Schedule as if fully written herein. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
FIRE PROTECTION CHARGE: If the customer has a fire service line or lines for standby fire protection, the appropriate rate as provided in Rate Schedule 6, Fire Service Line, shall also be charged. 
IRRIGATION METER: If the customer has an additional meter installed primarily for irrigation or other outdoor uses such as, but not limited to, pool or spa filling or vehicle washing, the same commodity and system charge as set forth above shall apply. 
SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: Billings under this Schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the City and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
MINIMUM CHARGE: The minimum charge under this Schedule shall be the monthly service charge. 
REVIEW: Upon adoption of Ordinance No. 2009-2, the water division shall immediately begin a rate structure review. As part of this review, a recommendation shall be produced regarding a third tier for excessive use of water for Rate Schedule 1, an expansion of the poverty exemption set forth in 15-1.3 SFCC 1987 for low/fixed income customers, and an increase in the utility expansion charge set forth in Rate Schedule 8. The review and recommendation shall be completed as soon as possible in order to be in place for the May 2009 billing date. 
USE OF SERVICE: Service shall not be resold or shared with others. 
ADDITIONS AND EXTENSIONS: Additions or extensions under this Schedule shall be subject to the availability of existing water lines of adequate capacity to provide the service requested. The City shall not be required for purposes of supplying service hereunder to increase the capacity of its mains or to make any extensions thereto. Subject to the foregoing provisions, additional points of delivery may be requested, and the City, upon receipt of such requisition, shall furnish the water service in accordance with the rates contained in this Schedule. 
OTHER CONDITIONS: Other conditions pertaining to application of service, water taps, disconnection and reconnection of service, responsibility for payment of bills, and other conditions are provided for in the City's Rules and Regulations, available at its Water Services Division's office. 
SERVICE APPLICATION: All applications for services for one inch (1") and larger meters shall be covered by written agreement on the City's standard application form. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 1A* 
RESERVED 
*Former Rate Schedule 1A, Multi-Family Residential Water Service, previously codified herein, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  40. Former Rate Schedule 1A shall remain in effect until January 1, 2007. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 2* 
RESERVED 
*Former Rate Schedule 2, Small Commercial Water Service, previously codified herein, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  41. Former Rate Schedule 2 shall remain in effect until January 1, 2007. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 3* 
RESERVED 
*Former Rate Schedule 3, Large Commercial Water Service, previously codified herein, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  42. Former Rate Schedule 3 shall remain in effect until January 1, 2007. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 4* 
RESERVED 
*Former Rate Schedule 4, Special Charges, previously codified herein, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  43. Former Rate Schedule 4 shall remain in effect until January 1, 2007. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 5 
PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT SERVICE 
APPLICABILITY: This rate applies to owners of private fire hydrants used for fire protection only. This Schedule is not applicable to resale, breakdown, or standby service. 
AVAILABILITY: Available only to installation existing and in service under this Schedule on or before June 30, 1969. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
RATES: The rate for fire hydrant service provided shall be the sum of A and B: 
A. For each private fire hydrant, $54.52 per year payable monthly. 
B.  SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: Billings under this Schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the City and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
    TERMS OF PAYMENT: The rates set forth above are net and payable within twenty (20) days from date of bill. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 6 
FIRE SERVICE LINE 
APPLICABILITY: This Fire Service Line rate applies to those individual customers who have a fire service line. This Schedule is not applicable to resale or breakdown service. Service will be furnished in accordance with the City's Rules and Regulations covering water service, available at the City's offices and on file with the office of the City Clerk of the city of Santa Fe, which Rules and Regulations or subsequent revisions thereof are a part of this Schedule as if fully written herein. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
RATE: The rate for fire service lines shall be the sum of A and B: 
A. 
Fire Service Line Monthly 
Charge 3" $21.19 4" 34.68 6" 68.39 8" 108.84 10" 159.89  NOTE: Fire service lines will be billed on a per customer basis.  
B. SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: Billings under this Schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the City and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
TERMS OF PAYMENT: The rates set forth above are net and payable within twenty (20) days from date of bill. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 7 
BASE METER SERVICE CHARGES 
APPLICABILITY: This Base Meter rate is applicable to all 3/4-inch, 1-inch, 1 1/2-inch, and 2-inch services installed by the City in dirt, gravel, and paved streets. This Schedule is not applicable to the installation of services larger than 2-inches, nor to services installed in subdivisions. Larger services and subdivision services will be installed under special contract provisions. 
Service will be furnished in accordance with the City's Rules and Regulations covering water service, available at the City's offices and on file with the office of the City Clerk of the city of Santa Fe, which Rules and Regulations or subsequent revisions thereof are a part of this Schedule as if fully written herein. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
RATE: The rate for Base Meter Service Charges shall be the sum of A, B, and C: 
A.  SERVICE CHARGES: 
Service Dirt or Gravel Paved 3/4-inch $554.75 $1,026.83 l-inch $592.23 $1,064.31 Service Dirt W/Main 
Back of Curb Gravel Paved 11/2-inch $1,276.80 $1,372.43 $1,876.31 Service Street W/Mains 
Back of Curb Gravel Paved 2-inch $1,447.24 $1,542.87 $2,046.74  
B.  CHARGES FOR RESTORATION OF STREET OR ROAD SURFACE: The customer shall be assessed any cost related to the excavation or the restoration of street and road surfaces, curbs and gutters and sidewalks, including governmental permits, as may be required in compliance with applicable state or local government statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
C.  SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: Billings under this Schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the City and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 8 
UTILITY EXPANSION CHARGE 
APPLICABILITY: This Utility Expansion Charge is applicable to all new customers for connection with the City's system. Installation of a second meter and establishment of a new account for existing demand on a legal residential lot of record shall not be considered a new customer subject to application of the Utility Expansion Charge. Service will be furnished in accordance with the City's Rules and Regulations covering water service, available at the City's offices and on file with the office of the City Clerk of the City of Santa Fe, which Rules and Regulations or subsequent revisions thereof are a part of this Schedule as if fully written herein. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the City of Santa Fe. 
UTILITY EXPANSION CHARGE (UEC) : The rate for the UEC shall be the sum of A and B. 
A.  CHARGE: 
1.  The Charge for a ?" meter service is $2,013.00. 
2.  The Charge for a ?" meter service for the following is $800.00. 
a.  Santa Fe Homes Program for-sale or for-rent units as defined in Section 26-1 SFCC 1987; 
b.  Housing opportunity program home or housing opportunity program rental unit subject to a valid housing opportunity program agreement; or 
c.  A low priced dwelling unit as defined in Section 26-2 SFCC 1987. 
3.  The Charge for each meter service size shall be determined by multiplying the Charge for a ?" meter service by the applicable equivalent meter EQM Factor. 
4.  The other meter service sizes are as follows: 
Meter Service EQM Factor UEC 3/4" 1.5 $3,019.00 1" 2.5 5,032.00 11/2" 5.0 10,065.00 2" 8.0 16,104.00 3" 15.6 31,402.00 4" 25.0 50,325.00 6" 50.0 100,650.00 8" 80.0 161,040.00  
B.  SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: Billings under this Schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the City and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
C.  VARIANCE: In the event a developer makes an advance payment for project costs, which payment covers all costs pertaining to the project in question which are included in the UEC calculation, he/she shall upon application to the governing body of the city of Santa Fe be entitled to a variance excusing him/her from payment of the UEC. A qualifying project within the Midtown LINC Overlay District, as defined in Subsection 14-5.5(D)(4)(b) SFCC 1987, is exempt from payment of the UEC. 
TERMS OF PAYMENT: The UEC is due when notice is provided to the Customer prior to installation of the service line. 
SERVICE APPLICATION: The UEC shall apply to new services, not including the installation of a second meter and establishment of a new account for existing demand on a legal residential lot of record, located anywhere within the water service area approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39  11) 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 9 
MUNICIPAL FIRE HYDRANT SERVICE 
APPLICABILITY: Hydrants for the city of Santa Fe for fire protection, street cleaning, and sewer flushing. This Schedule is not applicable to resale, breakdown, or standby service. Service will be furnished in accordance with the City's Rules and Regulations covering water service available at the City's offices which Rules or subsequent revisions thereof are a part of this Schedule as if fully written herein. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
RATE: The rate for fire hydrant service provided shall be the sum of A and B: 
A. For each fire hydrant installed - $46.72 per annum payable monthly. 
B. SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: Billings under this Schedule may be increased by an amount equal to the sum of the taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges (exclusive of ad valorem, state and federal income taxes) payable by the Utility and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
TERMS OF PAYMENT: The rate set forth above is net and payable from date of bill. 
AVAILABILITY: Available to the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico for all hydrant service. Available under this Schedule are the following types of hydrants: 
a.  Standard 4-inch inlet 2-nozzle hydrants. 
b.  Standard 6-inch inlet with two 21/2-inch hose nozzles and one standard 41/2-inch pumper nozzle. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 10 
CONSERVATION PROGRAM CHARGE 
APPLICABILITY: In addition to the charges set forth elsewhere in Exhibit B of Chapter XXV SFCC 1987, all customers, except those that qualify for the poverty exemption set forth in subsection 15-1.3 SFCC 1987, shall pay a once per year conservation program charge. The charge shall be included in the customers' April water bill. Multi-family service customers shall be billed on a quarterly basis. The revenue collected shall be specifically set aside to fund water conservation programs of the city. 
SERVICE AREA: Within the corporate limits of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico and those areas outside the corporate limits to which service has been authorized by action of the governing body of the city of Santa Fe. 
RATE: The charge for the conservation program shall be the following: 
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SERVICE Meter Size Conservation Fee ?" $4.00 3/4" $4.00 1" $6.00 1.5" $9.00 2" $9.00 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SERVICE Meter Size Conservation Fee ?" $8.00 3/4" $15.00 1" $20.00 1.5" $50.00 2" $105.00 3" $150.00 4" $305.00 6" $525.00 8" $750.00 COMMERCIAL SERVICE Meter Size Conservation Fee ?" $5.00 3/4" $12.50 1" $20.00 1.5" $32.00 2" $65.00 3" $110.00 4" $200.00 6" $285.00 8" $350.00  
TERMS OF PAYMENT: The charge set forth above is payable within twenty (20) days from date of bill. 
REVIEW OF FEE. The governing body shall review the conservation fee every two (2) years after the date of adoption. 
CITY OF SANTA FE - PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT 
WATER SERVICES DIVISION 
RATE SCHEDULE 11 
POTABLE WATER FILL STATION 
APPLICABILITY: Water dispensed from the city's potable water fill station. 
POTABLE WATER FILL STATION RATE: 
A.  CHARGES: 
1.  Base Rate $2.05 per 500 gallons or portion thereof 
2.  Surcharges 
a.  Water conservation surcharge (as an overlay onto the base rate) shall apply to water dispensed May 1 through October 31 
$0.50 per 500 gallons or portion thereof 
b.  During Water Emergency Management Stages 2 or 3, surcharges (as an overlay onto the base rate) 
$1.00 per 500 gallons or portion thereof 
B.  SPECIAL TAX AND ASSESSMENT CLAUSE: The above charges shall be increased by an amount equal to the sum of taxes payable under the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act and of all other taxes, fees, or charges payable by the City and levied or assessed by any governmental authority on the public utility service rendered, or on the right or privilege of rendering the service, or on any object or event incidental to the rendition of the service. 
OTHER CONDITIONS: 
A.  Upon the water division's approval of an application, the following may purchase water from the city's potable water fill station: 
1.  A customer of the city's water, sewer or refuse utilities; or 
2.  A person living within the city limits. 
B.  Payment is due at the time the application for water is approved by the water division, prior to dispensing. 
C.  The amount shall not exceed 5,000 gallons per purchase, not to exceed 20,000 gallons per month per purchaser. 
D.  There is no restriction on where the water may be used; however, the water shall be subject to the same use restrictions as all other city water set forth in this chapter including, but not limited to, conservation, water waste and emergency water regulations. Violations shall be subject to the same enforcement as other violations of this chapter. 
E.  The purchaser or their representative shall have, in their possession at the time and place of use of the water, the receipt from the city for the water. 
F.  During Water Emergency Management Stage 4, water shall not be dispensed at the potable water fill station. 
G.  The above conditions may be waived by the water division director, or his or her designee, if it is determined that an emergency exists and that the water is necessary for the public's health, safety and welfare. 
H.  The city reserves the right to prohibit or limit the sale of water at the potable water fill station as it may deem necessary to protect the city's water supply and comply with the intent of the provisions of this chapter. 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
EMERGENCY WATER REGULATIONS 
"WATER WARNING - ORANGE" 
IMPLEMENTATION STAGE 
EXHIBIT C [16] 
(Subsection 25-5.5) 
Adopted: August 28, 2006 (effective January 1, 2007) 
Amended November 30, 2011 by Ord. No. 2011-38 
A.  Landscape Restrictions. 
(1)  Any requirement to plant new landscaping under Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 associated with new construction shall be held in abeyance until all water emergency management plans are rescinded. The property owner or developer shall post a bond sufficient to cover the costs of installing the required landscaping. 
(2)  Except as set forth in paragraph (4) below, the planting of cool-season grass is prohibited. Violation of this provision shall be subject to a $500 administrative fee as set forth in subsection 25-1.4 SFCC 1987. Subsequent watering of cool-season grass with potable water shall be subject to additional fines. 
(3)  The planting of all other plant materials is strongly discouraged. New plantings shall comply with the current irrigation restrictions. 
(4)  New turf areas in public parks may be installed as long as the overall total square footage of turf in public parks does not increase from that in existence at the time of adoption of this ordinance. Existing turf areas in public parks may be renovated by sod or seeding. 
B.  Irrigation Notices. All plant nurseries or landscape professionals or community gardens shall provide their customers at the time of sale or service contract, literature, the text of which is provided by the city, indicating that the city is under twice per week watering restrictions, that the new plantings shall comply with those restrictions, and that violations are subject to administrative fee assessments. 
C.  Irrigation Restrictions. 
(1)  Except as set forth in paragraph (2) below, outdoor irrigation using potable water shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Odd-numbered addresses shall irrigate only on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Even-numbered addresses shall irrigate only on Wednesdays and Sundays; 
(b)  For a location lacking an identifiable odd or even-numbered address, the owner or managing agent shall select an odd-even schedule to which it chooses to adhere provided the city water division is so notified; and 
(c)  A large irrigation user may designate a portion of its landscape area as "odd" and a portion as "even" if active use of the landscaping and/or water pressure limitations constrain the owner's ability to irrigate the entire landscaped area in either an odd or even day provided the city water division is so notified. 
(2)  The following exemptions apply: 
(a)  Plants being irrigated for retail or wholesale sale are exempt; 
(b)  Licensed landscape maintenance and contracting companies doing manual watering may apply to the city's water conservation office for an exemption; however, they shall not manually irrigate their clients' landscaping more than two (2) days a week. For those customers of landscape companies that have automatic irrigation controllers, the odd-even address watering days and times shall be complied with; and 
(c)  Public parks, public school athletic fields and public roadside landscapes. This provision is adopted in order to serve community needs for active and passive recreation deemed essential to the quality of life for persons of all ages and to protect tax paid investments in landscaped facilities. Maximum irrigation for turf and woody plant areas shall be based upon evapotranspiration (ET) replacement to maintain the health and vigor of the plants as follows: 
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Total ET (in inches) 0.70 1.55 2.80 4.25 5.05 4.50 3.00 1.65 0.50 24.00  
    However, the city will use the information received from its weather stations to determine optimal watering levels which may be less than those listed in the chart above. Woody plant materials in roadside landscapes may be irrigated once a week. Roadside landscapes shall mean those located within the public right-of-way completed as part of a publicly funded project and maintained by the city. Public parks, public school athletic fields and roadside landscapes shall be reviewed and retrofitted to incorporate the most efficient available technology in irrigation and xeric plant selection. 
D.  Swimming Pool and Spa Restrictions. One initial filling is allowed for swimming pools and spas. This includes indoor or outdoor facilities. Kiddy pools less than 12 inches in depth and five feet in diameter are exempt from this provision. 
E.  Posting of Water Shortage Bulletin. Excluding residential facilities, owners of restrooms, showers, and locker facilities shall post a city-provided 8.5 by 11 inch water shortage announcement in the restroom, shower, and locker room areas. This provision applies to all private, public, governmental, and commercial establishments. In addition to restroom signs, all indoor commercial establishments shall post the same announcement in a location clearly visible to their customers. 
F.  Santa Fe River Target Flows. Target flows to the Santa Fe River may be suspended. 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
EMERGENCY WATER REGULATIONS
"WATER EMERGENCY - RED"
IMPLEMENTATION STAGE
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Former Exhibit C, Water Emergency Plan Stage 2, Implementation Plan, previously codified herein, adopted May 29, 1996 and amended June 13, 1996, July 31, 1996, September 11, 1996, June 28, 2000, April 10, 2002, May 28, 2003 and February 9, 2005, was repealed in its entirety August 28, 2006 by Ordinance No. 2006-53,  44. 

EXHIBIT D [17] 
(Subsection 25-5.5) 
Adopted: August 28, 2006 (effective January 1, 2007) 
Amended: November 30, 2011 by Ord. No. 2011-38 
A.  Landscaping Restrictions. The planting of all plant materials is prohibited. 
B.  Irrigation Restrictions. 
(1)  All outdoor irrigation using potable water is prohibited except as noted below. 
(2)  The following exemptions apply: 
(a)  Plant materials classified to be rare, exceptionally valuable or essential to the well being of the public at large or rare animals may be irrigated twice per month. The watering shall occur on the first and third Tuesdays of the month. 
(b)  Irrigation of plants for retail or wholesale shall be reduced in volume by an amount determined through approval of the "Water Emergency - Red" implementation stage by the governing body. 
(c)  Irrigation for public parks, public school athletic fields, and roadside landscapes shall reduce irrigation permitted in Section B.(2)(c) of Exhibit C, Chapter XXV SFCC 1987 by 35%. 
C.  Swimming Pool and Spa Restrictions. The filling or refilling of all swimming pools or spas is prohibited except where this use is storage for a water supply. The operation of any fountain or similar water feature is prohibited except for short periods of time to prevent damage. 
D.  Vehicle Washing Restrictions. 
(1)  All vehicle washing at residences, commercial car sale lots and other 
    commercial and governmental entities is prohibited. 
(2)  The use of water by all types of commercial car washes or commercial vehicle service stations and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare shall be reduced in volume by an amount determined through approval of the "Water Emergency - Red" implementation stage by the governing body. 
(3)  Such washings are exempt from these regulations where the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleanings such as refuse collection trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
E.  Commercial Use. The use of water for commercial, manufacturing or processing purposes shall be reduced in volume by an amount determined through approval of the "Water Emergency - Red" implementation stage by the governing body. 
F.  Sales of Potable Water. All sales of potable water outside of the water service area shall be discontinued, with the exception of sales previously approved by the governing body. Water shall not be dispensed at the potable water fill station. 
G.  Santa Fe River Target Flows. Target flows to the Santa Fe River shall be suspended. 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note- Former Exhibit D, Emergency Water Regulations Water Emergency Management Plan Stage 3 Implementation Plan, previously codified herein and amended September 13, 2000, April 10, 2002 and May 28, 2003, was repealed in its entirety August 28, 2006 by Ordinance No. 2006-53.  46. 

CHAPTER XXVI - HOUSING 
26-1 - SANTA FE HOMES PROGRAM. 

26-1.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Santa Fe Homes Program Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  30) 
26-1.2 - Authority. 
    This Santa Fe Homes Program (SFHP) Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to enact a housing code (Section 3-17-6A(8) NMSA 1978), to enact ordinances pursuant to its police power (Section 3-17-1B MNSA 1978), to enact zoning ordinances in general (Section 3-21-1A NMSA 1978), to enact zoning ordinances regulating the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land (Section 3-21-1 B(2) NMSA 1978), and pursuant to any and all such other authority as may be applicable including but not limited to the city's recognized authority to protect the general welfare of its citizens. This section is adopted pursuant to the city of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter which was adopted effective March 15, 1998, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act Sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978 and Article 10, Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  31) 
Editor's note- Former Chapter XXVI, Housing Opportunity Program, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1998-3, 1999-42, 2001-32, 2002-32, 2003-6 and 2004-13 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-30(A). 
26-1.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Santa Fe homes program is to: 
A.  Increase the supply of affordable housing within the Santa Fe area for residents and businesses. 
B.  Encourage the construction of affordable housing in all areas of the city in accordance with the general plan. 
C.  Strengthen the unique heterogeneous character of the Santa Fe area by providing a full range of housing choices for all ages, incomes and family sizes. 
D.  Ensure that residents and future generations can afford to reside within the Santa Fe area. 
E.  Ensure that affordable housing opportunities are available for those who work and wish to live in the Santa Fe area. 
F.  Encourage the maintenance of the long term affordability of housing units within the Santa Fe area. 
G.  Provide affordable housing wherever city utilities are extended beyond the city limits. 
H.  Foster economic integration by encouraging the availability of a range of housing opportunities in new developments in the Santa Fe area. 
I.  To provide the benefit of home equity to homeowners of affordable housing similar to those in market rate housing for such purposes as college education and retirement needs and in turn encouraging pride in ownership and maintenance of the affordable housing unit by allowing access to that home equity. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  32; Ord. #2007-40,  17) 
26-1.4 - Findings. 
    The governing body finds and determines that: 
A.  Affordable housing furthers geographic and community balance through providing a range of housing opportunities throughout the city; and 
B.  New residential development has not provided sufficient housing opportunities for households with incomes below the area median income; and 
C.  The amount of land in the city available for new residential development is severely limited by geography and topography; and 
D.  Inclusionary housing programs represent an extension of cities' police powers to regulate land use, ensuring that the limited supply of developable land provides housing opportunities for all incomes; and 
E.  Santa Fe is facing a growing shortage of housing that is affordable to a wide range of our population affecting the ability of new graduates, senior citizens, families with children, and employees in industries and services that are vital to a healthy economy to remain living in the city; and 
F.  The lack of affordable housing is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents; and 
G.  Federal and state funds for the construction of new affordable housing are insufficient to fully address the problems of affordable housing within the city and the private housing market has not provided adequate affordable housing opportunities for persons and households with incomes below the area median income; and 
H.  The city has previously adopted the housing opportunity program in an attempt to address the affordable housing needs. This program has achieved limited effectiveness in stemming the growing affordable housing crisis in the city; and 
I.  The governing body in partnership with the regional planning authority established an affordable housing task force that was charged with recommending appropriate affordable housing policy and programs for the region. The task force recommendations included the implementation of a broadly applicable program to increase the supply of affordable housing particularly for those households with incomes less than the area median income; and 
J.  Based on the findings of the task force the governing body finds that it is necessary to adopt a new inclusionary zoning ordinance to replace the housing opportunity program in order to address the city's housing crisis; and 
K.  According to the Housing Needs Assessment, updated in 2013, the greatest mismatch between need and available services and affordable housing inventory is for renter households earning less than thirty percent (30%) of the area median income (AMI) with as many as three thousand (3,000) renter households in Santa Fe likely to be "cost burdened" or paying more than one-third (?) of their incomes toward rents; and 
L.  The 2010 Census indicates that: 
(1)  Santa Fe's population is aging, with fifty percent (50%) of the overall population aged fifty-five (55) years or older; 
(2)  Households are smaller, with single person households comprising forty percent (40%) of overall households; and 
(3)  The median age is forty-four (44) years old, compared to forty (40) years old in 2000. 
All factors that indicate housing demand is likely to shift to smaller units that can accommodate the needs of aging households and are located close to transit, services and amenities; and 
M.  Home sales prices continue to rise and were sixty-five percent (65%) higher in 2010 than in 2000, increasing the gap between what buyers can afford and how much homes are priced, with only fourteen percent (14%) of current renters able to afford the median-priced home, necessitating the continued implementation of the city's inclusionary zoning and other affordable housing programs that improve the capacity of lower- and moderate-income Santa Fe residents to buy homes; and 
N.  The city's support of affordable housing through regulation, policy development and administrative funding has achieved significant results, serving the needs of the homeless to the homeowner. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  33; Ord. #2014-10,  3) 
26-1.5 - Definitions. 
    Administrative procedures means the procedures adopted by the governing body which set forth how the Santa Fe homes program shall be administered. 
    Affordable home price means the highest price at which an SFHP home may be sold pursuant to subsection 26-1.16 of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the price of an SFHP home cannot exceed the maximum established price, including the base price and any fees charged of the buyer by the seller or a related entity, minus any of the buyer's closing costs or financing costs paid by the seller, as indicated by the settlement statement for the sale. The cost of allowable option upgrades may be in addition to the affordable home prices, as permitted by subsection 26-1.16F SFCC 1987. 
    Affordable manufactured home lot price means the highest price at which an SFHP manufactured home lot may be sold pursuant to subsection 26-1.16 of this chapter. 
    Affordable rent means the highest monthly rent that may be charged for an SFHP rental unit pursuant to subsection 26-1.24 of this chapter. 
    Allowable option upgrades means additions and/or modifications to the standard features of an SFHP home chosen solely at the option of the SFHP buyer to upgrade the standard features of the SFHP home. 
    Alternate means of compliance means that SFHP developer has proposed complying with the SFHP requirements through off-site construction, cash payment in lieu of constructing or creating the required SFHP units or manufactured home lots or dedication of land suitable for construction or creation of inclusionary units of equivalent or greater value than would be required for onsite construction, rather than constructing the required units pursuant to subsection 26-1.33 SFCC 1987. 
    Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who submits a development request to the city which is subject to any SFHP requirements, or any successor in title that is subject to SFHP requirements. 
    Area median income (AMI) means the median income for the Santa Fe metropolitan statistical area as adjusted for various household sizes and published and revised periodically by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. However, that in the event of a discrepancy between the AMI established by HUD and HUD's program income limits, the higher of the two (2) shall be used to establish AMI for the purpose of SFHP. 
    Certified means a buyer of a Santa Fe homes program unit or renter of such unit whose income has been verified by the city or its agent as meeting the income limits which establish eligibility to buy or rent under the program. Buyers shall also receive a certificate verifying they have completed homebuyer training courses as part of the certification process. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe or its agent. 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities. 
    Energy efficiency adjustment means the amount that may be added to the affordable home price of a for-sale SFHP unit that meets energy efficiency standards pursuant to subsection 26-1.16H SFCC 1987. 
    Extreme hardship means a condition occurring as a direct consequence of the SFHP Ordinance which would require the property owner to lose money on the development taken as a whole and/or affects the financing viability of the project and the property owner can demonstrate to the governing body's satisfaction that said loss would be an unavoidable consequence of the SFHP requirement for construction of SFHP units. 
    Income qualified means a buyer or renter whose household income does not exceed the amount which would establish eligibility to buy or rent a Santa Fe homes program unit, within income ranges established for the program or under specific development agreements. 
    Income range means the range of annual incomes used in the determination of eligibility of an SFHP home buyer or an SFHP tenant. The income ranges are: 
Income range 1: fifty percent (50%) or less of area median income 
Income range 2: more than fifty percent (50%) but not more than sixty-five percent (65%) of area median income 
Income range 3: more than sixty-five percent (65%) but not more than eighty percent (80%) of area median income 
Income range 4: more than eighty percent (80%) but not more than one hundred percent (100%) of area median income 
    Land use department means the land use department of the city, its agent or successor. 
    Manufactured home lot means a lot which is marketed and either sold or rented for the purposes of the placement of a manufactured home. 
    Maximum option upgrade allowance means the maximum amount paid by the SFHP buyer for allowable option upgrades pursuant to subsection 26-1.16 SFCC 1987. 
    Median income means the area median income as defined. 
    Office of affordable housing means the department created by subsection 26-1.6 SFCC 1987 to administer the Santa Fe homes program and other affordable housing programs. 
    SFHP means Santa Fe Homes program. 
    SFHP agreement means an agreement between a property owner of record and the city whereby the city confers benefits in the form of development incentives to the property owner in exchange for compliance with SFHP with regard to providing required SFHP units or alternate means of compliance. 
    SFHP developer means an owner of a property subject to any SFHP requirements, who is carrying out any phase of developing the subject tract, or as defined in this section, certain successors in title. 
    SFHP development means a tract of land or any improvements thereon which are subject to an SFHP agreement. 
    SFHP home means a dwelling unit marketed and sold to satisfy SFHP requirements. 
    SFHP home buyer means a purchaser of an SFHP home or the entire household occupying an SFHP home or the purchaser or entire household occupying an SFHP manufactured home lot. 
    SFHP manufactured home lot means a lot which is marketed and either sold or rented for the purposes of the placement of a manufactured home and to satisfy SFHP requirements. 
    SFHP property owner means the owner of any property which is subject to SFHP requirements, or as defined in this section, certain successors in title. 
    SFHP proposal means a proposal by a property owner of record made to the city detailing the property owner's plan for complying with SFHP. 
    SFHP rental unit means a rental unit marketed and leased specifically to satisfy SFHP requirements. 
    SFHP tenant means a person who is a lessee of an SFHP rental unit, or a manufactured home rental lot, or the entire household occupying an SFHP rental unit or SFHP manufactured home lot. 
    SFHP unit means a dwelling unit required to be provided on site by an SFHP developer or an SFHP property owner to satisfy the SFHP requirements. 
    Unit means a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  34; Ord. #2007-40,  18, 19; Ord. #2007-45,  30; Ord. #2009-32,  1; Ord. #2016-9  1) 
26-1.6 Creation of office of affordable housing. 
A.  The office of affordable housing shall be established to administer the Santa Fe homes program in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and to administer the city's other affordable housing programs. The office of affordable housing shall be an independent department responsible to the city manager. 
B.  In administering this chapter, the office of affordable housing shall work with the land use department to eliminate conflict and duplication in the permitting and development approval process. 
C.  The office of affordable housing shall administer any agreements previously executed by the city and others. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  35; Ord. #2007-45,  30) 
26-1.7 - Administrative procedures. 
A.  The SFHP shall be administered by the city as set forth in the administrative procedures adopted by resolution of the governing body. The administrative procedures shall set forth responsibilities, procedures and standards for administrative actions necessary to implement the SFHP and annexation agreements with affordable housing requirements, which include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Submitting and reviewing applicable residential development requests and determining conditions of approval related to the provision of SFHP units or alternate means of compliance. 
(2)  Reviewing and certifying SFHP proposals with property owners to ensure compliance with the SFHP and the administrative procedures. 
(3)  Monitoring the performance of property owners subject to such agreements, and any successors in title that are still subject to such agreements or other requirements of the SFHP and the administrative procedures; and taking appropriate action in the event of noncompliance. 
(4)  Collecting and distributing any payments resulting from SFHP controls on resale or alternative means of compliance with SFHP agreements or annexation agreements that have affordable housing requirements. 
B.  The office of affordable housing or its agents shall be responsible for the administration of the SFHP as set forth in the applicable city ordinances and the administrative procedures. 
C.  The land use department staff shall: 
(1)  Administer and enforce all planning and land use ordinances that apply to development requests that are subject to this section. 
(2)  Require, as part of the development review process, the applicant to prepare and submit an SFHP proposal to the office of affordable housing to assure compliance with the SFHP Ordinance. 
(3)  Administer provisions for development incentives in the development review process as set forth in this section. 
(4)  Record the SFHP agreements with the respective subdivision plat or development plan at the county clerk's office. 
(5)  Where applicable, invoke sanctions for noncompliance with SFHP agreements at the request of the city manager. 
D.  All changes to the administrative procedures other than changes to area median income and related SFHP numerical data shall be reviewed and approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  36; Ord. #2007-45,  30; Ord. #2007-45,  30) 
26-1.8 - Applicability. 
A.  Except as set forth in this paragraph the SFHP shall apply to any application for development including, but not limited to, annexation, rezoning, subdivision plat, increase in density, development plan, extension of or connection to city utilities for land outside the city limits, and building permits which propose two (2) or more dwelling units or buildings or portions of buildings which may be used for both nonresidential and residential purposes and manufactured home lots. SFHP applies to the residential portion of the development. 
(1)  The SFHP applies to new construction, to the conversion of existing rental units to ownership units and the conversion of commercial uses to residential uses. 
(2)  The SFHP shall not apply to a family transfer as set forth in subsection 14-3.7(E)(3)(b) or a division of land into two (2) lots as set forth in subsection 14-2.3(E)(1)(a). 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to determine the applicability of SFHP to the proposed development and comply with the requirements of SFHP. 
(4)  If a SFHP developer obtains a residential building permit for a SFHP development with two (2) through ten (10) total units, then a seventy percent (70%) reduction in fees associated with such development shall be assessed and the developer has the option to pay a fee in lieu of providing the required percentage of units in accordance with the SFHP administrative procedures. 
B.  The SFHP shall apply to dwelling units in vacation time share projects as defined in Section 14-12 SFCC 1987. 
C.  In addition to paragraph A(2) above, the SFHP shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any development or portion thereof which is subject to any formal, written and binding agreement entered into prior to August 15, 2005, with the city or Santa Fe county which if within said agreement the signatories agreed to provide affordable housing or payment in lieu thereof; or 
(2)  Dwelling units or manufactured home lots for an elementary, middle or high school, community college, private four (4) year college or related institutions where coursework leads to an associate of arts, bachelors or vocational degree or certification, hospital or similar institution to be used exclusively by its employees or enrolled students and their families. If the dwelling units are no longer used exclusively by its employees or enrolled students, the SFHP shall apply at the time the units are converted. 
D.  Petitioners for annexations and the office of affordable housing shall negotiate all terms for providing affordable housing on site including the distribution of development types and the number of SFHP units required or alternate means of compliance. The number of SFHP units required or alternate means of compliance may be in excess of that required by SFHP. These terms shall be included in the annexation agreement. To the extent practicable, all other SFHP requirements shall apply to annexations. In no case shall the agreement provide for less affordable housing or a lesser in-lieu contribution than required by SFHP. As the property is developed, a separate SFHP agreement in compliance with the annexation agreement shall be recorded with each subdivision plat or development plan. 
E.  All provisions of the prior ordinance, titled housing opportunity program (HOP) remain in full force and effect with respect to any and all agreements executed by the city and others which were required by HOP or incorporated HOP provisions by reference. Accordingly, the office of affordable housing will continue to use and annually update the administrative procedures for the HOP ordinance until such time as all obligations under such agreements have been satisfied. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  37; Ord. #2007-40,  20; Ord. #2008-45,  4; Ord. #2011-17,  2; Ord. #2014-10,  4) 
26-1.9 - Presubmission conference. 
    Prior to the submittal of a development request to the land use department or to the public utilities department, if the applicant is submitting a request for the extension of or connection to city utilities for a development located outside the city limits, to which the SFHP applies as set forth in subsection 26-1.8 SFCC 1987, a presubmission conference with the office of affordable housing is required with regard to the development proposal and SFHP requirements. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  38; Ord. #2007-45,  30) 
26-1.10 - Requirement, scope and content for SFHP proposals. 
    SFHP proposals shall be required by the city for all developments as set forth in subsection 26-1.8 SFCC 1987. SFHP proposals shall include the applicant's plan for providing SFHP units or alternate means of compliance as required by the SFHP Ordinance, and comply with all provisions set forth in the administrative procedures, including but not limited to a timetable for delivering SFHP units or completing alternate means of compliance. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  39) 
26-1.11 - Submission and review of SFHP proposals. 
A.  An SFHP proposal shall be submitted with any development request to which SFHP applies. The office of affordable housing shall provide a form that may be used to complete SFHP proposals and advise the applicant regarding responsiveness to SFHP requirements. Each SFHP proposal shall be reviewed by the office of affordable housing. After review, the office of affordable housing shall either approve the SFHP proposal or disapprove the SFHP proposal and refer it back to the applicant with written comments regarding the proposal's deficiencies. 
B.  A revised SFHP proposal shall be submitted and reviewed by the office of affordable housing if changes in the SFHP proposal are necessary because of changes in the development request as it proceeds through the development review process. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  40; Ord. #2007-40,  21) 
26-1.12 - Appeals. 
A.  Any applicant aggrieved of a decision of city staff regarding the Section 26-1 shall appeal to the governing body. 
B.  The applicant may proceed with other submissions related to the development request while any appeal is being considered. 
C.  Appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the action appealed. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  41; Ord. #2009-42,  27) 
26-1.13 - Processing and approval of development requests subject to SFHP. 
    The land use department and the planning commission or the public utilities department and governing body, if the applicant is submitting a request for the extension of or connection to city utilities for a development located outside the city limits, shall accept, review and decide on plan submissions on development requests subject to SFHP requirements as follows: 
A.  No submission shall be heard by the review body unless an SFHP proposal has been approved by the office of affordable housing or the SFHP proposal has been appealed in accordance with SFHP requirements. 
B.  Development incentives shall be included in SFHP developments as set forth in subsection 26-1.34 SFCC 1987. 
C.  If an SFHP proposal is subject to appeal, the outcome of the appeal process may determine whether the development incentives set forth in subsection 14-8.11(G) apply. In this case, the applicant may choose one (1) of the following options with regard to continued processing of the development proposals: 
(1)  Processing may be suspended until the appeal is heard and decided; or 
(2)  Processing may be continued. In this case, the applicant may determine whether to incorporate in the development proposal any development incentives which are subject to the outcome of the appeal. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  42; Ord. #2007-45,  30) 
26-1.14 - Execution of SFHP agreements. 
    The governing body delegates authority to enter into SFHP agreements to the city manager. Following the final approval of the development proposal the SFHP agreement shall be executed by the city manager and the applicant. The agreement shall be referred to and recorded as set forth in subsection 26-1.10 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  43) 
26-1.15 - Required number of for-sale SFHP homes in a development. 
A.  If a SFHP developer obtains a residential building permit for a SFHP development, twenty percent (20%) of the total number of dwelling units or manufactured home lots offered for sale in an SFHP development shall be SFHP homes, as follows: 
(1)  Five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units or manufactured home lots shall be sold at or below the affordable home price or affordable manufactured home lot price, as applicable, for income range 2. 
(2)  Ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units or manufactured home lots shall be sold at or below the affordable home price or affordable manufactured home lot price, as applicable, for income range 3, and 
(3)  Five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units or manufactured home lots shall be sold at or below the affordable home price or affordable manufactured home lot price, as applicable, for income range 4. 
    A modification to a SFHP agreement or HOP agreement that was entered into prior to June 8, 2011, shall be made to reflect the twenty percent (20%) requirement; and if applicable, an annexation agreement, subdivision plat or development plan shall be administratively amended to reflect the reduction and redistribution of SFHP or HOP lots and the amended annexation agreement, subdivision plat or development plan shall be recorded or filed, as applicable, by the owner or developer. Fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of dwelling units or manufactured home lots offered for rent in an SFHP development shall be SFHP units and meet all requirements of Section 26-1 SFCC 1987. 
B.  If an applicant exceeds the percentage in income range 2 or income range 3 as set forth above, the requirement in any higher income range may be reduced by the same percentage. 
C.  The whole number resulting from this calculation shall be the number of SFHP homes required to be constructed or SFHP manufactured home lots to be created. If the calculation described results in a fraction of a unit, this obligation shall be satisfied as set forth in the administrative procedures. Nothing herein shall prohibit a developer from building a greater number of SFHP homes or creating a greater number of SFHP manufactured home lots than specified herein. Such additional units shall meet all the requirements as an SFHP home or manufactured home lot to be considered an SFHP home or manufactured home lot. The SFHP developer shall receive the fee waivers described in subsection 14-8.11(G)(2) for such additional units so long as those units meet all SFHP requirements. 
D.  In any development with a mix of rental and ownership units or manufactured home lots, the number of SFHP rental units or rental manufactured home lots shall be in the same proportion as the number of non-SFHP rental units or rental manufactured home lots and likewise with ownership units or ownership manufactured home lots. 
E.  In any development with a mix of detached and attached ownership units, the mix of SFHP units shall be in the same proportion as the mix of non-SFHP units. 
F.  In the event that two (2) or fewer SFHP homes or SFHP manufactured home lots are required, the SFHP homes or manufactured home lots shall be affordable to income range 3 or lower. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  44; Ord. #2007-40,  22; Ord. #2011-17,  3; Ord. #2014-10,  5) 
26-1.16 - Determination of affordable home price. 
A.  To ensure the SFHP homes are affordable, the affordable home prices are calculated to ensure that the sum of principal and interest payments, taxes, property insurance and mortgage insurance does not exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the monthly income of the assumed household size in each applicable income range. The affordable price shall be determined at the midpoint in each income range as determined by the current pricing schedule based on HUD's area median income (AMI) figures for Santa Fe city. 
B.  The affordable manufactured home lot price shall be twenty-five percent (25%) of the affordable home price for a three-bedroom home for each applicable income range, determined by the current SFHP pricing schedule in effect at the time of the SFHP development application. 
C.  Beginning in 2006 and every year thereafter, the office of affordable housing shall review and adjust the affordable home price and affordable manufactured home lot for each applicable income range and home size based on the changes in area median income from the previous twelve (12) months, as determined by HUD. The price schedule will be adjusted within thirty (30) days of the release of the HUD data. However, every three (3) years thereafter at a minimum, the governing body shall review the methodology for calculating annual increases and make appropriate adjustments if necessary. The office of affordable housing shall report to the governing body within thirty (30) days of adjusting the affordable home price and affordable manufactured home lot price. 
D.  The affordable home price and affordable manufactured home lot price shall be reduced pursuant to administrative procedures in order to limit the impact on SFHP home buyers of fees assessed by condominium, common area, or homeowner associations. The affordable home price or affordable manufactured home lot price shall be reduced so that the buyer's mortgage or manufactured home loan principal amount and, accordingly, the buyer's monthly mortgage payments, are reduced by an amount equal to the assessed fee in excess of an allowable base fee, established pursuant to administrative procedures and updated annually according to the HUD's AMI figures. 
E.  Pursuant to administrative procedures, the affordable home price may be increased at the request of the SFHP home buyer by the price of allowable option upgrades, not to exceed the maximum option upgrade allowance. 
F.  Beginning in 2006 and every year thereafter, the office of affordable housing shall review and adjust the maximum option upgrade allowance based on changes in the area median income for the previous twelve (12) months. Permissible items to be included in the maximum option upgrade allowance shall be determined pursuant to administrative procedures. 
G.  Pursuant to administrative procedures, the affordable home price may be increased by the amount of the approved energy efficiency adjustment. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  45; Ord. #2007-40,  23; Ord. #2009-32,  2; Ord. #2010-13,  1; Ord. #2014-10,  6) 
26-1.17 - Design, unit types, siting, warranty requirements for SFHP homes. 
A.  The SFHP homes shall be constructed according to the guidelines for bathrooms and areas of habitable residential space described in the administrative procedures and any deviation from the guideline is subject to city approval. Habitable space shall be defined and calculated in accordance with the city's building code, except that the minimum area of SFHP homes may be greater than minimum building code requirements. 
B.  The distribution of SFHP homes is presented in a guideline in the administrative procedures. The SFHP developer may request approval from the office of affordable housing to provide a mix of unit sizes that varies from the guideline presented in the administrative procedures. Factors that may be considered as a basis for approving a different unit size mix include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  A different mix would better match the mix of non-SFHP homes within the development. 
(2)  A different mix would better match the consumer demand for SFHP homes. 
C.  In developments where units are converted from existing rental units to ownership units, the mix of size and type of SFHP homes offered for sale shall be in proportion to the mix of non-SFHP homes offered for sale. 
D.  SFHP homes at different price levels and of different home sizes shall be dispersed among the non-SFHP homes and be evidenced by designation of home lots at time of plat recording for each phase of development on the basis that the proposed dispersal takes full advantage of affordable housing opportunities that would not otherwise be maximized. 
E.  The SFHP homes shall be similar in architectural and landscaping appearance to the non-SFHP homes. 
F.  The seller of an SFHP home shall provide a warranty of at least one (1) year covering defects in materials and workmanship in addition to any manufacturers' warranties or warranties provided by a contractor or subcontractor, such as warranties on roofing and appliances. The minimum one (1) year warranty on defects in materials and workmanship shall not preclude the seller or any person from providing a warranty of longer period. No developer, seller, general contractor, subcontractor or other person shall be permitted to request that an SFHP homebuyer sign a waiver of the required warranty. Any such waiver shall be considered null and void. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  46; Ord. #2007-40,  24; Ord. #2014-10,  7) 
26-1.18 - Affordability controls on SFHP homes; rental prohibition. 
A.  An SFHP developer selling a SFHP home or manufactured home lot shall cause to be recorded, in the county clerk's office, simultaneous with the recording of the deed of sale, a form of deed restriction, restrictive covenant or other legal instrument that fulfills the requirements set forth in the administrative procedures with regard to controls placed on the occupancy and subsequent resales of SFHP homes and SFHP manufactured home lots. In order to maintain affordability, the SFHP developer shall impose resale controls consisting of mortgage liens, which include right of first refusal requirements as set forth in the administrative procedures. The effect of the recordation of said document(s) shall be to create, in accordance with state law, an obligation that runs with the property. The city shall approve the form of such documents prior to recordation. Initial affordability shall be achieved by including in the SFHP agreement terms of an escrow instruction requiring certification of SFHP compliance by the escrow agent. 
B.  The amount of the above-described lien will be the difference between the SFHP price and the initial market value of the SFHP home or SFHP manufactured home lot. In order to provide additional equity to the SFHP buyer at the time of purchase, the initial market value shall be determined as ninety-five percent (95%) of the appraised value of the SFHP home or SFHP manufactured home lot. 
C.  The affordability lien, as described, is non-interest bearing, no payment due until sale or transfer, and subordinate to the buyer's first position financing and other sources of subsidized assistance. 
D.  Upon resale of an SFHP home or manufactured home lot, the affordability lien may be assumed by another SFHP buyer as approved by the city or its agent, or the seller must repay the SFHP lien to the city or its agent. In the event that the home has lost value, through no fault of the seller, and the sales proceeds are not enough to pay off the seller's primary financing and other assistance to which the affordability lien is subordinate, the city will reduce the amount of the lien due to ensure that all other obligations are met, however, in no event, shall the city release more than the total amount of the lien. 
E.  The proceeds of repayment of SFHP liens resulting from SFHP agreements or annexations and held by the city shall be credited to a housing trust fund approved by the governing body and managed by the office of affordable housing, which may include funds from other sources. Uses of housing trust fund monies may include down payment assistance, as well as subsidies for low-income rental, emergency and special needs housing. Funding from the trust fund must be awarded through a competitive process. 
F.  An SFHP home buyer or SFHP manufactured home lot buyer shall not rent the SFHP unit or manufactured home lot to a second party, except as approved in writing by the office of affordable housing for instances in which the owner is under duress by reason of unemployment, family medical emergencies, or inability to sell the home for an amount equal to or greater than the original sale price, or other unique circumstances of family hardship. The city, at its sole discretion will approve or disapprove the request to rent a SFHP home pursuant to administrative procedures. 
G.  As a condition of participation in the SFHP, a SFHP home buyer or SFHP manufactured home lot buyer shall agree to fill out a brief questionnaire upon resale of the unit or lot for the purposes of assessing the effectiveness of the SFHP. Such questionnaire shall be included in the administrative procedures and referenced as Appendix E. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  47; Ord. #2007-40,  25; Ord. #2014-10,  8) 
26-1.19 - Enforcement of SFHP agreement. 
A.  When a sale is found to be not in compliance with the SFHP ordinance or SFHP agreement, or the information is insufficient to determine compliance, the SFHP developer shall be notified in writing and have the opportunity to rectify the noncompliance or supply the information lacking with respect to that SFHP home. However, in the event of such noncompliance, the city shall not certify any sale of an SFHP home and reserves the right not to certify the sale of any further non-SFHP units or manufactured home lots, while recognizing that this shall create an encumbrance and title flaw if any sale is made. 
B.  The enforcement provisions set forth in subsection 14-11.5D SFCC 1987 shall apply to all instances of noncompliance, including noncompliance as described in subsection 26-1.19A SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  48) 
26-1.20 - Marketing to and certifying SFHP buyers. 
A.  SFHP developers shall market SFHP homes and SFHP manufactured home lots in accordance with the requirements set forth in the administrative procedures. Any marketing materials shall clearly state the policies of the SFHP program with regard to pricing of SFHP homes and manufactured home lots and buyer eligibility. 
B.  In marketing SFHP homes and SFHP manufactured home lots the city or seller shall give preference to individuals who are citizens of Santa Fe county and/or are presently employed or under contract with an employer within Santa Fe county as may be limited by federal programs. 
C.  The city or its agent shall maintain lists of prospective SFHP buyers who have passed preliminary prequalifications for financing. The city or its agent shall maintain information on basic homebuyer characteristics, such as household size and income by AMI to monitor the match between production and affordable housing demand. For SFHP developments for which the city or its agent expects immediate effective demand to outstrip the supply, the city or its agent may establish and maintain a fair and competitive process for allocating rights to purchase the homes or manufactured home lots. In developments where the city or its agent has established such a process, the developer shall be required to follow the process when selecting SFHP buyers. For developments other than those described above, the developer shall establish and maintain an equitable process of marketing homes and manufactured home lots, including waiting lists where demand exceeds supply. 
D.  For each development with SFHP homes or SFHP manufactured home lots for sale, including annexations subject to SFHP, the office of affordable housing shall designate a qualified organization(s) to provide income certifications and maintenance of waiting lists. The office of affordable housing shall establish an equitable process for selecting the organization or organizations providing these services, which process shall provide an opportunity for the developer to provide input as to the organization(s) selected. The organization and the SFHP developer shall enter into a written agreement that describes the scope of services and, if appropriate, fee structure. The SFHP developer may not terminate such agreement with the organization without the consent of the office of affordable housing. Notwithstanding those requirements, and in order to assure access to SFHP homes and manufactured home lots by all potentially qualified SFHP buyers, any other service provider operating a homebuyer training, counseling and certification program approved by the office of affordable housing may refer its clients to the selected organization for possible purchases of the SFHP homes or manufactured home lots. A SFHP developer may enter into agreements with outside entities to provide marketing or other services, which agreement shall not require approval from the office of affordable housing. 
E.  Prior to executing a purchase contract for any SFHP home or SFHP manufactured home lot, the prospective SFHP buyer shall be certified as meeting SFHP requirements by the city or its agent. The certification shall be as set forth in the administrative procedures. SFHP developers and SFHP buyers may execute only purchase agreements that are approved as to form by the city and include language provided by the city which shall require that an appropriate disclosure form be provided to and explained to the SFHP buyer prior to execution of the contract. The disclosure form shall explain any deed restrictions, restrictive covenants and/or liens that are placed on the SFHP home or lot to ensure long-term affordability. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  49; Ord. #2007-40,  26) 
26-1.21 - Eligibility of SFHP buyers. 
A.  The household income of an SFHP homebuyer shall not exceed the defined income ranges as set forth in subsection 26-1.5 SFCC 1987 except as set forth in paragraph E below. 
B.  The household income of an SFHP manufactured home lot buyer shall not exceed the defined income ranges as set forth in subsection 26-1.5 SFCC 1987 for a three-person household, regardless of the household size of the SFHP buyer except as set forth in paragraph E below. 
C.  SFHP homebuyers and SFHP manufactured home lot buyers shall also meet additional eligibility criteria established in the administrative procedures. 
D.  Household sizes are provided as a guideline for SFHP homes in the administrative procedures unless the office of affordable housing approves in writing a smaller minimum household size. 
E.  An eligible buyer meeting the criteria of armed services veteran, emergency worker, first responder, teacher or related educational employees in Santa Fe county whose household income exceeds one hundred percent (100%) of area median income (AMI) but does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of AMI shall be eligible to purchase an SFHP unit in income range 4. 
(1)  The status of the buyer as a veteran, emergency worker or first responder shall be verified by the office of affordable housing. 
(2)  The office of affordable housing shall maintain a list of occupations that meet the requirement of emergency worker, first responder or essential worker, and the verification of veteran status pursuant to administrative procedures. 
(3)  All other eligibility requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  50; Ord. #2007-40,  28; Ord. #2014-9  1; Ord. #2014-10,  9) 
26-1.22 - Requirements for SFHP rental units. 
A.  If a SFHP developer obtains a residential building permit for multifamily residential development between January 1, 2016, and December 31, 2019, then a fee associated with such development shall be assessed in accordance with SFHP administrative procedures. A modification to a SFHP agreement or HOP agreement to construct rental units and create manufactured home lots for rent that was entered into prior to January 1, 2017, shall be made to reflect the modified requirement; and if applicable, an annexation agreement, subdivision plat or development plan shall be administratively amended to reflect the modified requirement and the amended document shall be recorded or filed, as applicable by the owner or development. Incentives for SFHP developers as set forth in subsection 14-8.11 SFCC 1987 will not be available for these projects. 
B.  One (1) year prior to the sunset clause date, this amendment will be evaluated to determine its effectiveness in reaching the city's goal of creating at least two thousand (2,000) multi-family rental units. 
C.  Effective January 1, 2020, and thereafter, fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of dwelling units offered for rent in a SFHP development shall be delivered as described in this section. 
D.  The marketing, leasing and occupancy of an SFHP rental unit and SFHP manufactured home lot that is rented shall conform to the criteria set forth in the administrative procedures. Rental rates shall be in accordance with the rates set forth in subsection 26-1.24 SFCC 1987. SFHP rental units shall be built to comply with the minimum size, unit type(s) and other structural requirements set forth in subsection 26-1.25 SFCC 1987. The location of the SFHP rental units shall be approved by the office of affordable housing. The units or manufactured home lots shall have compatible exterior architectural and landscaping appearance with other units in the development. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  51; Ord. #2014-10,  10; Ord. #2016-9  2) 
26-1.23 - Required number of SFHP rental units in a development. 
A.  Fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of dwelling units and SFHP manufactured home lots offered for rent in an SFHP development shall be SFHP rental units or SFHP rental manufactured lots, as follows: 
(1)  Five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units or manufactured home lots shall be rented at or below the affordable rent for income range 1. 
(2)  Five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units or manufactured home lots shall be rented at or below the affordable rent for income range 2. 
(3)  Five percent (5%) of the total dwelling units or manufactured home lots shall be rented at or below the affordable rent for income range 3. 
B.  If an applicant exceeds the percentage in income range 1 or income range 2 as set forth above, the requirement in any higher income range may be reduced by the same percentage. 
C.  The whole number resulting from this calculation shall be the number of SFHP rental units to be constructed or rental manufactured home lots to be created. If the calculation described results in a fraction of a unit or manufactured home lot, this obligation shall be satisfied as set forth in the administrative procedures. Nothing herein shall prohibit a developer from building a greater number of SFHP rental units or creating a greater number of SFHP rental manufactured home lots than required herein. Such additional units shall meet all the requirements as an SFHP rental unit or manufactured home lot. The SFHP developer shall receive the fee waiver described in subsection 14-8.11G,(2) for such additional units so long as the units meet all SFHP requirements. 
D.  In any development with a mix of rental and ownership units or manufactured home lots, the number of SFHP rental units or manufactured home lots shall be in the same proportion as the number of non-SFHP rental units or manufactured home lots and likewise for ownership units or manufactured home lots. 
E.  In the event that only two (2) or fewer SFHP rental units or SFHP rental manufactured home lots are required, the SFHP rental unit(s) or SFHP rental manufactured home lot(s) shall be affordable to income range 2 or income range 1. 
F.  Units or manufactured home lots available for SFHP rentals shall be described in the SFHP proposal in sufficient detail so that such units or manufactured home lots can be identified after construction or creation and occupancy. SFHP rental units or manufactured home lots shall have approximately the same ratios of unit or manufactured home lot sizes as the number of non-SFHP rental units. SFHP tenants must meet eligibility requirements at the time of the initial lease. If an SFHP tenant vacates an SFHP rental unit or manufactured home lot, landlord shall offer that unit or manufactured home lot, or another equivalent unit or manufactured home lot, to an eligible tenant within the same income range. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  52) 
26-1.24 - Determination of affordable rent. 
A.  To ensure that rental rates do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the monthly income for both rent and utilities for households in each applicable income range, the affordable rent for SFHP rental dwelling units is determined annually, based on HUD income limits, pursuant to the administrative procedures. 
B.  Affordable rental rates shall be determined for each income range pursuant to the SFHP rental rate schedule in the administrative procedures. The required rental rates include utilities and shall be adjusted if utilities are provided separately. 
C.  The affordable rent for manufactured home lots shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the affordable rent for a three-bedroom dwelling unit for each applicable income range, pursuant to SFHP rental rate schedule. 
D.  Beginning in 2006 and every year thereafter, affordable rent and affordable manufactured home lot rent for each applicable income range shall be adjusted by the percentage change in area median income from the previous twelve (12) months, as per HUD's annual determination of income limits, and the office of affordable housing shall issue an updated schedule of affordable rents and affordable manufactured home lot rent for each applicable income range. The office of affordable housing shall report to the governing body within thirty (30) days of adjusting affordable rents and affordable manufactured home lot rent. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  53; Ord. #2007-40,  28; Ord. #2014-10,  11) 
26-1.25 - Design, unit types for SFHP rental dwelling units. 
    The SFHP rental dwelling units shall be constructed according to the minimum requirements for bathrooms and area of habitable residential space described below: 
Unit Type Minimum
Number of
Bathrooms Minimum Area Efficiency/Studio 1 500 square feet 1 Bedroom 1 650 square feet 2 Bedroom 1 800 square feet 3 Bedrooms 2 950 square feet 4 Bedrooms 2 1,100 square feet  
    Habitable space shall be defined and calculated in accordance with the city's building code, except that the minimum area of SFHP rental units may be greater than minimum building code requirements. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  54) 
26-1.26 - Marketing to and certifying SFHP tenants. 
A.  Owners of SFHP developments for rental housing or rental manufactured home lots shall market the SFHP rental units in accordance with the administrative procedures. Marketing materials shall clearly state the policies of the SFHP program with regard to pricing of SFHP rental units and tenant eligibility. For developments with SFHP rental units for which the city or its agent expects immediate effective demand to outstrip the supply, the city or its agents shall establish and maintain a fair and competitive process for allocating rights to lease the SFHP rental units. In developments where the city or its agent has established such a process, the developer shall be required to follow the process when selecting SFHP tenants. For developments besides those described above, the developer shall establish and maintain an equitable process of marketing SFHP rental units, including waiting lists where demand exceeds supply. 
B.  In renting SFHP rental units the landlord shall give preference to individuals who are residents of Santa Fe county or are presently employed or under contract with an employer within Santa Fe county as may be limited by federal programs. 
C.  Prior to executing a lease for any SFHP rental unit, the prospective SFHP tenant shall be certified as meeting the SFHP requirements by the city or its agent. The certification shall be as set forth in the administrative procedures. Nothing, however, in this chapter or administrative procedures shall be construed so as to penalize qualifying renters for changes in family size due to changes in number of dependents. 
D.  Any owner or agent required to provide SFHP rental units shall not discriminate against a tenant for proposing to use federal or other rent subsidies, nor can such subsidies be used to achieve a required SFHP contract rent. 
(Ord. No. 2005-30(A),  55) 
26-1.27 - Eligibility of SFHP tenants. 
A.  The household income of an SFHP tenant renting an SFHP rental dwelling unit shall not exceed the defined income ranges as set forth in subsection 26-1.5 SFCC 1987. 
B.  The household income of an SFHP tenant renting an SFHP rental manufactured home lot shall not exceed the defined income ranges as set forth in subsection 26-1.5 SFCC 1987 for a three-person household regardless of the household size of the SFHP tenant. 
C.  SFHP tenants and SFHP manufactured home lot tenants shall also meet additional eligibility criteria established in the administrative procedures. 
D.  An SFHP rental unit may not be rented to a household which is smaller than the following household sizes unless the office of affordable housing approves in writing a smaller minimum household size: 
Unit Size Minimum Household Size Efficiency/Studio 1 person household 1 Bedroom 1 person household 2 Bedrooms 1 person household 3 Bedrooms 2 person household 4 Bedrooms 3 person household  
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  56) 
26-1.28 - Allowed and disallowed uses of subsidies. 
    Prospective tenants who may be income eligible and have rent subsidy, such as a Section 8 Voucher, are eligible to rent a SFHP unit; however, under no circumstances shall rents in excess of fair market rent (FMR) as established annually by HUD, be charged. Developers of SFHP rental units may use any type of capital development subsidy to achieve the required rents. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  57; Ord. #2007-40,  29; Ord. #2014-10,  12) 
26-1.29 - Term of compliance. 
    Rental housing developments and manufactured home lot developments subject to SFHP (or portions thereof completed and occupied at different times) shall maintain required occupancy and rental rates in SFHP units for a period of ten (10) years after the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the entire development or portions thereof. This requirement shall be made applicable to successors in title, if any, by means of a deed restriction. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  58; Ord. #2014-10,  13) 
26-1.30 - Monitoring by the city of SFHP leases and enforcement of agreements. 
    SFHP agreements involving SFHP rental units shall provide for annual monitoring and certification of leased SFHP rental units by the city or its agents, as set forth in the administrative procedures. The city shall have the right to inspect and photocopy all accounting and occupancy records with regard to any SFHP rental unit. It shall further have the right to contact and interview any SFHP tenant with regard to compliance issues. Owners of SFHP rental units shall keep adequate records of all payments of rent and data concerning tenants, in accordance with standard practices of the rental housing industry. If disputes arise over what constitutes adequate record keeping, the city or its agents under its SFHP agreement shall have the right to require owners to adopt financial and information management practices that are recommended by a certified public accountant and/or property management manuals published by the institute of real estate management. The city, or its agents shall have access to all relevant financial and tenant information records during normal business hours, upon providing verbal or written notice at least two (2) business days prior to a proposed monitoring visit. Upon completion of this annual monitoring activity, the city, or its agents shall certify that the property owner is in compliance with the SFHP agreement, or shall issue findings of noncompliance. Upon findings of noncompliance with the SFHP agreement, the city, or its agents shall issue orders for bringing the SFHP development into compliance. Such orders shall give the property owner twelve (12) months to reach compliance, but may also require actions to compensate for noncompliance. If a property owner willfully and continually refuses to comply with SFHP agreements or related orders from the city, the city or its agents may invoke sanctions set forth in subsection 26-1.19 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  59; Ord. #2014-10,  14) 
26-1.31 - Simplified compliance and low-income housing tax credit projects. 
    Notwithstanding any other terms of SFHP or a SFHP agreement, if rental units in a SFHP development have been awarded tax credits under the federal low-income housing tax credit program, or have received substantial subsidy under another local, state or federal funding program that enables the project to serve renters or meets other emerging needs as identified in the city's annual action plan and approved by HUD, such units shall be deemed to comply with all tenant certification and rental requirements of the SFHP program, so long as the project is in good standing with regard to the monitoring standards of that program. For such projects in good standing, the only monitoring required by the city shall be delivery to the office of affordable housing, within ten (10) days of receipt, all copies of the monitoring agency's reports and correspondence with regard to compliance monitoring. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  60; Ord. #2014-10,  15) 
26-1.32 - Timing of compliance; for sale and for-rent housing. 
A.  In an SFHP development, completed SFHP homes or SFHP manufactured home lots shall be made available for sale in proportion to the offering for sale of unimproved lots or non-SFHP units or non-SFHP manufactured home lots as set forth in the administrative procedures. In an SFHP development, the required number of SFHP rental units shall be leased as each building or phase of the project is offered for rent as set forth in the administrative procedures. A phase shall be defined as a group of units or manufactured home lots which is completed and ready for occupancy within a period of one (1) year. A developer may sell or lease SFHP units or manufactured home lots earlier than required herein. 
B.  Fee in lieu of contributions approved as an alternate means of compliance shall be due and deliverable as provided in the administrative procedures. An applicant may, at the applicant's option, propose an alternative to this requirement in which staged payments are made upon the predicted occurrence of certain events as set forth in the administrative procedures. The value of each contribution shall be determined as set forth in the administrative procedures. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  61; Ord. #2007-40,  30) 
26-1.33 - Alternate means of compliance. 
A.  One of the goals and purposes of the SFHP is to foster economic integration by requiring that developers provide required SFHP units and manufactured home lots on the property proposed for development. However, it is recognized that at times this approach may not be feasible for a variety of reasons. In this event, the applicant may seek permission from the governing body to comply with the SFHP through any one or combination of the following alternative means acceptable to the city in its sole discretion: off-site construction, cash payment in lieu of constructing or creating the required SFHP units or manufactured home lots or dedication of land suitable for construction or creation of inclusionary units of equivalent or greater value than would be required for onsite construction. 
B.  The city may approve an alternate means of compliance for the following, provided that any approval must be based on a finding that the purposes of this chapter would be better served by implementation of the proposed alternative(s). In determining whether the purposes of this chapter would be better served under the proposed alternative, staff from the land use department and the office of affordable housing shall consider the factors listed in subsection 26-1.33C below. Consideration of these factors will provide basis for staff's recommendation regarding the approval or denial of alternate compliance to the governing body. 
(1)  SFHP for-sale projects; 
(2)  SFHP rental projects; and 
(3)  SFHP projects that meet the definition of a vacation time share project as set forth in Section 14-12 SFCC 1987. 
C.  In determining whether the purposes of this chapter would be better served under the proposed alternative, the city shall consider the following: 
(1)  The extent to which the proposed alternate results in a benefit that responds directly to a community-wide documented need as determined by the governing body; 
(2)  Whether implementation of an alternative would overly concentrate SFHP units within any specific area and if so must reject the alternative unless the undesirable concentration of the SFHP units is offset by other identified benefits that flow from implementation of the alternative in issue; and 
(3)  The extent to which other factors affect the feasibility of prompt construction of the SFHP units on the property, such as costs and delays, the need for appraisal, site design, zoning, infrastructure, clear title, grading and environmental review; and 
(4)  The potential of leveraging funds for other needed affordable housing programs described in the city's housing plans. 
D.  The value of the fee in lieu contribution shall be established pursuant to administrative procedures. 
E.  The governing body, at its sole discretion, may grant a waiver of the SFHP requirements. Any approval of a waiver for any sized project shall be based on the finding that the condition of extreme hardship, as defined, cannot be sufficiently alleviated by the alternate means of compliance described in paragraph B. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  62; Ord. #2007-40,  31; Ord. #2008-45,  5; Ord. #2014-10,  16; Ord. #2016-9  3) 
26-1.34 - Incentives for SFHP developers. 
    Incentives for SFHP developers shall be as set forth in subsection 14-8.11 SFCC 1987. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  63) 
26-1.35 - Separability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are separable and invalidity of any part of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the rest of the chapter. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  64) 
26-1.36 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this chapter shall be February 20, 2016, (ten (10) days after passage of this chapter). 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  65; Ord. No. 2016-9  4) 
26-1.37 - Annual review. 
    The governing body shall review this chapter twelve (12) months after the effective date and each year thereafter. The purpose of the review is to evaluate the effectiveness of the chapter. The review shall include at a minimum the number of SFHP units or manufactured lots created, the number of qualified households placed and the number of density bonus units approved. The review shall also include an economic analysis regarding the impact on the city's revenues due to the fee waivers and other development incentives granted. The analysis should include options of how the city could recover such loss in revenue in order to continue paying for necessary infrastructure and services. 
(Ord. #2005-30(A),  66) 
26-2 - LOW PRICED DWELLING UNITS. 

26-2.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of Section 26-2 SFCC 1987 is to establish appropriate requirements and proper safeguards for low-priced dwelling units which qualify for incentives set forth in various city codes, policies and procedures. 
(Ord. #2007-40,  33) 
26-2.2 - Definitions. 
    As used in Section 26-2 SFCC 1987: 
    Area median income (AMI) means the median income for the Santa Fe metropolitan statistical area as adjusted for various household sizes and published and revised periodically by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. However, that in the event of a discrepancy between the AMI established by HUD and HUD's program income limits, the higher of the two (2) shall be used to establish AMI for the purpose of the provisions related to low-priced dwelling units. 
    Low-priced dwelling unit means a dwelling unit as defined in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987 that complies with the requirements set forth in Section 26-2 SFCC 1987. A low-priced dwelling unit is not a Santa Fe homes program unit or a housing opportunity program unit. 
    Non-profit affordable housing organization means a legally incorporated non-profit organization recognized by the city's office of affordable housing whose purpose includes providing housing or housing services to low- and moderate-income individuals and families. 
    Owner/builder means a person building his or her own home on property that he or she owns or which is owned by a member of their immediate family. 
(Ord. #2007-40,  34) 
26-2.3 - Requirements for low-priced dwelling units. 
    Low-priced dwelling units qualifying for various incentives set forth in various city codes, policies and procedures shall comply with this section. 
A.  In order to qualify as a low-priced dwelling unit, the unit shall be built by: 
(1)  A developer as part of a type A development described in a valid housing opportunity program agreement; 
(2)  An owner/builder; or 
(3)  A nonprofit affordable housing organization. 
B.  Low-priced dwelling units shall meet the following: 
(1)  Sale prices or rental rates shall be affordable to a household with an income at or below one hundred percent (100%) of the area median income, using a four-person household for buyers and a three-person household for renters according to the procedures established in the Santa Fe homes program; 
(2)  Buyers, renters or owner/builder of low-priced dwelling units shall not earn more than one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the area median income, adjusted for household size; 
(3)  For-sale units and units built by an owner/builder shall be owner occupied for at least five (5) years; 
(4)  For all low-priced dwelling units, a lien shall be placed against the property for the value of all fee waivers or reductions given by the city and such lien shall be repaid to the city when the unit is refinanced or sold, with proceeds from the lien repayment being deposited into the city's affordable housing trust fund; and 
(5)  At the time of initial occupancy of the low-priced dwelling unit the following minimum household size shall be met unless the city's office of affordable housing approves a smaller household size upon the request of the nonprofit affordable housing organization or the buyer of the low-priced dwelling unit. This paragraph (5) does not apply to a unit built by an owner/builder. 
Unit Size Minimum Household Size Efficiency/Studio 1-person household 1 bedroom 1-person household 2 bedrooms 1-person household 3 bedrooms 2-person household 4 bedrooms 3-person household  
D.  If the low-priced dwelling unit is built by an owner/builder, the owner/builder shall submit a certified appraisal from a qualified appraiser indicating that the value of the dwelling unit with the land does not exceed the price set forth in paragraph B(1) above. 
E.  If the low-priced dwelling unit is built by a nonprofit affordable housing organization, the organization shall place a shared equity lien against the property to capture any value between the actual sales price and the appraised price. This lien shall be in last place and any proceeds realized from the sale shall be used for affordable housing and shall be reported to the city's office of affordable housing. 
(Ord. #2007-40,  34) 
26-3 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND. 

26-3.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Affordable Housing Trust Fund Ordinance." 
(Ord. #2007-23,  4) 
26-3.2 - Authority. 
    The Affordable Housing Trust Fund Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the express statutory authority conferred upon municipalities to enact a housing code pursuant to Section 3-17-6A(8) NMSA 1978; to enact ordinances pursuant to its police power, Section 3-17-1B NMSA 1978; to provide for affordable housing pursuant to subsections E and F of Art. 9,  14, of the N.M. Constitution and the Affordable Housing Act (Sections 6-27-1 through 6-27-8 NMSA 1978) and in particular to provide a portion of the cost of financing and/or authorizing housing assistance grants for the purpose of affordable housing pursuant to Section 6-27-5 NMSA 1978 (2007), and pursuant to any and all such other authority as may be applicable including but not limited to the city's recognized authority to protect the general welfare of its citizens. This section is adopted pursuant to the city of Santa Fe's powers under its municipal charter which was adopted effective March 15, 1998, pursuant to the Municipal Charter Act Sections 3-15-1 to 3-15-16 NMSA 1978 and Article 10, Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  5) 
26-3.3 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body has determined that: 
A.  The city should actively participate in the creation of a comprehensive housing services delivery system that addresses the full continuum of housing needs from the homeless to the homebuyer; 
B.  The cost of financing is an important factor in the total cost of housing; 
C.  The lack of affordable capital can be a significant barrier to the creation and preservation of affordable housing and can be an obstacle in providing housing that addresses multiple community housing needs and priorities; and 
D.  It is in the public interest to create the affordable housing trust fund. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  6) 
26-3.4 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund Ordinance is to identify the initial source of funds which shall be dedicated to the affordable housing trust fund (AHTF) and to restrict allowable uses of the AHTF to provide or pay all or a portion of the costs of acquisition, development, construction, renovation or conversion, financing, operation or owning affordable housing or infrastructure to support affordable housing which meets agreed upon community housing goals and objectives. The AHTF is not intended to be the sole source of funding for affordable housing and any activity or project eligible for support from the AHTF is expected to develop additional sources of funds. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  7) 
26-3.5 - Definitions. 
    AHTF means the affordable housing trust fund. 
    Administrative procedures refer to the administrative procedures adopted by resolution that outline application, evaluation, and all other administrative procedures associated with the AHTF. 
    Affordable housing means residential housing primarily for persons or households of low or moderate income. 
    Allowable uses means those uses for the AHTF which are set forth in subsection 26-3.4 SFCC 1987. 
    Community housing priorities means priorities established from time to time by the governing body to guide the allocation of funds from the AHTF. 
    Comprehensive housing strategy means a services delivery system that addresses the full continuum of housing needs from the homeless to the homebuyer. 
    Eligible households means a person or households of low or moderate income as defined in rules adopted by the New Mexico Mortgage Finance Association. 
    Leverage means the dollar value of other resources committed to projects for which an application and approval has been received for a loan or grant from the AHTF. Each dollar committed to the project that is not generated from the AHTF shall be considered as leverage. 
    Office of affordable housing means the department of the city of Santa Fe or its successor administering affordable housing programs. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  8) 
26-3.6 - Dedication. 
    The following shall be dedicated to the affordable housing trust fund. 
A.  Tierra Contenta: 
(1)  All payments received from the sale of property in Tierra Contenta that has been reserved for affordable housing as of the date of the passage of this ordinance; 
(2)  Thirty-five percent (35%) of all payments received from the sale of property in Tierra Contenta received after the date of the passage of this section; and 
(3)  All interest earned from the above. 
B.  All proceeds of loans that have been recorded against various affordable housing units through the capital improvements program funds-infrastructure loan funds. 
C.  Principal and interest payments made by the borrowers to the city for outstanding AHTF loans. 
D.  Proceeds from shared equity loans which are realized when a housing opportunity program home or Santa Fe homes program unit is sold on the open market. 
E.  All in-lieu-of contributions or fractional payments received from developers as an option to meet the Santa Fe Homes requirements. 
F.  All in-lieu-of contributions received from developers of qualifying residential projects within the Midtown LINC overlay district, as defined in Section 14-5.5(D) SFCC 1987, shall be applied only within the following locations: 
(1)  The Midtown LINC overlay district; 
(2)  Qualified Census tracts (as defined by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development) adjacent to the boundaries of the Midtown LINC overlay district; or 
(3)  Existing residential developments adjacent to the boundaries of the Midtown LINC overlay district. 
G.  Other funds that may be identified from time to time which are suitable and appropriate for allocation to the AHTF. These may include on-going, dedicated funding sources as well as one-time funding that is specifically approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 2007-23,  9; Ord. No. 2016-39  21) 
Editor's note- Section 26-3 was originally adopted July 11, 2007, and amended in its entirety October 26, 2016, by Ord. No. 2016-39. 
26-3.7 - Use of the affordable housing trust fund. 
    The city shall provide loans or housing assistance grants by using the AHTF to: 
A.  Donate, provide or pay all, or a portion, of the costs of land for the construction on the land of affordable housing; 
B.  Donate, provide or pay all or a portion of the costs of conversion or renovation of existing buildings into affordable housing; 
C.  Provide or pay the costs of financing or infrastructure necessary to support affordable housing projects; or 
D.  Provide or pay all or a portion of the costs of acquisition, development, construction, financing, operating or owning affordable housing. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  10) 
26-3.8 - Other requirements. 
    Use of the affordable housing trust fund shall comply with the following: 
A.  Location. Financing for projects shall be limited to developments located within the city limits of Santa Fe or those properties which will be annexed into the city within six (6) months of application for funds. 
B.  Beneficiaries. The beneficiaries of the housing shall be limited to households of low or moderate incomes. Lower income requirements may be established for specific projects to meet community housing goals. 
C.  Leverage. All loans or housing assistance grants from the AHTF shall have a minimum one dollar ($1.00) to three dollars ($3.00) leverage requirement. Sources of leverage may include other project financing, federal community development block grants, federal HOME investment funds, low-income housing tax credits and owner equity or any other sources which are in accordance with the approved administrative procedures. Financing and funding from other sources must be committed prior to the release of AHTF funds. 
D.  Terms of the Loan. Loan terms will vary with the type of development proposal. Loan terms and conditions will be outlined in the administrative procedures, which may be amended and approved by the governing body from time to time. 
E.  Restriction. Funds loaned to an organization shall only be used for the activity or project for which the loan was approved. The funds cannot be expensed (thereby reducing the amount of the asset on the organization's balance sheet) except in cases where an unpreventable loss occurs and when approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  11) 
26-3.9 - Affordable housing trust fund administration. 
A.  The AHTF shall be administered by the office of affordable housing (OAH). The administrative procedures for the AHTF shall be prepared by the OAH, shall be consistent with the rules of the New Mexico mortgage finance authority upon amendment of the rules in conformity with the Act as amended in 2007 and shall be approved by the governing body. 
B.  All funds shall be allocated under a request for proposal that is conducted at least annually and concurrently with the process used for the community development block grant programs and is consistent with the provisions of this section and administrative guidelines. Loans and grants shall be disbursed according to standard city procurement practices. 
C.  Applications for funding shall be reviewed according to evaluation criteria contained within the administrative procedures. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  12) 
26-3.10 - Community development commission. 
    The community development commission will provide funding recommendations to the governing body concerning all loans and grants to be allocated under this section. 
(Ord. #2007-23,  13) 
26-4 - FAIR HOUSING. 

26-4.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Fair Housing Ordinance". 
(Ord. #1999-10,  2; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.2 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the city by prohibiting discrimination in housing based upon race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, familial status, or disability. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  3; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.3 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section 
    Disability (does not include the current illegal use of, or addition to, a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Federal Controlled Substance Act) means: 
A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more of the major life activities of such individual; 
A record of such an impairment; or 
Being regarded as having such impairment. 
    Dwelling means: 
A.  Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families; or 
B.  Any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or structure described in subsection A above. 
    Familial status means: 
    The status resulting from one (1) or more persons who are under the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with an individual who is either: 
The parent of the persons under age eighteen (18); 
The legal guardian of the persons under age eighteen (18); or 
The designee (with written authorization) of the parent or legal guardian or custodian of the persons under age eighteen (18); 
The status resulting from being pregnant; or 
The status resulting from being in the process of securing legal custody of any person who is under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Family means: 
An individual; 
Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal guardianship or adoption, plus resident domestic servants; or 
Any group of not more than five (5) persons living together in a dwelling unit. 
    Housing for older persons means housing: 
That the housing is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons under a federal or state program; 
Intended for, and solely occupied by persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older in at least eighty percent (80%) of the occupied units, and adheres to a policy that demonstrates an intent to house persons who are fifty-five (55) years or older. 
    Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    To rent includes to lease, sublease, to let, or to otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  4; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.4 - Certain sales and rental exemptions. 
A.  Pursuant to paragraph B below, subsections 26-4.8 through 26-4.14 SFCC 1987 do not apply to the following: 
(1)  The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by an owner if: 
(a)  The owner does not: 
(i)  Own more than three (3) single-family houses at any one (1) time; or 
(ii)  Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) single-family houses at any one (1) time; and 
(b)  The house was sold or rented without: 
(i)  The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a real estate broker, agent, or salesman licensed under the Real Estate License Act or an employee or agent of a licensed broker, agent, or salesman, or the facilities or services of the owner of a dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five (5) or more families; or 
(ii)  The publication, posting, or mailing of a notice, statement or advertisement prohibited by subsection 26-4.9 SFCC 1987; or 
(2)  The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied, or intended to be occupied, by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner maintains and occupies one (1) of the living quarters as the owner's residence. 
B.  The exemption in paragraph A of this section applies only to one (1) sale or rental over a twenty-four-month period if the owner did not reside in the house at the time of sale or rental or was not the most recent resident of the house prior to the sale or rental. 
(Ord. #1990-10,  5; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.5 - Religious organization and private club exemption. 
A.  This section does not prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization, association, or society, from the following: 
(1)  Limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion unless membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color or national origin; or 
(2)  Giving preference for such dwellings to persons of the same religion. 
B.  This section does not prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  6; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.6 - Housing for the elderly exempted. 
    The provisions of this section relating to familial status do not apply to "housing for older persons" as defined. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  7; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.7 - Appraisal exemption. 
    This section does not prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of residential real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  8; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.8 - Discrimination in sales or rental of housing. 
A.  A person may not refuse to sell or rent a dwelling to a person who has made a bona fide offer; refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of a dwelling; or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, familial status, or national origin. 
B.  A person may not discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or providing services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental because of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, familial status, or national origin. 
C.  This section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Federal Controlled Substance Act. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  9; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.9 - Publication indicating discrimination. 
    A person may not make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make such a preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  10; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.10 - Availability for inspection. 
    A person may not represent to any person because of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, familial status, or national origin that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is available. 
(Ord. #1999,  11; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.11 - Entry into neighborhood. 
    A person may not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, familial status, national origin, or disability. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  12; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.12 - Disability. 
A.  A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to a buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
(1)  A buyer or renter; 
(2)  A person residing in, or intending to reside in, that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with a buyer or renter. 
B.  A person may not discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of: 
(1)  A buyer or renter; 
(2)  A person residing in, or intending to reside in, that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with that person. 
C.  For purposes of this section only, discrimination includes the following: 
(1)  Refusing to permit, at the expense of the person with the disability, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises of a dwelling, provided that, in the case of a rental, a landlord may: 
(a)  Reasonably condition permission for modifications upon the renter's agreement to restore the interior of the premises to its premodification condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted, and 
(b)  Reasonably condition such permission on the renter providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications and reasonable assurances that all work will be done in a workmanlike manner and that all required permits will be obtained. 
(2)  Increasing for persons with a disability any customarily required security deposit except that to ensure available funds for restorations, if any, a landlord may negotiate an agreement that the renter deposit into an interest-bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount not to exceed the cost of restorations where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to pay for the restoration. All interest shall accrue to the renter's benefit. 
(3)  Refusing to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling, including public and common use areas. 
(4)  Failing to design or construct covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, in a manner that: 
(a)  The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to, and usable by, persons with a disability; 
(b)  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons in wheelchairs; and 
(c)  All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
(i)  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
(ii)  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
(iii)  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installations of grab bars; and 
(iv)  Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space; or 
(5)  Making any inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling, a person intending to reside in that dwelling or any person associated with that person, has a disability or to determine the nature or severity of any disability, except that the following inquiries may be made if these inquiries are made of all applicants, regardless of disability: 
(a)  Inquiry into an applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy; 
(b)  Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a dwelling available only to persons with disabilities or to persons with a particular type of disability; 
(c)  Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is qualified for a priority available to persons with disabilities or to persons with a particular type of disability; 
(d)  Inquiring whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal user or addict of a controlled substance; 
(e)  Inquiring whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
D.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for person with physical disabilities, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.l," suffices to satisfy the requirements of paragraph C(4)(c) above. 
E.  As used in this section, the term "covered multi-family dwellings" means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if the buildings have one (1) or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground-floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units. 
F.  Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  13; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.13 - Residential real estate-related transactions. 
A.  A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a real estate-related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real estate-related transaction because of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
B.  In this section, "residential real estate-related transaction" means the following: 
(1)  Making or purchasing loans or providing other financial assistance: 
(a)  To purchase, construct, improve, repair, or maintain a dwelling; or 
(b)  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  Selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  14; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.14 - Restrictive covenants. 
A.  Any restrictive covenant restricting occupancy or ownership of property on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, familial status or disability, whether included in an instrument affecting the title to real or leasehold property, is declared to be null, void and of no effect, and contrary to the public policy. 
B.  Any person who is asked to accept a document affecting title to real or leasehold property may decline to accept the same if it includes such a covenant until the covenant has been removed from the document. Refusal to accept delivery of an instrument for this reason shall not be deemed a breach of contract to purchase, lease, mortgage or otherwise deal with such property. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  15; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.15 - Brokerage service. 
    A person may not deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organizations or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person in the terms of conditions of access, membership, or participation in such an organization, service, or facility because of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  16; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.16 - Administration. 
A.  The department as designated by the city manager, or its delegate, shall be responsible for the administration of this section. The city shall: 
(1)  Provide a copy of the complaint to the city attorney if the city attorney is not the designated administrator; 
(2)  Investigate complaints of violations of this section; 
(3)  Notify the person against whom the complaint is made and identify the aggrieved person who filed the complaint; 
(4)  Dismiss the complaint if after investigation finds that there is no merit in the complaint; and 
(5)  Endeavor to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice by conference and conciliation if after investigation finds that there is merit in the complaint. 
B.  The city may adopt administrative procedures to follow in the administration of this section. 
C.  The city shall advise the person filing a complaint that in order to preserve his or her rights under the federal regulations, the person shall simultaneously file a housing discrimination complaint with the U.S. department of housing and urban development. The city will provide information to the person regarding how to file the complaint. This paragraph does not apply to complaints regarding sexual orientation. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  17; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.17 - Enforcement. 
A.  If conference and conciliation do not eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice, the city shall refer the complaint to the secretary of the department of housing and urban development for an alleged discriminatory housing practice under the Federal Fair Housing Act. This paragraph does not apply to complaints regarding sexual orientation. 
B.  The city may file a complaint in municipal court if conference and conciliation do not eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice. Noncompliance with this section is subject to fines and imprisonment as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. 
C.  The city may pursue other enforcement remedies as may be authorized by law. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  18; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.18 - Effect. 
    Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to repeal any other ordinance of the city relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, familial status or disability; but all such ordinances and portions thereof in conflict herewith are repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  19; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
26-4.19 - Separability. 
    The provisions of this section are separable and the invalidity of any part of this section shall not affect the validity of the rest of the section. 
(Ord. #1999-10,  20; Ord. #2008-1,  28) 
CHAPTER XXVII - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1998-16 and 2007-45. 

27-1 - RESERVED. 
27-2 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AUTHORIZED IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 

27-2.1 - Short title; purpose. 
A.  Section 27-2 shall be cited as the "Telecommunications Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance." 
B.  The purpose of Section 27-2 SFCC 1987 is to establish a policy for use of the public rights-of-way for telecommunications networks and enable the city to: 
(1)  Permit competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for providers of telecommunications services; 
(2)  Manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Promote competition among telecommunications services providers and encourage the universal availability of telecommunications services to residents and businesses of the city by careful management of the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way through collection of fees and charges; 
(5)  Minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other adverse effects on the city's public rights-of-way, and to other users of those rights-of-way; and 
(6)  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, exercise such other powers as the city may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  3) 
27-2.2 - Applicability. 
A.  Section 27-2 SFCC 1987 shall apply to telecommunications networks located within the public rights-of-way which shall be authorized by a franchise with the city. This includes the networks and/or facilities of cable television, electric, and other companies to the extent that these networks and/or facilities are used to provide telecommunications services. The provisions of Section 27-2 SFCC 1987 shall supersede the provisions of subsection 14-6.2E SFCC 1987 for telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
B.  Any telecommunications facilities installed or located in the public rights-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter (this amended chapter was adopted June 9, 2010) shall be deemed legally conforming to the extent that such facilities are in compliance with the requirements of this section; provided that if such facilities are not in compliance with the requirements of this section, they shall be deemed legally nonconforming and subject to city requirements; and further provided, that the owner of such facilities files an application for a franchise within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter (or such later date as the director may agree to) and complies from such application date with this section. 
C.  An application submitted under paragraph B above shall include a map, in such detail as the director shall require, identifying the location of all of the applicant's telecommunications facilities existing in the public rights-of-way at the time of application, to the extent such maps are available. The map becomes the approved for the purposes of subsection 27-2.13L SFCC 1987 regarding modifications to approved plans. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  4; Ord. #2010-33,  1) 
27-2.3 - Definitions. 
    Applicant means any person who files an application with the city under subsection 27-2.4 SFCC 1987 in order to obtain a franchise to use the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. 
    Bad debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale of telecommunications at retail, for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. 
    City means the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico, a home rule municipal corporation, or as appropriate, any board, bureau, authority, agency, commission, department or any other entity of the city of Santa Fe, or any authorized officer, official, employee, or agent thereof. 
    City clerk means the city clerk of the city of Santa Fe or the city clerk's designated representative. 
    City requirements means all laws, rules, regulations, policies, and directives of general application of the city of Santa Fe in effect at present or to be adopted in the future by the governing body or the city. 
    Department means the department of public works. 
    Director means, unless specifically referring to the director of the land use department, the director of the engineering division of the city or the director's designee, or other division director charged with the administration of the public rights-of-way. 
    Emergency means a sudden unexpected event which has created a condition which is an immediate and continuing threat to the safety of property or persons or the operations of a provider. 
    Emergency repair means the repair, restoration, or replacement of an existing structure made necessary because of an emergency. 
    Franchise means the non-exclusive authorization to operate a telecommunications network within the city and the right granted by the city to use city public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city, to the public, or to other providers, as specified by the terms of individual franchise agreement between the city and the applicant. 
    Governing body means the mayor and the city councilors of the city, together. 
    Gross charge means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charge" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the city, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the city, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the city. "Gross charge" shall not include: 
A.  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: 
(1)  The fee imposed by this chapter; 
(2)  Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under Section 63-9D-8, 63-9F-12, or 63-9H-6, NMSA 1978; 
(3)  The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; 
(4)  The tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
B.  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the city; 
C.  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. This definition applies, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, accounting equipment or voice mail systems, and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
D.  Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, but only if the charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
E.  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and the wholly owned subsidiaries or between the wholly owned subsidiaries represent an expense allocation among the entities and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering the telecommunications and related services; 
F.  Bad debts; provided, however, if any portion of a debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee on that portion of the debt during the reporting period in which the payment is made; 
G.  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or 
H.  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the city. In addition, retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. Gross charges include charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to any governmental entity other than the city. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership, joint venture, or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
    Provider means: 
A.  Any person who uses the public rights-of-way within the city to provide any telecommunications services by means of: 
(1)  A telecommunications network owned by such person; 
(2)  Specifically identifiable facilities of a telecommunications network reserved or made available for the use of such person under a lease or any other arrangement for a term longer than one hundred twenty (120) days; or 
(3)  Facilities of a telecommunications network not owned by such person and not specifically identifiable but obtained from another provider if the use of such facilities is continuing and substantial. 
B.  Except to the extent that a provider or a person uses the public rights-of-way, a provider or any person which provides commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, or other communications service shall not be subject to this chapter with respect to such service. 
    Public right-of-way has the meaning of Section 3-1-2(M) NMSA 1978. 
    Public structure means any building or structure owned by the city. 
    Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee imposed by this chapter previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the City where bills are sent. 
    Structure means anything that is constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include but are not limited to walls, buildings, fences, poles, street lights, street signs, and other signs. 
    Telecommunications, in addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include: 
A.  Value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission; 
B.  The purchase of telecommunications or telecommunications services by a retailer for use as a component part of a service provided to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications; or 
C.  The provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.A. sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or the provision of other video programming services equivalent to services provided through a cable system, or the provision of "direct-to-home satellite services" within the meaning of section 602 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended. 
    Telecommunications facilities means the inside and outside plant equipment and property, including but not limited to, fiber optic lines, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, underground vaults, towers, poles, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances whatsoever used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
    Telecommunications network means any system which includes telecommunications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way and used to provide any telecommunications services, even if said network is also used for other purposes such as providing cable television or in the delivery of electric utility services. 
    Telecommunications provider means: 
A.  Any telecommunications retailer; 
B.  Any telecommunications reseller that is not a telecommunications retailer; or 
C.  Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer or telecommunications reseller that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
    Telecommunications retailer or retailer or carrier means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this chapter. 
    Telecommunications services means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
    Trenchless excavation means any line installation, replacement or rehabilitation through the use of boring, jacking, horizontal drilling or tunneling. 
    Wireless telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  5; Ord. #2007-33,  2, 3; Ord. #2012-30,  1; Ord. No. 2016-42  1) 
27-2.4 - Application for franchise. 
A.  Application Required. Any person with telecommunications infrastructure in the city's public rights-of-way as of July 5, 2010, or who proposes to construct a telecommunications infrastructure in the city's public rights-of-way shall submit an application to the director. The application, in a form prescribed by the director and as may be modified by the director from time to time, shall expansively describe the applicant's current or proposed use of the public rights-of-way. 
B.  Authority of Director. The director shall have the duty to review applications submitted under this section. The director shall review the application and shall notify the applicant within ten (10) business days of receipt of the application on whether or not the application has been accepted as complete or rejected. If the application has been rejected, a new application shall be required. The director shall negotiate the terms of franchises (to the extent not prescribed in this section) for adoption by the governing body. The director shall administer and enforce compliance with respect to all franchises granted under this section except as specifically delegated to the land use director as set forth in subsection 27-2.19 SFCC 1987. 
C.  Governing Body Action. All franchises granted under this section shall be adopted by ordinance and shall incorporate by reference all applicable provisions of this section. The city shall apply any modifications or amendments to this section in a manner that does not unreasonably discriminate against any provider subject to this section. Prior to proceeding with a termination of a franchise granted by the governing body, the city shall comply with the alternative dispute resolution provisions of this section. Any person who is denied a franchise or whose franchise is terminated shall petition the governing body for reconsideration before seeking judicial remedies. The governing body shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the petition to reconsider such denial or termination. 
D.  Franchise Granted. Subject to compliance with this section and other applicable requirements of city code, a franchise granted under this section shall authorize an applicant to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14,  6; Ord. No. 2010-33,  4; Ord. No. 2016-42  2) 
27-2.5 - Fees; audit. 
A.  Infrastructure Maintenance Franchise Fee. 
(1)  Pursuant to the authority granted by section Section 3-42-1 NMSA 1978 and 47 U.S.C. 253(c), there is hereby imposed an infrastructure maintenance franchise fee upon telecommunications retailers at the rate of two percent (2%) of all gross charges charged by telecommunications retailers to a service address in the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
(2)  The fee imposed by this chapter shall not be imposed in any circumstances in which the imposition of the fee would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  7; Ord. #2010-33,  5; Ord. #2012-30,  2; Ord. No. 2016-42  3) 
27-2.6 - Collection of additional charge by retailers. 
A.  Any retailer making or effectuating a sale of telecommunications at retail shall pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee to the department as provided by subsection 27-2.5 of this chapter. The fee shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city. 
B.  The retailer shall charge each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee attributed to the customer's service address in the city. This additional charge to customers shall, when collected, be stated as a distance item on the bill to each customer separate and apart from the retailer's gross charges to its customers for telecommunications. 
C.  Each retailer may retain two percent (2%) of the additional charges it collects under this chapter to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in connection with accounting for and remitting the fee to the department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-42  4) 
27-2.7 - Transfers of franchise. 
A.  No franchise granted under this section, the assets held by providers for use under such franchise which are in the public rights-of-way, or any rights or privileges of providers under a franchise, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred, leased, or conveyed by providers to any other person, without notice to the city no less than ninety (90) days prior to the consummation of such proposed sale, transfer, or conveyance. Provider shall submit all information reasonably requested by the city relating to the financial, technical, and operational qualifications of the transferee. Prior to consummation of such sale, transfer, or conveyance, an authorized corporate officer of the proposed transferee shall without limitation or exclusion affirmatively and in writing assume all obligations, rights, and liabilities whatsoever of the current provider as specified in any franchise. Upon request of the provider, the city shall keep confidential any and all information related to a proposed sale, transfer or conveyance to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
B.  Any change of control of a provider shall constitute a transfer under this subsection. A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or change of control. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  8; Ord. No. 2016-42  4) 
27-2.8 - Obligations of providers regarding the public rights-of-way. 
A.  Compliance with Law. Providers are explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, all other lawful governmental powers, and the city's rights as a property owner under state and federal laws. This section is governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the state of New Mexico. 
B.  Land Use Requirements. Providers shall comply with subsection 27-2.19 SFCC 1987 regarding land use requirements. 
C.  Construction Plans and Drawings. 
(1)  Before the provider may conduct underground work involving excavation, new construction, or major relocation work in any public rights-of-way: 
(a)  The provider shall first notify the city through the acquisition of a street cut permit as per Section 23-2 SFCC 1987 and shall comply with any special conditions relating to location, scheduling, coordination, and public safety; and 
(b)  The provider shall file maps and/or drawings with the director showing the location of any construction or extension of its facilities and services in any public rights-of-way of the city. For multi-conduit duct banks, maps and drawings shall show overall size, material, and configuration of the duct bank showing the horizontal and vertical locations within the rights-of-way, size and type of equipment and materials and location of other utilities. The provider shall provide city with updates of the maps and drawings showing the location of any new construction, extension, or relocation of its underground facilities or line spot such facilities. 
(2)  Proposed construction work to be done by the provider shall be performed in a safe manner and in accordance with applicable federal and state laws and city requirements now or hereinafter existing. 
D.  Construction Forecast. On or before the first day of June each year within three (3) years of which the provider anticipates constructing all or any identified and approved portion of its telecommunications network in the city's public rights-of-way, the city and provider will meet and exchange three (3) year construction forecasts, including aerial builds, together with such additional information as the city and provider deem appropriate relating to projects planned within the city. Any such information may be designated by provider as proprietary if the provider believes in good faith that such information is exempt from disclosure under the New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act, Section 14-2 NMSA 1978, or other applicable law. Provider shall mark any such materials by clearly marking each page, or portion thereof, for which a proprietary designation is claimed. The city shall maintain the confidentiality of such information to the maximum extent permitted by law. The provider has the burden of demonstrating that such information is exempt from disclosure. Provider will use best efforts to forecast construction for the future, however, the city recognizes that construction is driven by customer demand for service which is highly unpredictable. The provider shall not be subject to termination, suspension, fines or other penalties if its actual construction does not meet the timelines stated in the forecasts. The city and provider shall hold such additional meetings as they deem necessary to exchange additional information with a view toward coordinating their respective activities in these areas where such coordination will prove mutually beneficial to the public by minimizing disruption costs to the public. Provider will comply with all building and zoning codes and assure that aesthetic and other relevant planning principles have been given due consideration. It is recognized that, notwithstanding the foregoing, the city retains absolute discretion over the timing and all other aspects of the city's proposed projects. The parties will make reasonable efforts to allow each party's work to be incorporated in the other's respective projects. Provider will not cut or otherwise disturb any new or rehabilitated roadway within two (2) years of its placement as limited by and pursuant to Section 23-2 SFCC 1987 Excavations, Street Cuts and Restoration Ordinance, except or unless in emergency conditions. Where conflict occurs between the city's construction plans and schedules and the provider's construction plans and schedules, the city's plans and schedules shall take precedence. Where unresolved conflicts occur between the two (2) or more providers' construction plans and schedules, the city shall determine precedence. 
E.  Installations, Excavations, and Restorations. 
(1)  Pursuant to any franchise granted under this section, the provider shall have the right to excavate in, occupy, and use any and all public rights-of-way for the purpose of installing, erecting, constructing, repairing, maintaining, removing, relocating, and operating its facilities after obtaining any and all appropriate permits from the city, and in compliance therewith provided, however, that: 
(a)  The provider shall not place any of its facilities on, over, under, or within any city park, open space or trail not located in a public rights-of-way, duly designated as such by the city except in accordance with city requirements; 
(b)  Where appropriate and as may be required by the city through any permitting process, installation, excavations, and restorations affecting street and/or lane closures shall be approved by the city and in accordance with current city policies and ordinances; 
(c)  The city reserves the right to direct the coordination and scheduling of any provider projects where such project may be reasonably coordinated with the placement of other provider facilities. Otherwise, and subject to city permitting processes and approvals, it is recognized that, notwithstanding the foregoing, the provider retains discretion over the timing of the provider's proposed projects. In directing these activities, the city will make a good faith attempt to accommodate the provider's construction schedule and desired service initiation dates as long as they were disclosed in the construction schedule provided for in subsection 27-2.8D SFCC 1987; 
(d)  The provider shall, to the extent feasible, employ "trenchless" technology (for example, directional boring) in the placement of its underground facilities; and 
(e)  A franchise does not include the right to use the city's sewer or storm sewers, which requires a separate discretionary license from the city and fee for such application and use. 
(2)  Except in an emergency, not less than two (2) working days prior to the commencement of any work by the provider which involves excavation in any public rights-of-way, the provider shall notify the director through the street cut permit process, including payment for any and all fees, as set forth in Section 23-2 SFCC 1987. Provider shall comply with Section 23-2 SFCC 1987 as it now or may exist in the future. In an emergency, the director shall be notified the next working day and shall be provided with a description of the emergency and the action taken. The right of the city to require a post-emergency city permit(s), inspection(s) and fee(s) is preserved. 
(3)  Whenever work is performed in any public rights-of-way, the provider shall take all reasonable precautions to minimize interruption to traffic flow, damage to property, or creation of a hazardous condition. A plan for traffic control shall be provided to the director for his approval prior to issuance of a permit. 
(4)  After any excavation shall be made and after work is completed, the provider, at provider expense, shall as soon as practicable but not longer than forty-eight (48) hours, weather permitting, remove all surplus material in compliance with specifications, requirements, and regulations of the city in effect at the time of such restoration and restore the portion of the public rights-of-way to the same condition as nearly as practicable to its condition before the start of construction and in a manner consistent with the normal specifications and requirements of the city. All vegetation, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of telecommunications facilities, shall be replaced, or restored, as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work. If the provider fails to restore promptly the affected portion of the public rights-of-way following written notice to provider, and reasonable opportunity to cure, the city may make the restoration in a manner satisfactory to city, and all reasonable and documented costs incurred for such restoration, whether done with city work forces and equipment or otherwise, shall be paid by the provider, or recovered from any posted bonds, including the cost of any inspectors the city may assign to the project. 
(5)  The provider shall be responsible for the maintenance of its own equipment, facilities, and appurtenances placed upon, over, or under the public rights-of-way, including the removal of all graffiti therefrom. If after ten (10) days' notice, unless a lesser time period is required by another city ordinance, such graffiti has not been removed, it may be removed by the city at provider's sole cost which shall be paid in full by provider to city within ten (10) days of the date of the city's billing. 
(6)  The provider shall ensure its public facilities in public rights-of-way are located and constructed in a manner such that the public's physical access to such rights-of-way is not impaired and in full compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Where existing facilities constructed prior to ADA (legal nonconforming facilities) are modified or replaced, the provider shall insure that such modification or replacement shall then fully comply with ADA. Any intersection upgrades shall include upgrading all four (4) corners with ADA accessibility compliant ramps. Following notice by the city of an ADA construction problem, the provider shall have thirty (30) days or other reasonable time to remedy the problem. In the event that the city and the provider cannot agree that a problem exists, the city and the provider shall follow the dispute resolution provisions of this section. 
F.  Location and Relocation of Facilities. 
(1)  All facilities of the provider shall be placed so that they do not interfere with the use of public rights-of-way by the city and shall only be placed after approval of the location by the city's planning commission pursuant to subsection 27-2.19 SFCC 1987 and by the director and in accordance with all barricade, excavation and permitting ordinances and regulations adopted by the city governing the location of facilities. The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain, and operate any public improvement, work, or facility, including without limitation, telecommunications facilities, do any work that the city may find desirable on, over, or under any public rights-of-way, and vacate, alter, or close any public rights-of-way subject to provider's rights and obligations under subsections 27-2.8F(2) and (3) SFCC 1987. All such work shall be done, if possible, in such a manner as not to obstruct, injure, or prevent use and operation of the provider's network or system. Pursuant to any franchise, provider agrees to obtain the city's express written approval before placing structures in public rights-of-way that do not currently exist in public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The city may require the removal or relocation of facilities used by the provider in any public rights-of-way as follows: 
(a)  After notice to the provider, where relocation cannot reasonably be avoided and where the city and the provider agree that no reasonable alternative exists, the city may require the removal or relocation of facilities used by the provider in any public rights-of-way as may reasonably be required by the city or caused or occasioned by any city project, including but not limited to the installation of water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, or traffic signal facilities, road reconstruction, or other public right-of-way construction. The provider shall complete the removal and relocation of such facilities within sixty (60) days following notice to do so from the city. Projects requiring, in the opinion of the director after consultation with the provider, in excess of sixty (60) days to complete shall be completed in a time frame determined by director on a project specific basis. Prior to any such relocation, the city agrees to provide for a suitable similarly sized location for such relocated facilities sufficient to maintain service. The cost of any removal or relocation of its facilities shall be borne by the provider. To the extent that a delay in a city project is due to provider's relocation, then such provider shall pay all reasonable, documented expenses and costs incurred by the city as a result of and proportionate to its contribution to the delay. Notwithstanding the foregoing, provider shall not be required by the city to relocate its facilities to accommodate another provider or other nongovernmental third party in the city. The costs of any relocations occasioned by another provider or authorized non-governmental rights-of-way user of the city in no event shall be the responsibility of the city. 
(b)  The provider shall reconstruct, replace, or restore any street, alley, or public way or place in a timely fashion and any water, sewer, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic signalization facilities, or other facility of the city disturbed by the provider, without cost to the city, to the condition that existed prior to the work by provider, consistent with city standards and specifications for public works construction. Any facility so disturbed by the provider shall be reconstructed, replaced, or restored only under the supervision of city personnel. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of this subsection and upon notice to the city and receipt of all required city permits, the provider may remove or relocate facilities maintained by the provider on its own initiative. 
(3)  Where the city, acting through itself, an agent, contractor, or permit holder, proposes to improve a street, which requires the relocation of an existing aerial facility within the public rights-of-way under its jurisdiction or control, the provider shall replace such overhead distribution facilities as are then within the affected right-of-way with underground facilities unless the provider can demonstrate to the city that such facilities cannot functionally be located underground or that the cost of relocation is economically unreasonable. All such relocations of provider facilities shall be at such provider's expense. The conversion from overhead to underground shall be nondiscriminatory and shall be conditioned upon the city requiring the under grounding of all existing and new facilities located or to be located in the area. Such replacement of overhead with underground distribution facilities of a provider shall be paid for by such provider. 
G.  Public Works and Improvements. 
(1)  The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain, and operate any public improvement, work, or facility and do any work that the city may find desirable on, over, or under any public rights-of-way including rights-of-way facilities of any type and nature owned or controlled by the city. All such work shall be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure, or prevent free use and operation of the provider's telecommunications network, and shall be performed as expressly provided in subsection 27-2.8F(2) SFCC 1987. 
(2)  Whenever the city shall excavate or perform any work in any present and/or future public rights-of-way of the city, or shall contract for such excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not require removal or relocation of provider's facilities, the city shall notify the provider sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to enable the provider to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect and support such facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public or the city's public rights-of-way. If the provider cannot take such measures, or if the city's work is performed in response to an emergency, the provider shall be required to relocate its facilities in accordance with this section. In such case, the provider upon request shall furnish field markings to the city or its contractor, as the case may be, showing the location of all its facilities in the area involved in such proposed excavation or other work. 
(3)  Subject to the requirements of subsection 27-2.8F SFCC 1987, whenever the city shall legally vacate (terminate all of the city's rights in) any public rights-of-way for the convenience or benefit of any person or governmental agency or instrumentality, the provider's rights shall be preserved as to any of its facilities then existing in such public rights-of-way. 
H.  Moving of Buildings. Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily rearrange, remove, lower, or raise the aerial cables or wires or other apparatus of the provider to permit the passage of any building, machinery, or other object, the provider shall perform such rearrangement upon the receipt of written notice no less than thirty (30) days (or less time in the event of an emergency as determined by the city) prior to the move from the person or persons desiring to move said building, machinery, or other objects. The written notice shall detail the route and timing of movement of the building, machinery, or other object. The costs incurred by the provider in making such rearrangements of its aerial plant will be borne, excepting the city, by the person or persons seeking such rearrangement, unless the aerial plant is placed or maintained in violation of the applicable rules of any local, state, or federal regulatory agency and thereby interferes with the movement. 
I.  Safety Standards. The facilities of the provider shall at all times be constructed, operated, and maintained so as to protect and safeguard the health and safety of the public, and to this end provider shall observe all rules pertaining thereto now or hereinafter existing prescribed by any local, state, or federal regulatory authority. 
J.  Joint Use Agreements. The provider is authorized and encouraged to enter into joint-use agreements with any person or entity franchised by the city with respect to the placement or use of a telecommunications facility or network. The provider may require any such person or entity to pay reasonable compensation for such joint use and to furnish evidence of adequate insurance covering the provider and adequate bonds covering the performance of the person or entity attaching to the provider's telecommunications network as a condition precedent to granting permission to any such person or entity to attach its telecommunications network to the provider's network, provided that the provider's requirements for such insurance shall be reasonable. 
K.  Interference. The provider shall not be required to attach its facilities to the facilities of any other person or to permit the facilities of any other person to be attached to the provider's facilities if it can be shown to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the other person is not willing to accept the terms of a joint use agreement, the provider will be subjected to increased risks of interruption of service or if the facilities of such other person are not of the character, design, and construction required by, or are not being maintained in accordance with industry standards or practice or in a manner permitted by law. 
L.  Supplying Maps. Provider shall maintain on file all available maps, operational data, and reports pertaining to its operations in the city. The city may inspect the maps, data, and reports at any time during business hours. The provider shall furnish to the city, as soon as practicable and without charge, current "As-Built" maps in the city's GIS format or compatible data base, showing the location and dimension of its telecommunications network located in the rights-of-way, but not other proprietary information, used in operating the provider's telecommunications network within the city of Santa Fe. 
M.  Limitation on Privileges. All rights, authority, and grants contained or conferred are also conditioned upon the understanding and agreement that the exercise of these privileges in the public rights-of-way of the city are not to operate in any way so as to be an enhancement of the provider's properties or values or to be an asset or item of ownership in any appraisal thereof in the event of a city acquisition, by purchase or otherwise. In the event that the city shall at any time hereafter acquire the property of the provider, by purchase or otherwise, the value of any franchise shall be fixed and determined at one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. #2010-14,  9; Ord. #2010-33  6; Ord. No. 2016-42  4) 
27-2.9 - Insurance requirements. 
A.  Providers shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of a franchise granted under this section insurance with an insurance provider licensed to do business in the state of New Mexico and acceptable to the city or shall provide evidence that it is a qualified self-insured. All insurance providers will be required to be rated A-VI or better by A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poors. Providers shall furnish the city with proof of such insurance so required at the time of the filing of the acceptance of a franchise. The city reserves the right to review these insurance requirements during the effective period of any franchise and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and its limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city's risk manager, based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the insurance provider. The city shall provide notice to the provider no less than sixty (60) days in advance of any change of insurance requirements and provider shall have the opportunity to negotiate with the city to adjust the new requirement based on reasonable industry standards. 
B.  Providers shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of any franchise, at providers' sole expense, insurance coverage as follows: 
(1)  Commercial comprehensive general liability insurance covering bodily injury and property damage liability with limits of coverage in the maximum amount which the city could be held liable under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act for each person injured and for each accident resulting in damage to property; 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance as required by law; and 
(3)  Commercial automobile liability insurance providing a minimum coverage in the amount required under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act. 
C.  The provider shall submit originals of authorized certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required above on forms reasonably acceptable to the city's risk manager. 
D.  Providers shall agree that with respect to the above-required insurance, all insurance certificates will contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name the city of Santa Fe and its officers, employees, board members, volunteers, and elected representatives as additional insureds (as the interests of each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for thirty (30) days notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; 
(3)  Provide for notice to both the director and the office of risk management by certified mail; and 
(4)  Provide that all provisions of this section and the franchise, as amended, concerning liability, duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity section, shall be underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to include such obligations within applicable policies, subject to policy terms and conditions. 
E.  The insurance certificates obtained by providers in compliance with this subsection shall be subject to approval by the city, and such proof of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the director and the office of risk management during the term of a franchise, or any extension or renewal thereof, and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing liability limits, as required by the city. Providers shall timely advise the city attorney of any actual litigation that would materially affect said provider's insurance coverage as required pursuant to this section. 
F.  Insurers shall have no right of recovery against the city, it being the intention that the insurance policies shall protect providers and the city and shall be primary coverage for all losses covered by the policies. Where a right of recovery against the city shall occur in contravention of this section, the provider shall indemnify the city for any losses and costs associated therewith. 
G.  Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the city for payment of any premiums or assessments, which all are set at the sole risk of the providers. Insurance policies obtained by provider shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with any damage covered by these policies. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  10; Ord. No. 2016-42  4) 
27-2.10 - Term of franchise. 
    The term of each franchise granted under this section shall be subject to negotiation with applicants but in no event shall exceed ten (10) years. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  11; Ord. No. 2016-42  4) 
27-2.11 - Filing returns and payments by retailers. 
A.  On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer required to pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee imposed by this chapter shall file with the department a remittance return and shall pay the fee attributable to gross charges for the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the director, and shall contain such information as the director may reasonably require. 
B.  No later than February 28 of each year, every telecommunications retailer shall provide to the department a report of an audit performed by an independent certified public accountant attesting to the amount of the infrastructure maintenance franchise fees paid to the department for the preceding calendar year, and that such amount complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-42  5) 
27-2.12 - Registration of providers and resellers. 
A.  Every telecommunications provider within the meaning of this chapter shall register with the department within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing a franchise with that provider, on a form to be provided by the department, the name and address of every telecommunications reseller or other telecommunications provider with whom the registering telecommunications provider has a contractual relationship to provide telecommunications services or to make available telecommunications facilities in the public way. The telecommunications provider shall have a continuing duty to file with the department a revised registration form within forty-five (45) days after the date of occurrence of any changes in the information provided on the form, including the creation or termination of a contractual relationship described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-42  6) 
27-2.13 - Resales. 
    Whenever amounts are claimed to be excluded from gross charges as sales for resale under the definition of gross charge, the reseller shall furnish to the telecommunications provider the reseller's resale information. The telecommunications provider shall retain the resale information with its books and records. 
(Ord. No. 2016-42  7) 
27-2.14 - Maintaining books and records. 
    Every retailer required to pay the fee imposed by this chapter, and every other telecommunications provider claiming an exclusion from gross charges as sales for resale under subsection 27-2.13 SFCC 1987, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any liability or exemption. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-42  8) 
27-2.15 - Application of other revenue provisions. 
    The infrastructure maintenance franchise fee imposed by this chapter is imposed in additional to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the city, the state of New Mexico or any other political subdivision of the state; provided, however, that no fee or other compensation in additional to the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee provided in this chapter shall be required for the use of the public way by telecommunications carrier. 
(Ord. No. 2016-42  9) 
27-2.16 - Indemnity. 
    Each franchise granted under this section shall contain provisions whereby the provider agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officials, agents, volunteers, and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or property arising out of or resulting from the franchise granted to provider (except to the extent caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the city) or by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the provider, or provider's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or its agents or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  12; Ord. No. 2016-42  9) 
27-2.17 - Penalties; remedies. 
A.  Any telecommunications retailer who fails to pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee as provided by this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the failure to pay continues. Each day that the retailer's failure to pay continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation and offense under this chapter. Any retailer who becomes subject to this fine may be enjoined from doing business in the city until the retailer has paid all sums due and owing under this chapter. 
B.  Any telecommunications provider who otherwise violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Default and Termination of Franchise: 
(1)  The provider agrees that an event of default shall include but shall not be limited to any of the following acts or failure to act by the provider: 
(a)  Failure to obtain any applicable permits from the city pursuant to this section or the franchise. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the assignment of or transfer of control provisions of this section or the franchise. 
(c)  Failure to supply any mutually agreed-upon non-monetary consideration. 
(d)  Failure to supply or maintain bonds as may be required by the city to assure the proper completion of any construction performed. 
(e)  Failure to make any of the payments set forth in this section or as required in any franchise. 
(f)  Failure to pay any permit fees, or failure to comply with any rules, regulations, orders, approvals or directives of the city as set forth in this section or any franchise. 
(g)  Failure to comply with any federal, state or local laws upon enforcement. 
(h)  Failure to submit maps, operational data, reports, insurance certificates or other required documents. 
(i)  Failure to use any of the telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services for a period of six (6) consecutive months, excepting facilities maintained for spare capacity and/or future use. 
(2)  Upon the occurrence of an event of default, in accordance with the procedures provided for in this section or any franchise, the city may take any of the following actions so long as the city does not also take action to impose penalties for the same conduct under another ordinance or regulation: 
(a)  Require the provider to take such actions as the city deems appropriate that are consistent with provider's duties under its franchise; or 
(b)  Seek money damages from the provider as compensation for such event of default; or 
(c)  Accelerate the expiration of the term of any franchise by decreasing the term of the franchise. The extent of such acceleration shall be determined by the city and may include any period of time, but not less than six (6) months, provided that at least six (6) months remain under the franchise; or 
(d)  As a last measure only, terminate the franchise and the city may require the provider at its sole cost to remove all of its facilities and reasonably restore all rights-of-way to their existing conditions within one hundred eighty (180) days after termination or the city may assume ownership of the facilities consistent with paragraph C(4)(f) below. 
(3)  The city shall exercise the rights set forth in this subsection in accordance with the following procedures: 
(a)  The director shall notify the provider, in writing, of an alleged event of default. This written notice shall set forth with reasonable specificity the facts the city believes are the basis for declaring that an event of default has occurred. The provider shall within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the notice is postmarked, or such additional time as the director may specify in the notice, cure the alleged event of default, or in writing present for review by the director a reasonable time frame and method to cure the event of default. The provider, in lieu of the cure of the event of default as set forth herein, may in writing present facts and arguments as to why the provider disagrees that an event of default has occurred. 
(b)  If the provider presents a written response that challenges whether an event of default has occurred, the director shall within ten (10) days review the submitted materials and determine again whether an event of default has occurred. If the director reaffirms that an event of default has occurred, the provider shall be notified in writing of this decision and shall, within thirty (30) calendar days, cure the alleged event of default. The period to cure is tolled in the event one (1) party demands mediation until such time as mediation is completed. 
(c)  If the provider fails to cure the event of default so declared pursuant to this section within the time permitted by the director, the director shall prepare a written report to the governing body and recommend action to be taken. If the governing body, after consideration of this report and hearing, agrees that an event of default has occurred, it may order an appropriate remedy as set forth herein. 
(4)  In addition to the rights under this section, the city, upon any termination, may, at its sole discretion, direct the provider to remove, at the provider's sole cost and expense, any or all of its facilities from all public rights-of-way within the city, subject to the following: 
(a)  The city may determine that removal of facilities is not necessary; 
(b)  In removing any part of the facilities, the provider shall refill and compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good a condition as that prevailing prior to the provider's removal of the facilities; 
(c)  The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the conditions of public rights-of-way after removal has occurred; 
(d)  The removal shall commence within thirty (30) days of an order to remove being issued by the director at the discretion of the governing body and shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the termination; 
(e)  The provider shall be responsible for all necessary removals of the facilities and maintenance of the street area in the same manner and degree as if the facilities were in active use, and the provider shall retain all liability associated with such removals. 
(f)  As an alternative to removal, the provider may, subject to the city's approval, abandon its facilities in place and transfer ownership of the installed facilities to the city. Nothing herein shall cause the city to incur any costs related to the removal of the provider's facilities or the transfer of ownership of said facilities to the city. 
D.  Dispute Resolution Provision. 
(1)  Following the notice set out in subsection 27-2.17C(3) SFCC 1987, above or in the event of any other dispute arising from or relating to the franchise or breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations, the following process will be followed during which any of the above remedies and penalties may be imposed. 
(2)  All disputes will be mediated prior to litigation. The costs of such mediation will be equally split. The place of the mediation session shall be in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The city and the provider will select a mediator or mediators by mutual agreement and, in cooperation with the mediator(s), shall determine all necessary rules and procedures for the mediation. The city and the provider will fully cooperate in the mediation activities. All mediation communications shall be confidential, not subject to disclosure and shall not be used as evidence in any arbitration, judicial, or administrative proceeding, as set forth in the Mediation Procedures Act, Chapter 11 NMSA (2007 Supp.) or as subsequently amended. 
E.  Remedies and Penalties Not Exclusive. Subject to the provisions of subsection 27-2.17 SFCC 1987, all remedies and penalties granted pursuant to this section and franchise are cumulative and not exclusive, and the recovery or enforcement by one (1) available remedy or imposition of any penalty is not a bar to recovery or enforcement by any other such remedy or imposition of any other penalty. The city shall not, however, pursue duplicative remedies or penalties against provider for violations of other city ordinances or regulations arising from the same conduct. The city reserves the right to enforce the penal provisions of any ordinance or resolution and to avail itself of any and all remedies available at law or in equity. Failure to enforce shall not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any term, condition, or obligation imposed upon the provider by or pursuant to this section or any franchise. A specific waiver of a particular breach of any term, condition, or obligation imposed upon the provider by or pursuant to this section or franchise shall not be a waiver of any other or subsequent or future breach of the same or of any other term, condition, or obligation, or a waiver of the term, condition, or obligation itself. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14,  13; Ord. No. 2010-33,  7; Ord. No. 2016-42  5, 10) 
27-2.18 - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way unlawful. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services that has not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this section. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place facilities on public structures or utility infrastructure to provide telecommunications services not allowed under the terms of a franchise. 
C.  Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. Each day a violation of this section continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
D.  The provisions of this section do not apply to any dispute between the city and a provider under a franchise where the city alleges that the provider has failed to comply with the terms of the provider's franchise. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  14; Ord. No. 2016-42  6) 
27-2.19 - Land use review. 
A.  General Applicability. 
(1)  This subsection applies to all telecommunications facilities located within the city's public rights-of-way for which a franchise agreement is required pursuant to this Article 27-2 SFCC 1987. 
(2)  Land use review under this chapter is not required for the following: 
(a)  Telecommunications facilities located within the city limits, but outside the public rights-of-way; 
(b)  Telecommunications facilities in existence prior to July 5, 2010 in the form in which they existed on such date; 
(c)  Emergency and temporary telecommunications facilities or the emergency repair of telecommunications facilities; and 
(d)  The underground installation of telecommunications facilities. 
B.  Land Use Review Required. 
(1)  Unless otherwise excepted pursuant to subsections 27-2.19A(2) and 27-2.19C, submittal of an application for land use review is required for the following: 
(a)  The construction of new telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, the addition of new facilities to existing facilities, including, but not limited to street lights and telephone poles (collocations); and 
(b)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing telecommunications facilities to the extent that such work will increase the physical dimensions or visual impact of such facilities, including, but not limited to, the addition of new elements that increase visual clutter. 
(2)  Land use review is separate from and in addition to the requirement for submittal of an application to the New Mexico Construction Industries Division for a construction permit. 
C.  No Application Required. 
(1)  The following shall not require submittal of an application for review under this subsection: 
(a)  The construction of new telecommunications facilities that conform to design parameters established from time to time by the land use department and are approved for use following a public hearing in the historic districts by the historic districts review board or outside the historic districts by the planning commission, provided that notice of the use of the approved design and of the proposed location is submitted to the city prior to commencement of the work and the city approves the proposed location of the facilities; 
(b)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing conforming and legally nonconforming telecommunications facilities to the extent that such work does not increase the physical dimensions or visual impact of such facilities, and routine maintenance or improvements to existing infrastructure, such as painting over graffiti on utility boxes or renewing screening elements used to minimize visual impact; 
(c)  Telecommunications facilities of any subdivision of government used exclusively for emergency services, including police, fire, and the operation of city utilities; 
(d)  Upgrades in capacity that do not otherwise modify the telecommunications facilities being upgraded; 
(e)  Erection and removal of temporary or emergency facilities; 
(f)  Removal of telecommunications facilities, or modifications that reduce their visual impact. 
(2)  An exemption from land use review is not an exemption from the requirement for submittal of an application to the New Mexico Construction Industries Division for a construction permit. 
D.  Administrative Approval. Administrative approval as set forth in this paragraph is separate from and required prior to submittal to the New Mexico Construction Industries Division of an application for a construction permit. 
(1)  The following applications shall be subject to administrative approval: 
(a)  Except for facilities permitted under subsection 27-2.19(C)(1) above or requiring planning commission review under subsection 27-2.19(E) below, the construction of new telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way, including, without limitation, the addition of new facilities to existing facilities (collocations); and 
(b)  Applications for modifications to existing telecommunications facilities submitted pursuant to subsection 27-2.19(B)(1) above, to the extent that they do not substantially change the physical dimensions or visual impact of such facilities. 
(c)  For the purposes of this subsection 27-2.19(D)(1)(c) the city adopts the objective standards established under 47 C.F.R.  1.40001 for what constitutes a substantial change to the physical dimensions of an existing telecommunications facility. 
E.  Planning Commission Review Required. Applications for telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way that are not otherwise permitted or administratively approved under subsections 27-2.19(A)(2), (C)(1) or (D), shall be heard and decided by the planning commission after early neighborhood notification and in accordance with standard planning commission procedures. 
(1)  In reviewing applications for telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way, the planning commission shall consider the visual impact of the proposed facilities on the natural and built environment and the community benefits derived from access to stable and efficient telecommunications services. 
(2)  In approving an application, the planning commission shall determine that: 
(a)  The application is in compliance with this subsection; 
(b)  The application is necessary in order to close a proven significant gap in service coverage, either generally or of the applicant; and 
(c)  The applicant has demonstrated that no other less intrusive means or alternative to the approved facilities design and siting exists. 
(3)  The planning commission may not regulate the placement of telecommunications facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions where such telecommunications facilities comply with 47 C.F.R. 1.1310 et seq. 
(4)  The planning commission may place conditions upon its approval of the application, but the conditions shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of the telecommunications services. 
(5)  Findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be prepared and approved. 
(6)  A decision of the planning commission is appealable as set forth in subsection 14-3.17 SFCC 1987. 
(7)  Any denial of an application or any approval of an application containing any conditions not accepted by the applicant shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Cite to the administrative record; and 
(c)  Not become final until approved by the same body at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
F.  Notwithstanding anything in this subsection 27-2.19 to the contrary, no aboveground telecommunications facilities shall be approved in areas of the city where all other utilities have been constructed underground, except where there are existing aboveground structures suitable for collocation, including, but not limited to, street lights, or in locations where the city determines that new street lights are needed and approves their installation for collocation. 
G.  General Requirements for Land Use Review. 
(1)  Zoning Districts; Location. Telecommunications facilities are permitted in all zoning districts. However, to the maximum extent practicable, telecommunications networks shall be designed in such a manner as to locate facilities: 
(a)  On existing structures; 
(b)  In nonresidential districts; and 
(c)  Along major arterials. 
(2)  Maximum Height. Telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall not exceed the higher of: 
(a)  The maximum height for buildings permitted in the zoning district in which such facilities are located as set forth in Chapter 14 SFCC 1987; or 
(b)  The height of other structures, including, but not limited to, street lights and telephone poles located in the public rights-of-way within a radius of one hundred fifty (150) feet of the location proposed for such facilities. 
(c)  To the extent that the height on any telecommunications facility has been increased pursuant to 47 C.F.R.  1.40001, such increase shall not be included in calculating the maximum permitted height under this subsection 27-2.19(G). 
(3)  Width. To the maximum extent possible, telecommunications towers shall have a slender profile, with antennas and related equipment, including, but not limited to, wires, sheathed within a single cylinder or with antennas pulled in as close as possible to the tower in order to present a uniform appearance. 
(4)  Aesthetic Requirements. Subject to applicable federal standards, the following criteria shall be met: 
(a)  Telecommunications facilities shall be installed underground to the maximum extent feasible. No aboveground telecommunications facilities shall be permitted in the public rights-of-way in areas of the city where all other utilities with facilities in the public rights-of-way are located underground in accordance with applicable law or otherwise by covenant, except where there are existing aboveground structures suitable for collocation, including, but not limited to, street lights. 
(b)  Aboveground telecommunications facilities shall be located, designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to minimize the visual impact upon the natural and built environment. Acceptable methods to minimize visual impact shall include, but are not limited to: concealment, screening, camouflaging, color, materials, texture, shape, size and location. To the maximum extent feasible wires and similar appurtenances shall be contained within the tower or encased in conduit with a matching finish, in order to present a uniform appearance. 
(c)  Consideration shall be given to minimize disruption to or alteration of the natural or built environment, including, without limitation, landscaping in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  No permanent lighting shall be permitted unless the lighting is necessary for compliance with federal, state or local law. Permanent lighting shall not include equipment status indicating lights exceeding fifteen (15) watts of power. 
(5)  Archaeological Requirements. The provider shall comply with subsection 14-5.3 SFCC 1987 regarding the city's archaeological review districts. 
(6)  Other Requirements. 
(a)  No signs are permitted unless the sign is required for safety reasons or for compliance with the federal, state or local law, or otherwise permitted by the city. 
(b)  All aboveground telecommunications facilities shall be maintained so as to be orderly and attractive. 
(c)  All telecommunications facilities shall be designed, constructed and installed in such a manner as to minimize noise to the maximum extent possible, but in no event shall it exceed the standards set forth in Section 10-2 SFCC 1987. 
(d)  All lockable telecommunications facilities shall be kept locked when not being actively serviced by the provider. 
(e)  All nonlockable telecommunications facilities shall be kept closed when not being actively serviced by the provider. 
(7)  Applications to Land Use Department. After approval of a franchise as set forth in subsection 27-2.4 SFCC 1987 and prior to construction, any person proposing to construct telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way requiring land use review under this subsection 27-2.19 shall submit an application to the land use department for review. 
(a)  The application, in a form prescribed by the land use department, shall, without limitation: 
(i)  Describe the applicant's proposed telecommunications services and facilities; 
(ii)  Demonstrate compliance with this subsection; 
(iii)  Include a map at a suitable scale of the project area indicating the proposed locations of telecommunications facilities; 
(iv)  If a significant gap in coverage is claimed by the applicant, the applicant shall provide evidence demonstrating that the proposed facilities are necessary to close a defined and disclosed significant gap the applicant's in service coverage, and that the proposed facilities are the least intrusive means to close the proven significant gap; 
(v)  To the extent that facilities are located in the historic or escarpment overlay districts or are not otherwise permitted or approved under this subsection 27-2.19, demonstrate that the applicant has investigated alternative siting and that no other practicable alternative exists; and 
(vi)  Demonstrate that the applicant has complied with the National Historic Preservation Act for the siting of proposed facilities that may affect sites that are listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(b)  The application shall be in writing with the accompanying data in a format acceptable to the city that can be posted on the city's website in the same descriptive format as tendered in physical form (i.e., by use of PDF or other similar page reproduction software). 
(c)  The applicant may submit one (1) application showing multiple locations or, if a project is to be phased, phases, or may submit a new application for each location or successive phase. 
(8)  Land Use Review Fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established from time to time by the governing body. In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of any technical review by a qualified consultant, including, but not limited to, any structural, electrical or radio frequency engineer. 
(9)  Staff Review of Application. The land use department and other city staff as necessary shall review the application according to the standard procedures established by the land use department for applications to the planning commission. 
(10)  Community Information Availability. Following verification by the land use department that the application is complete, the application and related submittal documents shall be made available to the public on the city's website. The public may submit written comments to the land use department for its consideration for a period of ten (10) calendar days after the website posting on all applications that do not require planning commission approval. 
H.  Modifications to Approved Plans. Modifications or amendments to approved telecommunications facilities or networks shall be reviewed as provided under subsection 27-2.19(A)-(D). Approvals of applications for telecommunications facilities shall expire after three (3) years if the applicant has not commenced and completed the work. 
I.  Waivers. 
(1)  The planning commission may grant a waiver of the requirements set forth in this subsection 27-2.19 SFCC 1987 provided that the commission finds that the waiver: 
(a)  Is necessary to assure continuing service coverage by the applicant at the same level, or is necessary to close a significant gap in coverage; 
(b)  Is in the best interest of the community as a whole; 
(c)  Will not jeopardize public safety and welfare; 
(d)  Will better serve the purposes contained in Section 27-2 SFCC 1987; and 
(e)  The applicant demonstrates that compliance with the requirement is not practicable due to physical or legal constraints. 
(2)  The planning commission shall consider the following when granting a waiver: 
(a)  The visual impact of the of the proposed facilities on the natural and built environment; 
(b)  The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(c)  The physical surroundings and constraints; and 
(d)  Improved telecommunications services including service coverage and the potential for increasing the affordability of telecommunications services through competition. 
J.  Monitoring Standards. 
(1)  At all times, a telecommunications provider shall ensure that its telecommunications facilities comply with the most current regulatory and operational standards including but not limited to radio frequency emissions standards adopted by the FCC and antenna height standards adopted by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
K.  Enforcement. The land use director has the authority to interpret this subsection in accordance with the purpose of this section and shall administer and enforce the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  15; Ord. #2010-33,  8; Ord. #2012-30,  3; Ord. No. 2016-42  7; Ord. # 2017-18 ,  1) 
27-2.20 - Compliance with other codes. 
    Telecommunications networks or facilities granted approval under this section shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. #2010-14,  16; Ord. No. 2016-42  8; Ord. # 2017-18 ,  2) 
27-2.21 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. # 2017-18 ,  3, adopted August 30, 2017, repealed  27-2.21, which pertained to appointment of telecommunications advisory committee and derived from Ord. #2010-14,  18; Ord. #2011-15,  1; Ord. #2016-42,  11. 
27-2.22 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this Section 27-2 SFCC 1987 and its sections, parts, subparts, paragraphs and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, section, part, subpart, paragraph or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the purposes of the section. 
(Ord. #2010-33,  8; Ord. No. 2016-42  10) 
CHAPTER XXVIII - WAGE REQUIREMENTS 
28-1 - LIVING WAGE. 

28-1.1 - Short title. 
    This section may be cited as the "Living Wage Ordinance". 
(Ord. #2002-13,  1) 
28-1.2 - Legislative findings. 
    The governing body of the city has determined that: 
A.  The public welfare, health, safety and prosperity of Santa Fe require wages and benefits sufficient to ensure a decent and healthy life for workers and their families; 
B.  Many Santa Fe workers earn wages insufficient to support themselves and their families; 
C.  Many Santa Fe workers cannot participate in civic life or pursue educational, cultural, and recreational opportunities because they must work such long hours to meet their households' most basic needs; 
D.  Minimum wage laws promote the general welfare, health, safety and prosperity of Santa Fe by ensuring that workers can better support and care for their families through their own efforts and without financial governmental assistance; 
E.  The average earnings per job in Santa Fe County is twenty-three percent (23%) below the national average and the cost of living is eighteen percent (18%) higher than the national average; 
F.  Housing costs in Santa Fe are much higher than in most other parts of New Mexico, and low income workers must therefore spend a disproportionate percentage of their income sheltering themselves and their families; 
G.  Livable wages also benefit employers and the economy as a whole by improving employee performance, reducing employee turnover, lowering absenteeism, and thereby improving productivity and the quality of the services provided by employees; 
H.  When businesses do not pay a livable wage, the community bears the cost in the form of increased demand for taxpayer-funded social services including homeless shelters, soup kitchens and healthcare for the uninsured. Coupled with high real estate values, low wages reduce the ability of low- and moderate-income residents to access affordable housing. As a result, the city has had to invest significant tax dollars to support affordable housing including funding to nonprofit organizations, purchasing land, building infrastructure and waiving fees. In addition, the city has allocated significant tax dollars to operate after school and summer recreation programs and to support nonprofit organizations offering an array of human services and children and youth services, all of which are needed by very low-income residents and their families; 
I.  It is in the public interest to require certain employers benefiting from city actions and funding, and from the opportunity to do business in the city, to pay employees a minimum wage, a "living wage", adequate to meet the basic needs of living in Santa Fe; 
J.  According to the 2000 Census, approximately twelve and three-tenths percent (12.3%) of the Santa Fe community lives below the poverty level; and 
K.  According to the New Mexico department of labor, twenty-three and one-half percent (23.5%) of Santa Feans who are employed in the nongovernmental sector earn hourly wages of ten dollars and fifty cents ($10.50) per hour or less. 
L.  The governing body has reviewed the impact of previous minimum wage increases, relevant studies and other appropriate data, and finds that the city's minimum wage should be upwardly adjusted each year to keep pace with increases in the cost of living. 
M.  The governing body has found that limiting coverage of the minimum wage just to businesses with twenty-five (25) or more employees has hindered compliance and has created an uneven playing field among local businesses. 
(Ord. #2002-13,  2; Ord. #2003-8,  1; Ord. #2007-43,  1) 
28-1.3 - Authority of the city of Santa Fe. 
    This Living Wage Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the general welfare and police powers conferred upon the city of Santa Fe by Section 3-17-1 et seq. and Section 3-18-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, pursuant to the powers conferred upon the city of Santa Fe by New Mexico Constitution, Article X  6(D) and 6(E) and the Municipal Charter Act Section 3-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, which have been exercised by the city's adoption of its "Santa Fe Municipal Charter". 
(Ord. #2002-13,  3; Ord. #2003-8,  2) 
28-1.4 - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this section are: 
A.  To have the city of Santa Fe set an example for the public and private sectors by paying its employees a minimum wage adequate to meet the basic needs of living in Santa Fe. 
B.  To raise the income of low-income employees of employers who contract with the city, receive grants, subsidies or other benefits from the city or benefit from the opportunity to do business in Santa Fe. 
(Ord. #2002-13,  4; Ord. #2003-8,  3) 
28-1.5 - Minimum wage payment requirements. 
A.  The following shall pay the minimum wage: 
(1)  The city of Santa Fe to all full-time permanent workers employed by the city. However, the provisions of this section are expressly limited by and subject to future union negotiations in compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act and subsequent appropriations by the governing body in compliance with the Bateman Act; 
(2)  Contractors for the city, that have a contract requiring the performance of a service including construction services but excluding purchases of goods, shall pay the minimum wage to their workers and subcontractors performing work under the contract if the total contract amount with the city is, or by way of amendment becomes, equal to or greater than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00); and 
(3)  Businesses receiving assistance relating to economic development in the form of grants, subsidies, loan guarantees or industrial revenue bonds in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to those employed by such entity for the duration of the city grant or subsidy; and 
(4)  Businesses required to have a business license or business registration from the city of Santa Fe and nonprofit organizations shall pay the minimum wage to their workers for all hours worked within the city of Santa Fe that month. For purposes of this paragraph, worker shall not include any person who is related by blood or by marriage to any person who may have or possess any ownership interest in the business that employs them. For purposes of identifying persons entitled to be paid the minimum wage, all individuals employed by or providing work to the business for compensation, whether on a part-time, full-time or temporary basis, during a given month shall be counted as a worker. This definition shall include contingent or contracted workers, and persons made available to work through the services of a temporary service, staffing or employment agency or similar entity. However, interns working for a business for academic credit in connection with a course of study at an accredited school, college or university or persons working for an accredited school, college or university while also attending that school, college or university, or persons working for a business in connection with a court-ordered community service program such as teen court or workers who are in an apprenticeship program in a 501C(3) organization (such as the Santa Fe opera) shall not be counted as a worker for such purposes. 
B.  Beginning January 1, 2004, the minimum wage shall be an hourly rate of eight dollars and fifty cents ($8.50). In computing the wage paid for purposes of determining compliance with the minimum wage, the value of health benefits and childcare shall be considered as an element of wages. On January 1, 2006, the minimum wage shall be increased to an hourly rate of nine dollars and fifty cents ($9.50). Beginning January 1, 2009, and each year thereafter, the minimum wage shall be adjusted upward by an amount corresponding to the previous year's increase, if any, in the consumer price index for the western region for urban wage earners and clerical workers. 
C.  For workers who customarily receive more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month in tips or commissions, any tips or commissions received and retained by a worker shall be counted as wages and credited towards satisfaction of the minimum wage provided that, for tipped workers, all tips received by such workers are retained by the workers, except that the pooling of tips among workers shall be permitted. 
D.  Nonprofit organizations whose primary source of funds is from Medicaid waivers are exempt. 
E.  Staff shall contract for a study or studies to review the impact of changes made to the Living Wage Ordinance approved as Ordinance No. 2007-43 on businesses of less than ten (10) employees and on the student drop-out rate. The study shall be presented to the governing body no later than July 1, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2002-13,  5; Ord. #2003-8,  4; Ord. #2005-40; Ord. #2007-43,  2) 
28-1.6 - Prohibitions against retaliation and circumvention. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any employer or employer's agent or representative to take any action against an individual in retaliation for the exercise of or communication of information regarding rights under this section. This section shall also apply to any individual that mistakenly, but in good faith, alleges noncompliance with this section. 
B.  Taking adverse action against an individual within sixty (60) days of the individual's assertion of or communication of information regarding rights shall raise a rebuttable presumption of having done so in retaliation for the assertion of rights. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any business or employer to intentionally circumvent the requirements of this section by contracting portions of its operation or leasing portions of its property. 
(Ord. #2002-13,  6; Ord. #2003-8,  5) 
28-1.7 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former subsection 28-1.7, Compliance Through Collective Bargaining Process, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2002-13, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-38. 
28-1.8 - Enforcement; remedies. 
A.  Administrative Enforcement. The city manager, or his/her designee, is authorized, as appropriate and as resources permit, to enforce this section. The city manager is authorized to investigate possible violations of this section. Where the city manager, after a proceeding that affords a suspected violator due process, concludes that a violation has occurred, the city manager may issue orders to the employer appropriate to effectuate the complaining person's rights, including but not limited to back pay and reinstatement. The city manager also has the power to order termination of any and all economic benefit derived by any offending party from the city and has the power to revoke the employer's business license or registration. 
B.  Criminal Penalty. A person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, for each offense may be subject to fines and imprisonment as set forth in Section 1-3 SFCC 1987. A person violating any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof and for each worker or person as to which any such violation has occurred. 
C.  Other Remedies. The city, any individual aggrieved by a violation of this section, or any entity the members of which have been aggrieved by a violation of this section, may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, correct, abate or remedy any violation of this section and, upon prevailing, shall be entitled to such legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate to remedy the violation including, without limitation, reinstatement, the payment of any wages due and an additional amount as liquidated damages equal to twice the amount of any wages due, injunctive relief, and reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
D.  Nonexclusive Remedies and Penalties. The remedies provided in this section are not exclusive, and nothing in this section shall preclude any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties, or relief provided by law. 
(Ord. #2002-13,  8; Ord. #2003-8,  6) 
28-1.9 - Effect. 
    Nothing in this Living Wage Ordinance shall be deemed to nor shall be applied in such a manner so as to have a constitutionally prohibited effect as an ex post facto law or impairment of an existing contract within the meaning of New Mexico Constitution, Article II,  19. 
(Ord. #2002-13,  9) 
28-1.10 - Severability. 
    The requirements and provisions of this section and their parts, subparts and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, part, subpart or clause of this section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the section be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the governing body's purpose of ensuring a living wage for persons covered by the section. 
(Ord. #2002-13,  10; Ord. #2003-8,  7) 
28-1.11 - Notice; posting; and publication. 
    Any business subject to the provisions of this section shall as a condition to obtaining and holding a city of Santa Fe business license or registration, post and display in a prominent location next to its business license or registration on the business premises a notice, in English and Spanish, that the business is in compliance with the provisions of this section and in particular post the text of subsections 28-1.5, 28-1.6 and 28-1.8 SFCC 1987. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be construed a violation of this section and, in addition, shall be considered grounds for suspension, revocation, or termination of the business license or registration. 
(Ord. #2003-8,  8) 
28-1.12 - Living wage review. 
    The city shall conduct a review of this section on or before July 1, 2005. In conducting said review the governing body may, at its discretion and pursuant to a duly-adopted resolution, appoint an ad hoc committee to advise and assist in making recommendations regarding this section and to investigate the economic and social effects of this section on Santa Fe. The city will contract with an independent third party to develop an evaluation that will generate objective measures on the effect of the Living Wage Ordinance on the health, security, and livelihood of Santa Feans by March 31, 2003. Data necessary for such an evaluation on Santa Fe city businesses will be compiled and presented to the governing body for their review on or before July 1, 2003. In compiling the data, consideration should be given to potential impacts on youth employment and possible recommendations that might prevent unforeseen consequences hurting children in the community. 
(Ord. #2003-8,  9) 
APPENDIX A - INCORPORATION PROCLAMATION 

APPENDIX B - FIRST COUNCIL MINUTES 


EXHIBIT C - CITY ORGANIZATION 

APPENDIX D - GAS FRANCHISE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 1995-36 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO PNM GAS SERVICES, A DIVISION OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY OF NEW MEXICO, A NEW MEXICO CORPORATION, ITS LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES, SUCCESSORS, LESSEES AND ASSIGNS, CERTAIN POWERS, LICENSES, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, PRIVILEGES AND FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN IN THE CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO, WORKS, SYSTEMS AND PLANTS FOR THE HANDLING, PRODUCTION, MANUFACTURING, TRANSPORTING, STORING, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL GAS INTO, OUT OF, AND THROUGH, THE CITY TO ITS INHABITANTS AND OTHERS, INCLUDING CUSTOMERS WITHIN, BEYOND AND OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY; AND TO USE THE STREETS, AVENUES, EASEMENTS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, ALLEYS, HIGHWAYS, SIDEWALKS, PATHS, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND PUBLIC PLACES AND GROUNDS IN THE CITY FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY-FIVE YEARS; AND PRESCRIBING CERTAIN RIGHTS, DUTIES, TERMS AND CONDITIONS HEREIN MENTIONED; AND PROVIDING FOR THE PAYMENT TO THE CITY BY GRANTEE OF A PERCENTAGE OF CERTAIN REVENUES OF GRANTEE FROM ITS OPERATIONS, AS DESCRIBED IN THIS ORDINANCE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 
    Section 1. Grant of Franchise. The City of Santa Fe, New Mexico, a New Mexico municipal corporation, including all areas within the corporate boundaries of such municipal corporation, as now existing or hereafter enlarged (the "City"), hereby grants and vests in PNM Gas Services, a division of Public Service Company of New Mexico, a New Mexico corporation, and the legal representatives, successors, lessees and assigns of PNM Gas Services (collectively, the "Grantee"), a franchise and the authority, license, right, power and privilege (collectively, the "Franchise") to maintain, construct, equip, extend, alter, install, remove, change, improve and otherwise establish and operate in the City, works, systems, plants, pipes, and all related facilities, including those now in service, as may be necessary or reasonably convenient, to sell, manufacture, store, distribute, convey or otherwise conduct, serve, supply and furnish to the inhabitants of the City and others, and to the City, whenever the City or its inhabitants desire to contract therefor, gas for light, fuel, power, heat and any and all other useful purposes, and the Grantee is hereby granted passage and rights-of-way, in, upon, along, across, and the right to occupy, and use, in any lawful way during the life of the Franchise, any and all streets, avenues, easements, rights-of-way, alleys, highways, sidewalks, paths, bridges, structures and other public places owned by the City on or after the date of this Ordinance (collectively, the "City Property"), both above and beneath the surface of the same, for every and any such service, use, effect and lawful purpose as described in this Ordinance, provided the Grantee complies with all federal, state and local laws, rules, ordinances and regulations and the terms and conditions of the Franchise 
    Section 2. Operation and Maintenance; Disturbances of City Property. During the term of the Franchise, the Grantee is hereby authorized, licensed and empowered to do any and all things as may be necessary or reasonably convenient to be done and performed in executing the powers and utilizing the rights, powers and privileges described in this Ordinance and granted by the Franchise, provided the same do not unreasonably interfere with pre-existing water, sewer and other authorized installations. All work done by Grantee or its duly authorized agents in, over, under or on any City Property shall be done diligently, reasonably quickly and in accordance with standard engineering practices and applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Upon completion of any work, necessary or reasonably convenient to be done and performed in executing the powers and utilizing the rights, powers and privileges described in this Ordinance and granted by the Franchise, which work has the direct effect of materially altering the surface or subsurface of any City Property (any such work, an "Alteration"), or within a reasonably short time thereafter, the Grantee shall restore or shall cause to be restored as nearly as practicable all City Property that is affected by the Alteration to the condition of such City Property that existed immediately prior to the Alteration. Any restoration work necessitated by any Alteration shall be performed subject to the reasonable approval and supervision of the City or the City's designee. 
    Section 3. Transfers and Assignment of Franchise . During the term of the Franchise, Grantee shall have the right and privilege of transferring the Franchise and all rights and privileges granted with respect to the Franchise by this Ordinance unless such transfer is or would be prohibited under applicable law. At least thirty (30) days prior to the consummation of any such transfer, the Grantee shall deliver to the City written notice of the name and business address of the transferee and the names, titles and addresses, if different, of all chief operating officers (or the functional equivalent of such officers) of the transferee. No transfer shall be effective until, and each transfer shall be null and void unless, Grantee shall have delivered to the City written notice that the transfer has been consummated by Grantee and transferee, together with a duly executed assumption of Grantee's obligations as set forth in this Ordinance. Whenever the word "Grantee" appears in this Ordinance, it shall be construed as including the Grantee, the Grantee's successors, assigns and lessees, so long as the relevant successor, assign or lessee serves and continues to serve the City as a public utility. Nothing in this Section 3 shall be construed to prevent the City from exercising any right it has under law to present its views regarding the proposed transfer in any proceeding before any lawful authority having jurisdiction over such transfer. 
    Section 4. Compensation for Franchise . 
A.  For and in consideration of the grant of the Franchise and as rental of the occupation and use of, on, in, over and under City Property, in lieu of any and all City Taxes (as defined in Section 4(C) below), for each calendar year or portion thereof during the term of the Franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the City a total, aggregate sum of two percent (2%) of the Grantee's gross receipts (exclusive of sales and gross receipts taxes) collected during such calendar year or portion thereof by Grantee or Grantee's agents from: 
     (1) end users and consumers on account of gas sold and consumed within the corporate limits of the City under the Grantee's approved rates, as in effect from time to time, excluding, however, the gross receipts from gas sole to the City for the City's own use; and 
     (2) third-parties in consideration of transportation service furnished by the Grantee to such third-parties for gas that is: 
      (a) transported by the Grantee to a delivery point within the corporate limits of the City; and 
      (b) sold to and consumed by any end user, other than the City, that is located within the corporate limits of the City. 
    The Franchise fee rate set forth in the first sentence in this Section 4(A) shall continue during the term of the Franchise unless and until changed as provided in Section 4(B). Within twenty (20) calendar days of the last day of each calendar month during the term of the Franchise, the Grantee shall tender to the City in cash or cash equivalent, all fees due under this Ordinance with respect to such preceding calendar month or portion thereof during the term of the Franchise. 
B.  The City and the Grantee each shall have the right to request a review of the Franchise fee rate payable pursuant to Section 4(A) on each of the fifth, tenth, fifteenth and twentieth anniversaries of the date this Ordinance is adopted (each such date, a "Review Date") by delivering written notice to the other at least sixty (60) days before the corresponding Review Date. Upon a review pursuant to such request, but subject to the provisions of this Section 4(B) and this Ordinance, the City may elect to increase the Franchise fee rate payable by Grantee for the remainder of the Franchise term following the Review Date with respect to which the review and increase is initiated. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary, in no event shall the Franchise fee rate payable under this Ordinance by the Grantee exceed the lesser of: 
     (1) four percent (4%); or 
     (2) the lowest franchise fee rate then payable to the City by any other public utility or cooperative or any other supplier or transporter of pipeline fuel or power. 
C.  As used in this Ordinance, the term "City Taxes" means and includes any and all franchise, license, privilege, instrument, occupation, excise or revenue taxes and any and all other fees, charges or exactions upon all or any portion of the business, revenue, property or activities of the Grantee located or conducted within the City during the term of the Franchise, except for: 
     (1) the fees payable by the Grantee to the City under Section 4(A) of this Ordinance; 
     (2) excise taxes imposed by the City and actually collected by the Grantee from its customers; 
     (3) municipal occupation taxes lawfully assessed and collected on a non-utility business of the Grantee; 
     (4) general ad valorem taxes; 
     (5) special assessments for local improvements imposed by City ordinance and uniformly imposed and collected from other persons engaging in the same or similar activities as Grantee; and 
     (6) other compensatory service fees that may be agreed to by the Grantee and the City in writing by written instrument other than this Ordinance. 
D.  Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance to the contrary, Grantee's obligation to make the payments provided for in this Section 4 shall continue only so long as Grantee is not prohibited from making the same by any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the premises. If any such prohibition occurs and continues for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, to request renegotiation of the terms and conditions of Section 4 of this Ordinance for the period during which the prohibition continues. Following the delivery of such a request to Grantee, the City and the Grantee will renegotiate the provisions of this Section 4 in good faith so as to provide adequate compensation to the City, subject to the four percent (4%) rate ceiling set forth in Section 4(B)(1). If the parties fail to reach an agreement within ninety (90) days of delivery of the City's request for renegotiation, either party shall have the right to terminate the Franchise, effective thirty (30) days after delivery to the other party of a notice of termination. 
E.  Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance to the contrary, the City recognizes that the Grantee's payment, collection and treatment of the Franchise fee payable pursuant to this Section 4, and the procedures applicable to such payment, collection and treatment, shall be subject to and governed by all applicable laws and regulations and orders of any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the premises. If after the adoption of this Ordinance, any law, regulation or order (including any final Order issued in New Mexico Public Utility Commission Case No. 2662, filed August 28, 1995 by the Grantee) is enacted or promulgated that materially and substantially changes the Grantee's present authority relating to the payment, collection and treatment of the franchise fees payable hereunder, the City and the Grantee shall each have the right, but not the obligation, to request renegotiation of Section 4 of this Ordinance by giving written notice to the other within thirty (30) days of the effective date of such change. The parties shall thereafter renegotiate the provisions of this Section 4 in good faith giving due consideration to such change. 
    Section 5. Inspection of Grantee's Books. To enable the City to verify the conformity to the requirements of Section 4 of the amounts tendered to the City by Grantee under this Ordinance, the books of the Grantee shall be subject to inspection by the City or its duly authorized agents at all reasonable times upon written request in writing delivered to the Grantee by the City. 
    Section 6. Liability and Indemnity. The Grantee shall indemnify the City, its officers, agents and employees (collectively, the "Indemnitees") and shall save the Indemnitees from, and hold the Indemnitees harmless against, any and all claims, obligations, judgments, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, attributable to the negligence of the Grantee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors and subcontractors in connection with the installation, repair, operation or maintenance of any of the Grantee's facilities or with respect to any work done as authorized by this Franchise, including, without limitation, any Alteration. The City shall give prompt notice to the Grantee of any claim or suit arising with respect to this indemnity agreement; and the Grantee or its insurer shall have the option to compromise and defend the same to the extent of their respective interests. This indemnity shall be construed in conformity with the present and future law of the State of New Mexico with respect to the contribution among joint tort-feasors. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of the approval and adoption of this Ordinance by the City, the Grantee shall cause an officer of the Grantee who is a duly authorized signatory of the Grantee to execute and acknowledge a written statement of acceptance of the Franchise granted by this Ordinance on behalf of the Grantee (the "Acceptance"); and the Grantee shall cause the Acceptance to be filed of record with the Clerk of the City. Upon such recording of the Acceptance, the Grantee shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of Grantee and shall be subject to all obligations and responsibilities of Grantee as and to the extent provided by this Ordinance. 
B.  If the Acceptance is not filed of record as provided in subsection (A), this Ordinance and the rights, privileges, powers and obligations with respect to the Franchise or otherwise as provided in this Ordinance shall be terminated and void; provided, however, that, by Resolution, the City may postpone such termination and voiding for an additional period not to exceed sixty (60) days, during which additional period, the Grantee must comply with subsection (A). 
C.  This Ordinance, if accepted by the Grantee pursuant to Sections 7(A) and 7(B) of this Ordinance and if adopted as provided in Section 3-42.1 NMSA 1978, shall supersede, cancel, and replace any and all other existing or prior grants of right, permission or authority to the Grantee, or any predecessor of the Grantee, by the City to construct, operate and maintain any system for the sale, manufacture, storage, distribution, conveyance and supply of pipeline gas for light, fuel, power, heat or other purpose within the City. 
    Section 8. Term of Franchise. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, the term of the Franchise granted by this Ordinance shall endure for a period of twenty-five (25) calendar years commencing the date this Ordinance is adopted by the City. 
    Section 9. No Surrender of City Rights. In granting the Franchise provided in this Ordinance, the City does not, and shall not be deemed to, surrender or waive any privilege or right that the City may now or hereafter have with respect to owning or installing any system of light, heat, power or communication and furnishing the same to the City and the City's inhabitants. 
    Section 10. Severability. If any section, paragraph, subparagraph, subsection, clause, phrase or other provision of this Ordinance is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part of the provisions of this Ordinance other than the section, paragraph, subparagraph, subsection, clause, phrase or other provision of this Ordinance so determined to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
PASSED, APPROVED, and ADOPTED this 25th day of October 1995. 
      /s/___________ 
      Debbie Jaramillo, Mayor  
/s/___________ 
Yolanda Y. Vigil, City Clerk 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/___________ 
Asenath Kepler, City Attorney 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1970-24, previously codified herein granted a gas franchise to Southern Union Gas Company for a term of twenty-five (25) years from October 28, 1970. 

APPENDIX E - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1974-42 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY OF NEW MEXICO, ITS LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES, SUCCESSORS, LESSEES OR ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO LOCATE, CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE IN THE CITY OF SANTA FE, STATE OF NEW MEXICO, AS NOW OR HEREAFTER CONSTITUTED, A SYSTEM OF WORKS FOR THE GENERATION, TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY FOR USE BY SAID CITY AND THE INHABITANTS THEREOF FOR A PERIOD OF 25 YEARS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO: 
SECTION I 
    That the City of Santa Fe in the County of Santa Fe, State of New Mexico (City), duly incorporated under the laws of the State of New Mexico, hereby grants to the Public Service Company of New Mexico, a corporation duly organized in the State of New Mexico and authorized to do business in the State of New Mexico, whose principal office is in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, including its legal representatives, lessees, successors or assigns (Company), the right, privilege and non-exclusive franchise for the uses and purposes hereinafter contained. 
SECTION II 
    The Company shall have the right to establish, locate, purchase, construct, maintain and operate into, within and through, and across, the City, as now or hereinafter constituted, electric power plants, systems, lines or other pertinent works for the generation, transmission, distribution and sale of electricity for light, heat, power or any other useful service. 
SECTION III 
    In order to meet the burden and responsibilities placed on it by accepting this Franchise, the Company shall have the right during the term hereof to install, remove, change, alter, extend, lay, operate or maintain poles, conduits, wire and any and all equipment, or appurtenances, as may be necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the Company's electric systems, in, upon, across or under any street, alley, road, highway or other public place now or hereafter dedicated, owned or controlled by the City within its present corporate limits or any future extensions thereof; and the Company, without unreasonable obstruction of any alley, street or public place may place, construct, erect and maintain the electric systems and plants and any other equipment, devices and appurtenances upon Company property all as may be necessary to properly operate and maintain such system. 
    The Company shall work closely with and cooperate with the City Public Works Department on Company construction projects to aid traffic flow and police and fire protection. In the event company construction projects would interfere with traffic flow or police and fire protection, the City, upon written request to the Company in advance of the construction project, may require the Company to submit its plans for construction, provided that, the Company shall be authorized to undertake immediate construction in cases of bona fide emergency conditions or where a dangerous condition exists or to restore service which has been interrupted. The City, within six months of the effective date of this Franchise, agrees to prepare and adopt a valid ordinance governing construction projects to aid traffic flow and police and fire protection placing requirements upon all persons engaging in such activities. This paragraph shall only be effective until such ordinance is adopted or the expiration of a six-month period after the effective date of this Franchise, whichever event occurs first. Thereafter, this paragraph shall be void. 
    The Company shall comply with all valid applicable state statutes or laws, valid applicable local ordinances, and valid applicable zoning ordinances, rules and regulations, and with valid applicable general orders or rules and regulations issued by the Public Service Commission. This section does not diminish the Company's or City's legal rights or remedies under existing law and the Company or City reserves its right to pursue its legal rights or remedies in its discretion. 
SECTION IV 
    In order to meet the duties and responsibilities placed upon the City under this Franchise, the Governing Body shall appoint a city utilities committee composed of three members of the Governing Body. This committee shall meet with local Company representatives, or such other Company representatives as the local representatives shall designate, not more than once a month nor less than every three months or such other times as the parties mutually agree to discuss matters relating to the operation of the electrical system as it relates to providing service for the City in order to further cooperative efforts between the City and the Company supplying inhabitants of the City electrical service. Meetings may be held more often than once a month where existing bona fide emergency conditions necessitate such meetings. 
SECTION V 
    The Company shall have the right to install, remove, lay, change, alter, extend or maintain any poles, wires and lines, either overhead or underground, together with such other devices as may be required or useful in the proper operation of the electric system with the right to excavate said alleys, streets, highways or other public place needed for said purposes; provided, however, that there will be no unreasonable obstruction of any alleys, street or other public place. Such excavations shall be restored by the Company in accordance with valid ordinances and regulations as may be adopted by the City to reasonably control and monitor such activities of the Company. If such ordinances and regulations are not adopted or effective, it shall then place the responsibility of the restoring by the Company of such excavations to the original condition as near as practicable as before such work and excavation insofar as reasonably practicable. The City shall have the right to enforce such restoration by the Company. 
SECTION VI 
    The Company shall install and maintain in good order and condition all poles, lines, lamps, wires and all other apparatus and appurtenances thereto as have heretofore or may be henceforth erected for use and useful in its system and shall supply through such system a good quality of electricity for use by the City and its inhabitants and an abundant supply to all domestic, commercial and industrial users. 
    In developed areas within the City in which the City desires that distribution lines be placed underground, it shall notify the Company in writing of such desire and discuss the economic feasibility of the project. If the City after discussion with the Company still desires to have such distribution lines placed underground, the Governing Body shall pass a resolution, ordinance or such other legislation necessary to accomplish the purpose, setting forth the boundaries of such areas and authorizing the City to initiate a request before the Public Service Commission for undergrounding the area. If the Company approves the project, the Company and City shall file a joint request before the Public Service Commission seeking an order authorizing the project. If the Company does not approve the project, the City, at its option, may initiate a request before the Public Service Commission, and the Company reserves its right to present its case before the Commission. If ordered, the Company shall underground the distribution lines under the terms and conditions set forth in an appropriate order of the Public Service Commission. 
SECTION VII 
    The rates to be charged by the Company for furnishing electricity, except as otherwise provided in this Franchise, shall be those presently charged by it and presently in effect as now on file with the Public Service Commission, until and unless changed in accordance with law. It is further agreed that if, during the term of this Franchise, the law creating the Public Service Commission be repealed and power to regulate rates of public utilities be not delegated to some other State Commission or Department, then, in that event, the rates then on file with the Public Service Commission shall continue to be effective, subject to revision at one-year intervals by agreement of the parties to this Franchise. 
SECTION VIII 
    The City, in granting this Franchise, surrenders no privileges or rights that it may now have or possess, of owning or installing any system of light, heat, or power and furnishing the same to the City and inhabitants thereof. 
    In the event that the City shall at any time hereafter acquire by purchase or otherwise the property of the Company in Santa Fe, it is agreed that in any negotiation or proceedings looking toward the acquisition of said property by the City, the value of this Franchise shall be arbitrarily fixed and determined at the sum of $1.00 and no more. 
SECTION IX 
    The Company shall assume and pay all liabilities for damages to person or property which may arise from the sole negligent construction or sole negligent operation of any or all parts of said electric plant, or its appurtenances connected therewith, that may be erected or constructed, and shall save the City, its officers, agents and servants harmless from any and all liability that may arise or be incurred from the Company's negligent operation or negligent construction of the same. 
SECTION X 
    That all grants and privileges herein granted and conferred upon by said Company, its legal representatives, successors, lessees, or assigns, shall continue in full force and effect for the period of twenty-five years from and after the effective date of this Franchise. 
SECTION XI 
    The Company, for and in consideration of the granting of this franchise, and as rentals for the occupation and use or easement over, upon and beneath the streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, bridges and public places in said City, shall pay to said City each year during all the time this franchise shall remain in force and effect, a total aggregate sum of 2% of the gross receipts of the said Company received from the sales within the City of Santa Fe, for electricity sold and consumed within the aforesaid limits. The gross receipts of the Company shall consist of the total amount collected from users and consumers on account of electricity sold and consumed within the corporate limits of the municipality less any sales or gross receipts taxes. 
    A minimum payment shall be made during each year of the franchise as follows: 
1st $110,000.00 2nd 110,000.00 3rd 110,000.00 4th 110,000.00 5th 110,000.00 6th 115,500.00 7th 121,275.00 8th 127,339.00 9th 133,706.00 10th 140,391.00 11th 147,411.00 12th 154,782.00 13th 162,520.00 14th 170,646.00 15th 179,178.00 16th 188,137.00 17th 197,543.00 18th 207,420.00 19th 217,791.00 20th 228,681.00 21st 240,115.00 22nd 252,121.00 23rd 264,727.00 24th 277,963.00 25th 291,861.00  
    Each and every January during the term this franchise is in force and effect, the Company shall pay the minimum franchise tax set forth above. At the end of the calendar year if 2% of the Company's gross receipts as defined herein exceeds the payment, then the Company shall make the adjustment to pay 2% of the gross receipts tax unless the minimum is higher. 
    This agreement, after filing with the New Mexico Public Service Commission, shall be effective as of the 1st day of December, 1974. The foregoing payments shall be in lieu of any and all other franchise, license, privilege, instrument, occupation, excise or revenue taxes and all other exactions (except general ad valorem property taxes, special assessments for improvements and reasonable payments as required by appropriate City ordinance to pay the City for restoration of paving cuts) upon the business, revenue, property, lines, installations, systems, conduits, pipes, fixtures and other appurtenances of the Company or any part thereof in said City during the term of this franchise. 
    With respect to the gross receipts and payment of the tax herein contemplated, the records of the Company shall be open at all reasonable times for examination and scrutinization by any person or agent designated by the City Council to make such examination. 
SECTION XII 
    The Company shall file with the Public Service Commission reasonable rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, such rules being so constructed as to provide fair and standard practices with all its customers or prospective customers. The Company shall make a reasonable effort to notify the City of any of the Company's proposed amendments to its electric rules and regulations filed with the Public Service Commission at the time of or within a reasonable period of time after filing the proposed change with the Public Service Commission, which change will effect electric users located within the City. 
SECTION XIII 
    The Company shall permit the City, when requested, to use their poles and pole lines for police, fire alarm, traffic or other signals where such use is not in conflict with Federal or state health or safety requirements; provided, however, that the Company shall not be responsible for any liability that may arise by the reason of such use of the Company's poles or lines or other facilities for such purposes. If the Company changes, removes or alters any of its facilities, the City shall alter, remove or relocate its installations at its own expense upon the request of the Company. 
SECTION XIV 
    If the Company or City shall fail to faithfully perform the terms, conditions, covenants and obligations of the within franchise, or the Company fails to furnish an adequate supply of reliable and satisfactory electric service, then and in that event, the City shall give the Company written notice of such breach and the Company shall have a reasonable period of time in which to remedy the breach. If the Company has not cured the breach within a reasonable period of time, this Franchise shall be subject to forfeiture. It is further agreed that any failure to comply with the provisions of this Franchise which results from an "Act of God", or to circumstances beyond the control of the Company, shall not be cause for forfeiture within the contemplation of this Section. 
SECTION XV 
    At any time during the term of this Franchise, the City, through its Governing Body, or the Company may propose amendments to this Franchise by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendment desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will, within a reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendment. 
SECTION XVI 
    As further consideration for the granting of this Franchise, the Company agrees to bear the cost of any relocation of its electric facilities within the same right-of-way or widening within the City right-of-way of any street, avenue, easement, right-of-way, alley, highway, sidewalk, bridge or other structure or public place or grounds of the City and within the corporate limits of the City, which relocation may be reasonably required because of any specific regrading, rerouting, improving or widening with City right-of-way of any such street, avenue, easement, right-of-way, alley, highway, sidewalk, bridge or other structure or public place or grounds of the City, or when reasonably required to accommodate the construction, reconstruction, removal or relocation of sewer systems, water systems, storm drainage systems, traffic signal systems, or utility systems owned and operated by the City, provided, however, that the foregoing provisions of this section shall not be applicable in the case of any Urban Renewal Project planned, approved and executed or to be executed or funded under the authority of the Urban Renewal Law, Sections 14-47-1, et seq., N.M.S.A., 1953 Comp., as amended, or where by City application specific monies can be and are obtained from Federal or state sources for relocation costs of electric facilities and where no City matching funds are required or where the scope of the project would not be diminished, or where the state or Federal law requires a municipality to pay for relocation costs of electric facilities. 
SECTION XVII 
    The Company shall, within thirty (30) days after the passage and approval of this Ordinance, file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City a written statement of acceptance duly signed and acknowledged by the proper officers of the Company authorized to execute such acceptance, and when so accepted, this Ordinance shall be a contract duly executed by and between the City and the Company. 
    In the event such acceptance is not filed within the said period, this Ordinance and the rights, privileges and franchises herein granted shall, ipso facto, be and become terminated and void; provided, however, the Governing Body of the City may by resolution extend the time herein allowed for the filing of such acceptance for an additional period of thirty (30) days. 
SECTION XVIII 
    The Company recognizes the continued importance of an ongoing research and development program to develop new power sources, new methods of electric transmission, new pollution control devices and better methods of reclamation of coal producing properties and shall actively pursue development of such programs. To this end the Company will cooperate with the City and all State and Federal authorities exercising jurisdiction over such matters. The Company recognizes that there is a changing atmosphere in concepts of rate design and further recognizes the importance of a continuing investigation in this area and commits itself to a continuing program of review of these changing concepts. 
SECTION XIX 
    If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part of the provisions hereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. If any part of this Franchise is held invalid, the Company and the City shall commence meetings to renegotiate the provision or provisions held invalid. 
SECTION XX 
    The right is hereby reserved to the City to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein contained, such ordinances as may be a valid exercise of its police powers not inconsistent herewith. 
SECTION XXI 
    Nothing in this Franchise shall apply to or affect the rulings of the Court in any litigation now pending in which the City and the Company are parties, and by the execution of this Franchise agreement neither party waives any rights in any such pending litigation arising out of City Ordinance No. 1004. 
DATED, SIGNED, PASSED and APPROVED this 20th day of November, 1974. 

APPENDIX F - TELEPHONE FRANCHISE 
CITY OF SANTA FE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1975-8 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY-FIVE YEARS WITH CERTAIN RIGHTS INCIDENT THERETO, TO THE MOUNTAIN STATES TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY; ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS IN THE CITY OF SANTA FE, SANTA FE COUNTY, NEW MEXICO, AND PROVIDING THAT THE CITY SHALL RECEIVE CASH PAYMENTS AND OTHER CONSIDERATIONS THEREFOR. 
BE ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO, AS FOLLOWS: 
    SECTION 1. There is hereby granted to the Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company, a corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter referred to as the "Company," the right, privilege and easement to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways, and public places, now or hereafter laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in the City of Santa Fe, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other telephone fixtures necessary or proper for the maintenance and operation in said City of a telephone exchange, and lines connected therewith. No poles, underground cables or facilities or other fixtures shall be placed where they will in any way interfere with any gas lines, water lines, sewer lines, electric or other City-authorized underground facilities, or related utility facilities. All such installations shall be placed where they will not in any way touch or create an actual cross-connection with any such utility lines. All such poles or other fixtures placed in any street or thoroughfare shall be placed as far from the traveled way within the City's right of way as physically possible. Those poles, underground cables, fixtures or other facilities placed in alleys shall be located as close as practicable to the lines of the lot abutting on said alleys. Such equipment or fixtures in any event shall be placed in such a manner as to not unnecessarily obstruct public travel on said streets and alleys. Company manholes shall be placed behind the curb line in the City's right of way or in the Company's private easement area, unless such placement is not physically feasible. 
    SECTION 2. All poles to be placed shall be so set that they will not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain. The Company shall, at all times during the term of this franchise, be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the City, and to such reasonable regulations thereunder as the City may by ordinance provide. 
    SECTION 3. The surface of any street, alley, highway or public or private place disturbed by the Company in building, constructing, renewing or maintaining its telephone plant and system shall be restored by it within ninety (90) days after the completion of the work in accordance with valid ordinances and regulations as may be adopted by the City to reasonably control and monitor such activities of the Company. If such ordinances and regulations are not adopted or effective, it shall place the responsibility of the restoring by the Company of such excavations to the original condition as near as practicable as before such work and excavation. The City shall have the right to enforce such restoration by the Company. Any damage of any nature done to any gas, water, sewer, electric or other City-authorized lines, or related utility facilities during constructing, renewing or maintaining the telephone plant and system shall be reported promptly to the City, and the cost of any repair shall be borne by the Company. The Company shall indemnify and save the City harmless from and against any and all losses and damages caused by and arising: 
  1. From excavation of the City's streets and alleys; 
  2. From damages done to any gas, water, sewer line, storm sewer, electric or other City-authorized facilities, and related utility facilities during constructing, renewing or maintaining its telephone plant and system by the Company. 
    Any damage done shall be repaired according to City standard specifications and approval. 
    All public pay stations located on public property shall be approved in writing, as to location, by the City prior to installation. All pay stations attached to private property that may protrude into the public right of way shall be approved as to location by the City. 
    The Company shall work closely with and cooperate with the City on Company construction projects to aid traffic flow and police and fire protection. In the event Company construction projects would interfere with traffic flow or police and fire protection, the City, upon written request to the Company in advance of the construction project, may require the Company to submit its plans for construction, provided that, the Company shall be authorized to undertake immediate construction in cases of bona fide emergency conditions or where a dangerous condition exists or to restore service which has been interrupted. 
    SECTION 4. The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the Company, its successors and assigns, to trim trees upon and overhanging in streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires or cables of the Company. Where it is found necessary for the public safety and convenience the City may require the Company to trim shrubs and remove growth in the vicinity of their poles and facilities. 
    SECTION 5. In order to meet the duties and responsibilities placed upon the City under this franchise, the Governing Body shall appoint a city utilities committee composed of three members of the Governing Body. This committee shall meet with local Company representatives, or such other Company representatives as the local representatives shall designate, at such times as the parties mutually agree to discuss matters relating to the operation of the telephone system as it relates to providing service for the City in order to further cooperative efforts between the City and the Company in supplying inhabitants of the City telephone service. 
    SECTION 6. The City shall have the right and privilege at any time during the life of this franchise to place and maintain upon the aerial poles or in any underground construction of the Company, fixtures, for a fire alarm, police alarm, or other closed circuit municipal use systems. Such right and privilege exercised during the life of this franchise shall be without charge to the City. Any wires or fixtures to be placed pursuant to this right and privilege will be maintained under the supervision of the Company. The City in its use and maintenance of such wires and fixtures shall comply with the rules and regulations of the company on file with the State Corporation Commission and with the provisions of the latest edition of the National Electrical Safety Code or whatever is currently applicable according to State Statutes. Said municipal wires or other fixtures shall not be exposed, without the consent of the Company, to the danger of contact with any conductor carrying a voltage greater than the normal telephone voltage. 
    The City shall be solely responsible for all injury to persons or damage to property arising out of the construction, maintenance, attachment or removal of said municipal use fixtures. 
    In cases of rearrangement of the Company's plant, or removal of ducts, the City shall care for, or remove its own wires, and shall save the Company harmless from any damage or injury to persons or property arising out of the removal of construction of its wires. 
    SECTION 7. Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or to make any unusual use of the streets necessitating a change in the Company's system of wires, poles, fixtures or plant, prior to the issuance of any permit by the City for any alteration of the streets creating a change in the Company's system, shall present a written certificate of the proposed work from the Company and signed by its authorized representative. The Company, upon presentation of a City permit by the applicant shall thereafter provide for and do such cutting, altering and moving of any wires, poles and other fixtures as may be necessary. 
    Where existing telephone installations such as, but not limited to, poles and other overhead and underground telephone facilities are installed in City streets, and street right of ways, alleys, highways, public ways, sidewalks, bridges, and other public structures and public places and public grounds of said City and it is determined that such installations are in conflict with authorized street widening, street improvements and utilities systems, the project to relocate the facilities to a mutually acceptable location shall be subject to the approval of the City or its designee. All of such relocation work of same or similar facilities and installation shall be performed by the Company at no expense to the City; provided, that this provision shall not apply to any relocations made pursuant to the Urban Renewal Law (Sections 14-47-1 to 14-47-20 NMSA 1953 Comp.). When existing overhead facilities are replaced with underground facilities approval for such construction must be approved by the City prior to any work being performed. All work done in said streets, alleys, highways, public ways, sidewalks, bridges, and other public structures and public places, and public grounds of said City by said Company shall be performed with reasonable diligence; and said Company shall, within ninety (90) days, restore such streets, alleys, and public grounds excavated by it, to their original condition as nearly as possible; and said work shall be done subject to the approval and acceptance of the City manager or his designee. 
    SECTION 8. Extensions of telephone service in newly annexed areas to the City limits, or in new subdivisions within the existing City limits, shall be installed by underground facilities at the Company's own expense, and in accordance with reasonable regulations by the City; provided that the Company may, with the consent of the Governing Body of the City, construct overhead lines in any location where underground construction is not feasible. 
    If the City should desire that existing distribution lines in developed areas in the City be placed underground, the Company will cooperate in developing feasible means of accomplishing that objective. The Company agrees that it will perform such underground conversions upon development of arrangements satisfactory to the Company and the City for payment of the cost of such conversions. 
    SECTION 9. In consideration for the granting of this franchise, and for use of the City's streets, alleys, public ways and public places as heretofore provided, the Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company shall pay to the City of Santa Fe during the term hereof, and until such time as a succeeding franchise ordinance is adopted, two percent (2%) per annum of the Company's gross receipts. "Gross receipts" shall include all revenues received from local exchange services. 
    A minimum payment shall be made during each of the first five years under the franchise, the first of which shall be $83,160 with an 8 percent annual increment to be added during each of the next four franchise years as follows: 
1975 (1st)  83,160 1976 (2nd)  89,813 1977 (3rd)  96,998 1978 (4th) 104,757 1979 (5th) 113,138  
    At the end of each five-year period, the percentage of annual increment shall be adjusted and shall be based upon the linear average annual percentage growth of the Company's gross receipts in the Santa Fe franchise area during the five-year period immediately preceding. The minimum payment for the following five years shall be increased each year by the average amount of percentage growth so determined and added to the minimum payment for the preceding year. 
    Payments under this franchise shall be effective as of January 1, 1975, and shall be made quarterly within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each quarterly payment shall be at the rate of 2 percent of the gross receipts for the preceding calendar quarter. If, however, the aggregate of such payments for any calendar year do not equal the minimum fixed for that year, then the balance of the required minimum shall be paid at the time of the fourth quarter payment. 
    The foregoing payments shall be in lieu of any and all other franchise, license, privilege, instrument, occupation, excise or revenue taxes and all other exactions (except general ad valorem property taxes, special assessments for improvements, any occupation tax imposed on advertising revenues, and reasonable payments as required by appropriate City ordinance to pay the City for restoration of paving cuts) upon the business, revenue, property, lines, installations, systems, conduits, pipes, fixtures and other appurtenances of the company or any part thereof in said City during the term of this franchise. 
    SECTION 10. Upon any annexation of territory to the City of Santa Fe, local exchange revenues received from subscribers located within the annexed area shall be included in the base for computation of payments due to the City. Such inclusion shall be effective thirty (30) days after the effective date of such annexation. Notice shall be deemed given upon the recording of the annexation with the County Clerk; however, the City shall inform the Company of all annexations and shall furnish to the Company copies of all annexation ordinances and maps. 
    SECTION 11. The Company shall provide service to applicants within the base rate area, as established by tariff filed with the State Corporation Commission or its successors as authorized by statute, without construction charges or other charges in excess of normal service connection rates. The rates to be charged by the Company for furnishing telephone service, except as otherwise provided in this franchise, shall be those presently charged by it and presently in effect as now on file with the State Corporation Commission until and unless changed in accordance with law. It is further agreed that if, during the term of this franchise, the law creating the State Corporation Commission be repealed and power to regulate rates of the Company be not delegated to some other State Commission or Department, then, in that event, the rates then on file with the State Corporation Commission shall continue to be effective, subject to revision at one-year intervals by agreement of the parties to this franchise. 
    SECTION 12. If during the term of this franchise the Company makes application to the State Corporation Commission for a change in any of the general rate Schedules applicable to service required by the City, or Telephone customers located within the city limits, the company will simultaneously give written notice to the City of such application. The Company further agrees that reasonable advance written notice of any hearing on such application will be given to the city in order to afford the City the opportunity to appear in the formal hearing before the State Corporation Commission. 
    The Company agrees to provide the City with all available engineering, statistical, billing and other data pertinent to such application as requested by the City. 
    SECTION 13. The Company shall establish and shall maintain during the term of this franchise such alternate power facilities as may be required for emergency telephone operations within the City limits, as established by the City or its designee. 
    SECTION 14. The franchise herein granted shall continue in force and effect until the _______ day of _______, 2000. 
    SECTION 15. The Company recognizes the continued importance of an ongoing research and development program related to new technologies, environmental protection and urban beautification: and shall actively pursue development of such a program. To this end the Company will cooperate with the City and all State and Federal authorities exercising jurisdiction over such matters. The Company recognizes that there is a changing atmosphere in concepts of rate design and further recognizes the importance of a continuing investigation in this area and commits itself to a continuing program of review of these changing concepts. 
    SECTION 16. If the Company or City shall fail to faithfully perform the terms, conditions, covenants and obligations of the within franchise, or the Company fail to furnish adequate, reliable and satisfactory telephone service, then and in that event, the City shall give the Company written notice of such breach and the Company shall have a reasonable period of time in which to remedy the breach. If the Company has not cured the breach within a reasonable period of time, this franchise shall be subject to forfeiture. It is further agreed that any failure to comply with the provisions of this franchise which results from an "Act of God," or to circumstances beyond the control of the Company, shall not be cause for forfeiture within the contemplation of this Section. 
    SECTION 17. At any time during the term of this franchise, the City, through its Governing Body, or the Company may propose amendments to this franchise by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendment desired, and both parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will, within a reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendment. 
    SECTION 18. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to the Company any exclusive privilege or easement. 
    SECTION 19. The rights powers, limitations, duties and restrictions herein provided shall insure to and be binding upon the parties hereto and upon their respective successors and assigns. This franchise shall not be assigned without the written consent of the City. 
    SECTION 20. This ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after its passage and approval by the governing board of the City of Santa Fe, provided that the same shall be accepted in writing by the Company, and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 14-43-1, NMSA (1953 Comp.). The Company shall pay the publication and other expenses provided for in said Section 14-43-1 E Supra. Nothing in this franchise shall diminish the City's legal rights or remedies under existing law and the City reserves its right to pursue its legal rights or remedies in its discretion. 
    PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 9th day of April, 1975. 


  
  
  
  
  
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
May 6, 1975 
Mayor and City Commissioners 
City of Santa Fe 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 
Gentlemen: 
The Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company does hereby unconditionally accept all of the terms, conditions and provisions of Ordinance No. 1975-8 of the City of Santa Fe, granting a franchise to the Company. 
Very truly yours, 
THE MOUNTAIN STATES TELEPHONE 
AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY 

APPENDIX G - TELECOMMUNICATION FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly, Appendix "G" to the Santa Fe City Code set out a Water Franchise between the City and the Public Service Company of New Mexico. That franchise, by its own terms was "null and void" upon the acquisition of the "regional water system" by the City. See Chapter XXV, Water. 

ARTICLE I. - BROADBAND NETWORK 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-12 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING BROADBAND NETWORK OF NEW MEXICO, LLC A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO OPERATE A TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITHIN THE CITY OF SANTA FE; THE RIGHT TO USE CITY PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO PROVIDE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 

Section 1. - Legislative Findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  The granting of a franchise to Broadband Network of New Mexico, LLC ("the Company"), is necessary for the access and use of public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city limits in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Telecommunications in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance, Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 ("Article 27-2"). 
B.  The granting of such a franchise permits competitively neutral and non-discriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for providers of telecommunications services; and allows the city to appropriately manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
C.  The granting of a franchise promotes competition among telecommunications services providers and encourages the universal availability of telecommunications services to residents and businesses of the city through the careful management of public rights-of-way. 
D.  It is the intent of the city in the granting of the franchise to obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way through the collection of fees and charges, and to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other adverse effects on the public rights-of-way by Company's commercial use of public rights-of-way. 
E.  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the granting of a franchise allows the city to exercise such other powers, as the city may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers who are residents of the city. 
F.  In accordance with Article 27-2, Company submitted an application for a franchise on May 27, 2016. 
G.  The city is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for telecommunications services within the city. 
H.  The city has reviewed Company's application and has determined that granting a franchise in accordance with Article 27-2 is in the public interest and in the interest of the city and its residents. 
I.  This franchise, as it relates to the city's costs, maintenance, management, and necessary regulation of public rights-of-way, will assist in meeting the telecommunications related needs and interests of the community. 
J.  When the Wireless Consumer Advanced Infrastructure Act, 2018 New Mexico Laws Chapter 17 (H.B. 38) becomes effective on September 1, 2018, this franchise will no longer be of any force and effect. However, the parties agree to treat this agreement as one setting forth the rates, fees and terms of the Company to place Small Wireless Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, subject to the terms of the Act. 
Section 2. - Franchise Terms. 
    In exchange for Company's compliance with the terms of this Ordinance, the provisions of Article 27-2, and other applicable city codes, there is hereby granted by the city to Company permission to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. All terms of Article 27-2 shall control Company's use of the public rights-of-way except as specifically set out in this Ordinance. 
A.  Short Title; Purpose; Applicability. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be cited as the "Broadband Network of New Mexico Franchise Ordinance." 
2.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to grant Company, the right, privilege, and authority to: 
a.  Furnish and distribute telecommunications services in the city, by means of its network, on, over, under, along and across public rights-of-way, now or hereafter included in the boundaries of the city as such boundaries now exist or may hereafter be extended; and 
b.  Construct, purchase, acquire, locate, maintain, and extend into, within, and through the city, a telecommunications network for the period and upon the terms and conditions specified in this franchise comprised of all facilities and equipment used by Company to provide telecommunications services, including "Small Wireless Facilities." 
This permission is not exclusive and does not prevent the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations or prevent the city itself from constructing or operating its own telecommunications network within the public rights-of-way, with or without a franchise. 
3.  This franchise applies to the placement of Small Wireless Facilities in the city's public rights-of-way. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Bad Debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale of telecommunications at retail, for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. 
    Collocate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace one or more wireless facilities on, in or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
    Department means the department of public works. 
    Private Telecommunications Service means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation thereof, for the provision of telecommunications service, or any portion of that service, by a person for the sole and exclusive use of that person and not for resale, directly or indirectly. For purposes of this definition, the person that may use such service includes any affiliates of the person if at least eighty percent of the assets or voting stock of the affiliates is owned by the person. If any other person uses the telecommunications service, whether for hire or not, the private telecommunications service is a public telecommunications service; NMSA 1978,  63-9A-3 (L). 
    Public Right-of-Way has the meaning of  3-1-2(M) NMSA 1978. 
    Public Telecommunications Service means the transmission of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds, messages, data or other information of any nature by wire, radio, light waves or other electromagnetic means originating and terminating in this state regardless of actual call routing. Public Telecommunications Service does not include the provision of terminal equipment used to originate or terminate such service; private telecommunications service; broadcast transmissions by radio, television and satellite broadcast stations regulated by the federal communications commission; radio common carrier services, including mobile telephone service and radio paging; or one-way cable television service; NMSA 1978,  63-9A-3 (M). 
    Telecommunications Company means a person that provides public telecommunications service; NMSA 1978,  63-9A-3 (N). 
    Sale of Telecommunications at Retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee imposed by this chapter previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service Address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, Service Address shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the City where bills are sent. 
    Small Wireless Facility means a wireless facility whose: 
1.  Antennas are, or could fit, inside an enclosure with a volume of six or fewer cubic feet; and 
2.  Other ground- or pole-mounted wireless equipment, not including the following, is twenty-eight or fewer cubic feet in volume: 
a.  Electric meter; 
b.  Concealment elements; 
c.  Telecommunications demarcation box; 
d.  Grounding equipment; 
e.  Power transfer switch; 
f.  Cutoff switch; 
g.  Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services; and 
h.  Elements required by the city in accordance with Subsection H of Section 3 of the Wireless Consumer Advanced Infrastructure Investment Act. 
    Wireless Facility: 
1.  Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; and 
b.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cables, regular and backup power supplies and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; 
2.  Includes a small wireless facility; and 
3.  Does not include: 
a.  The structure or improvements on, under or within which the equipment is collocated; 
b.  A wireline backhaul facility, coaxial cable or fiber-optic cable between wireless support structures or utility poles; or 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna. 
    Wireless Telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
C.  Small Wireless Facility Franchise Fee. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority granted by  3-42-1 NMSA 1978 and 47 U.S.C. 253(c), there is hereby imposed an annual fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) multiplied by the number of small wireless facilities placed by the wireless provider in the right-of-way and in the city limits. 
2.  On an annual basis, the rate for the use of the Public Right-of-way shall increase by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the most recent consumer price index for all urban consumers for New Mexico, as published by the United States department of labor. The city shall notify the Company of the prospective adjustment and shall make the adjustment effective sixty (60) days following that notice. 
D.  Filing Returns and Payment of Franchise Fee. 
1.  On or before the last day of January of each calendar year, the Company is required to pay the small wireless facilities franchise fee imposed by this Section and shall file with the city a remittance return and shall pay the fee attributable to the fee for the preceding calendar year. The return shall contain such information as the director may reasonably require. 
2.  No later than February 28th of each year beginning in 2019, the Company shall provide to the city a report attesting to the amount of the small wireless facility franchise fees paid to the city for the preceding calendar year, and that such amount complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Company's Right to Enter into Sublicense Agreements. The parties agree and acknowledge that, notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance to the contrary, certain Equipment put in place by Company pursuant to this Ordinance may be owned and/or operated by Company's third-party wireless carrier customers ("Carriers") and installed and maintained by Company pursuant to license agreements between Company and Carriers. Such Equipment shall be treated as Company's Equipment for all purposes under this Ordinance and each Equipment Lease provided that: 
1.  Company remains responsible and liable for all performance obligations under this Ordinance and each Equipment Lease with respect to such Equipment; 
2.  The city's sole point of contact regarding such Equipment shall be Company; and 
3.  The Company shall have the right to remove and relocate the Equipment. 
F.  Registration of Providers, Resellers and Sublicensees. 
1.  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing a franchise with the Company, the Company shall provide the name and address of every telecommunications reseller, sublicensee or other telecommunications company with whom the Company has a contractual relationship to provide telecommunications services or to make available telecommunications facilities in the public way. The Company shall have a continuing duty to file with the city, within forty-five (45) days after the date of occurrence of any changes in the information provided to the city, including the creation or termination of a contractual relationship described herein. 
2.  Resales. Whenever amounts are claimed to be excluded from gross charges as sales for resale, the reseller shall furnish to the Company the reseller's resale information. The Company shall retain the resale information with its books and records. 
G.  Maintaining Books and Records. The Company shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any liability or exemption. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection by the city. 
H.  Insurance Requirements. Company shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.9 SFCC 1987, and Company shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this franchise the following types of insurance: 
1.  Commercial comprehensive general liability insurance; 
2.  Workers' Compensation insurance as required by law; and 
3.  Commercial automobile liability insurance providing a minimum coverage in the amount required under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act. 
I.  Term of Franchise. The term of this franchise, and the rights, privileges, and authority granted hereunder shall continue until the Wireless Consumer Advanced Infrastructure Act, 2018 New Mexico Laws Ch. 17 (H.B. 38) becomes effective on September 1, 2018. At that point in time this agreement shall be automatically be renewed annually unless Company provides notice to city of its intent not to renew at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the then current term. Company may surrender permits at any time and remove its telecommunications facilities at any particular location upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to city. Company shall not be obligated to pay the annual fee for such location following removal of its telecommunications facilities. 
J.  Indemnity. Company and city agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless each other and its officials, agents, volunteers, and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or property arising out of or resulting from the activities of the indemnifying party pursuant to this franchise, except to the extent caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnitee or by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the indemnitee, or it's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or it's agents or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage. Neither party shall be liable to the other for consequential, indirect or punitive damages (including lost revenues, loss of service, or loss of data) for any cause of action, whether in contract, tort or otherwise, even if the party was or should have been aware of the possibility of these damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including negligence), strict liability or otherwise. The maximum liability of either party to the other hereunder shall be the amount paid or payable during the preceding twelve (12) months. 
K.  Violations and Penalties. Only if the parties have agreed in writing that it is applicable, and if the Company fails to pay the small wireless facilities franchise fee, as provided by this Chapter, the Company shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the failure to pay continues. Each day that the Company fails to pay shall constitute a separate and distinct violation under this Chapter. Any retailer that becomes subject to this fine may be enjoined from doing business in the city until the Company has paid all sums due under this Chapter. 
    Any telecommunications company who otherwise violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
L.  Dispute Resolution Provision. 
1.  In the event of any other dispute arising from or relating to the franchise or breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations, the following process will be followed during which any of the above remedies and penalties may be imposed. 
2.  All disputes will be mediated prior to litigation. The costs of such mediation will be equally split. The place of the mediation session shall be in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The city and the Company will select a mediator or mediators by mutual agreement and, in cooperation with the mediator(s), shall determine all necessary rules and procedures for the mediation. The city and the Company will fully cooperate in the mediation activities. All mediation communications shall be confidential, not subject to disclosure and shall not be used as evidence in any arbitration, judicial, or administrative proceeding, as set forth in the Mediation Procedures Act, NMSA 1978,  44-7b-1 through 44-7b-6. 
M.  Unauthorized Use of Public Rights-of-Way Unlawful. In accordance with Section 27-2.12 SFCC 1987, Company shall not: 
1.  Use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services that have not been authorized by the city. 
2.  Place facilities on public structures or utility infrastructure to provide telecommunications services which are not allowed under the terms of this franchise. 
    Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to any dispute between the city and Company under this franchise where the city alleges that Company has failed to comply with the terms of this franchise. 
N.  Land Use Review. After approval of this franchise by the governing body, if Company proposes to construct additional telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way, Company shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.19 SFCC 1987 to the extent the functionality of any particular telecommunications facility is not impaired, which shall include, without limitation: 
1.  Application and Fees. This section applies to the activities of the Company in installing a new, replacement or modified utility pole associated with the collocation of a small wireless facility in a right-of-way. 
a.  The city shall process an application for a permit to install a new, replacement or modified utility pole associated with the collocation of a small wireless facility within one hundred fifty days after receiving the application. If the city fails to approve or deny the application within that period, the authority shall deem the application approved. The application fee for the installation, modification and, replacement of a utility pole shall be seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00). 
b.  This section applies to a wireless provider's collocation activities within a right-of-way. 
The Company shall pay an application fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each of up to five small wireless facilities and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional small wireless facility whose collocation is requested in a single application. 
2.  Additional Permits. In addition to the permits required set forth elsewhere in Article 27-2 and city code, the following permits are required from the city: 
a.  Street cut permits pursuant to Article 23-2 SFCC 1987; 
b.  Secondary electrical permits at each antenna or other facility site requiring secondary electrical service; and 
c.  Other permits as may be required. 
O.  Compliance with Law. 
1.  Company shall comply with the terms and conditions of Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 except as set forth herein, all other applicable city ordinances, and federal and state laws. 
2.  Company is explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, all other applicable governmental powers, and the city's rights under state and federal laws. 
P.  Severability. The requirements and provisions of this Ordinance and its sections, parts, subparts, paragraphs, and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, section, part, subpart, paragraph, or clause of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the Ordinance be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Q.  Effective Date; Publication. As provided by NMSA 1978, Section 3-42-1, this Ordinance shall not become effective until at least thirty (30) days after its adoption, during which time this Ordinance shall be twice published in full, not less than seven days apart. As required by law, Company shall pay the publication cost. 
R.  Acceptance. Company, within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, shall file with the city clerk an unconditional acceptance of this Ordinance, on a form prescribed by the city. Within ten (10) days after the filing of the acceptance, the city clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of Company's acceptance. If Company does not file said acceptance this Ordinance shall not be or become effective. 
S.  Notice. For the purpose of this Ordinance: 
1.  Notice to the city shall be to: 
City Manager 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
With a copy to: 
City Attorney 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
2.  Notice to Company will be to: 
Attn.: Legal Department 
Broadband Network of New Mexico, LLC 
660 Newport Center Drive, Suite 200 
Newport Beach, CA 92660 
With a copy to: 
Attn: Asset Management 
Broadband Network of New Mexico, LLC 
660 Newport Center Drive, Suite 200 
Newport Beach, CA 92660 
3.  Notice shall be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or Company notifies the other in writing, of a change in address. All notices shall be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the parties at their respective addresses set forth above. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 9 th day of May, 2018. 
      ALAN M. WEBBER, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
      YOLANDA Y. VIGIL, 
      CITY CLERK   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      GENO ZAMORA, INTERIM CITY ATTORNEY   
ARTICLE II. - COMPUTER NETWORK SERVICE PROFESSIONALS 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-13 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING COMPUTER NETWORK SERVICE PROFESSIONALS, INCORPORATED DBA NMSURF A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO OPERATE A TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITHIN THE CITY OF SANTA FE; THE RIGHT TO USE CITY PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO PROVIDE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 

Section 1. - Legislative Findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  The granting of a franchise to Computer Network Service Professionals, Incorporated dba NMSURF ("the Company"), is necessary for the access and use of public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city limits in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Telecommunications in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance, Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 ("Article 27-2"). 
B.  The granting of such a franchise permits competitively neutral and non-discriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for providers of telecommunications services; and allows the city to appropriately manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
C.  The granting of a franchise promotes competition among telecommunications services providers and encourages the universal availability of telecommunications services to residents and businesses of the city through the careful management of public rights-of-way. 
D.  It is the intent of the city in the granting of the franchise to obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way through the collection of fees and charges, and to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other adverse effects on the public rights-of-way by Company's commercial use of public rights-of-way. 
E.  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the granting of a franchise allows the city to exercise such other powers, as the city may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers who are residents of the city. 
F.  In accordance with Article 27-2, Company submitted an application for a franchise on January 15, 2015. 
G.  The city is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for telecommunications services within the city. 
H.  The city has reviewed Company's application and has determined that granting a franchise in accordance with Article 27-2 is in the public interest and in the interest of the city and its residents. 
I.  This franchise, as it relates to the city's costs, maintenance, management, and necessary regulation of public rights-of-way, will assist in meeting the telecommunications related needs and interests of the community. 
Section 2. - Franchise Terms. 
    In exchange for Company's compliance with the terms of this Ordinance, the provisions of Article 27-2, and other applicable city codes, there is hereby granted by the city to Company permission to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. All terms of Article 27-2 shall control Company's use of the public rights-of-way except as specifically set out in this Ordinance. 
A.  Short Title; Purpose; Applicability. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be cited as the "CNSP Franchise Ordinance". 
2.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to grant Company, the right, privilege, and authority to: 
a.  Furnish and distribute telecommunications services in the city, by means of its network, on, over, under, along and across public rights-of-way, now or hereafter included in the boundaries of the city as such boundaries now exist or may hereafter be extended; and 
b.  Construct, purchase, acquire, locate, maintain, and extend into, within, and through the city, a telecommunications network for the period and upon the terms and conditions specified in this franchise comprised of all facilities and equipment used by Company to provide telecommunications services, including but not limited to "Backhaul Equipment" and "Wireless Communication Equipment." 
This permission is not exclusive and does not prevent the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations or prevent the city itself from constructing or operating its own telecommunications network within the public rights-of-way, with or without a franchise. 
3.  This franchise applies to the placement of telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Bad Debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale of telecommunications at retail, for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. 
    Department means the department of public works. 
    Gross Charge. 
1.  Includes all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a Provider from or in connection with the Telecommunications Services offered within the city through or by means of a Telecommunications Network within the city, exclusive of any Franchise Fee or tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental agencies, received by the Provider for services provided to customers through use of the Network. Gross Charge shall include any revenue received by a Provider or any Affiliate through any means that is intended to have the effect of evading the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the city for Franchise Contract granted pursuant to this ordinance. 
2.  Gross Charge shall not include: 
a.  Proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgages, or other evidence of indebtedness, securities, or stocks; or 
b  Gross receipts taxes, bad debt write-offs, and customer credits; or 
c.  Revenue of any Affiliate or Provider from long distance service, commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, other wireless communications service, or directory advertising. Each of the above are not included in the definition of Gross Charge and, therefore, are not included in the calculation of any fee due under a Franchise. 
3.  Gross Charge shall not include the wholesale revenue of any Provider to the extent that the Person providing such wholesale revenue to the Provider pays to the city, pursuant to an agreement with the city, an annual Franchise Fee under  27-2.5, or an amount equivalent thereto, calculated on the basis of such Person's Gross Charge (as defined in this ordinance) from the provision of Telecommunications Service in the city. 
4.  Gross Charge shall be measured and monitored periodically. 
    Sale of Telecommunications at Retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this chapter previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service Address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the city where bills are sent. 
    Telecommunications Network. Any System which includes facilities and/or equipment placed in the Public Rights-of-Way and used to provide any Telecommunications Service. 
    Telecommunications. 
1.  All transmissions between or among points specified by the user of information of the user's choosing (whether voice, video, or data), without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished by means of a Telecommunications Network. 
2.  Telecommunications shall not include cable services as defined in Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as amended (47 USC  521 et seq.) and shall not include telecommunications services provided and used by a public utility as that term is defined at  62-3-3(G) NMSA 1978, or successor statute, for: 
a.  Its internal system communication needs; and 
b.  Provided directly or indirectly to its customers, including but not limited to electronic meter reading, load control, demand side management, power quality monitoring, and other activities related to the delivery of electricity or natural gas. 
    Telecommunications Provider ("Provider") means: 
1.  Any Person who provides any Telecommunications Service within the city by means of: 
a.  A Telecommunications Network owned by such Person or its Affiliate; 
b.  Specifically identifiable facilities of a Telecommunications Network reserved or made available for the use of such Person or its Affiliate under a lease or any other arrangement for a term longer than one hundred and twenty (120) days; or 
c.  Facilities of a Telecommunications Network not owned by such Person or its Affiliate and not specifically identifiable but obtained from another Person (including another Provider) if the use of such facilities is continuing and substantial. A Person owning or operating telecommunications facilities that merely pass through the city and such Person and facilities do not offer Telecommunications Service to subscribers within the city shall not be subject to this ordinance, provided that Person has received other appropriate authorization from the city to rent or occupy the Public Rights-of-Way. 
2.  Except to the extent that a Provider or a Person uses the Public Rights-of-Way, a Provider or any Person which provides commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, or other wireless communications service shall not be subject to this ordinance with respect to such service. 
    Telecommunications Service. The offering of Telecommunications within the city for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public. 
    Trenchless excavation means any line installation, replacement or rehabilitation through the use of boring, jacking, horizontal drilling or tunneling. 
    Wireless Telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
C.  Infrastructure Maintenance Franchise Fee. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority granted by section  3-42-1 NMSA 1978 and 47 U.S.C. 253(c), there is hereby imposed an infrastructure maintenance franchise fee upon the Company at the rate of two percent (2%) of all gross charges charged by the Company to a service address in the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
2.  The fee imposed by this chapter shall not be imposed in any circumstances in which the imposition of the fee would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States. 
D.  Filing Returns and Payment of Franchise Fee. 
1.  On or before the last day of each quarter, the Company is required to pay the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this chapter and shall file with the city a remittance return and shall pay the fee attributable to gross charges for the preceding quarter. The return shall contain such information as the director may reasonably require. 
2.  No later than February 28th of each year beginning in 2019, the Company shall provide to the city a report certified by an independent certified public accountant attesting to the amount of the infrastructure maintenance fees paid to the city for the preceding calendar year, and that such amount complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Collection of Additional Charges by Retailers. 
1.  When the Company makes or effectuates a sale of telecommunications at retail, it shall pay the infrastructure maintenance fee to the city as provided by subsection C, of this Section. The fee shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city. 
2.  The retailer may charge each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the infrastructure maintenance fee attributed to the customer's service address in the city. This additional charge to customers shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item on the bill to each customer separate and apart from the retailer's gross charges to its customers for telecommunications. 
3.  Each retailer may retain two percent (2%) of the additional charges it collects under this Section to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in connection with accounting for and remitting the fee to the city. 
F.  Registration of Providers and Resellers. 
1.  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing a franchise with the Company, the Company shall provide the name and address of every telecommunications reseller or other telecommunications company with whom the Company has a contractual relationship to provide telecommunications services or to make available telecommunications facilities in the public way. The Company shall have a continuing duty to file with the city, within forty-five (45) days after the date of occurrence of any changes in the information provided to the city, including the creation or termination of a contractual relationship described herein. 
2.  Resales. Whenever amounts are claimed to be excluded from gross charges as sales for resale, the reseller shall furnish to the Company the reseller's resale information. The Company shall retain the resale information with its books and records. 
G.  Maintaining Books and Records. The Company shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any liability or exemption. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection by the city with twenty-four (24) hour notice. 
H.  Insurance Requirements. Company shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.9 SFCC 1987, and Company shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this franchise the following types of insurance: 
1.  Commercial comprehensive general liability insurance; 
2.  Workers' Compensation insurance as required by law; and 
3.  Commercial automobile liability insurance providing a minimum coverage in the amount required under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act. 
I.  Term of Franchise. The term of this franchise, and the rights, privileges, and authority granted hereunder shall continue for a period of ten (10) years from the effective date hereof. The term of this franchise shall automatically be renewed annually unless Company provides notice to city of its intent not to renew at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the then current term. Company may surrender permits at any time and remove its telecommunications facilities at any particular location upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to city. Company shall not be obligated to pay the franchise fee for such location following removal of its telecommunications facilities. 
J.  Indemnity. Company and city agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless each other and its officials, agents, volunteers, and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or property arising out of or resulting from the activities of the indemnifying party pursuant to this franchise, except to the extent caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnitee or by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the indemnitee, or it's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or it's agents or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage. Neither party shall be liable to the other for consequential, indirect or punitive damages (including lost revenues, loss of service, or loss of data) for any cause of action, whether in contract, tort or otherwise, even if the party was or should have been aware of the possibility of these damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including negligence), strict liability or otherwise. The maximum liability of either party to the other hereunder shall be the amount paid or payable during the preceding twelve (12) months. 
K.  Violations and Penalties. If the Company fails to pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee, as provided by this Chapter, the Company shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the failure to pay continues. Each day that the Company fails to pay shall constitute a separate and distinct violation under this Chapter. Any retailer that becomes subject to this fine may be enjoined from doing business in the city until the Company has paid all sums due under this Chapter. 
    Any telecommunications company who otherwise violates this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
L.  Dispute Resolution Provision. 
1.  In the event of any other dispute arising from or relating to the franchise or breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations, the following process will be followed during which any of the above remedies and penalties may be imposed. 
2.  All disputes will be mediated prior to litigation. The costs of such mediation will be equally split. The place of the mediation session shall be in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The city and the Company will select a mediator or mediators by mutual agreement and, in cooperation with the mediator(s), shall determine all necessary rules and procedures for the mediation. The city and the Company will fully cooperate in the mediation activities. All mediation communications shall be confidential, not subject to disclosure and shall not be used as evidence in any arbitration, judicial, or administrative proceeding, as set forth in the Mediation Procedures Act, NMSA 1978,  44-7b-1 through 44-7b-6. 
M.  Unauthorized Use of Public Rights-of-Way Unlawful. In accordance with Section 27-2.12 SFCC 1987, Company shall not: 
1.  Use public rights-of-way without authorization to provide telecommunications services. 
2.  Place facilities on public structures or public utility infrastructure to provide telecommunications services which are not allowed under the terms of this franchise. 
    Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to any dispute between the city and Company under this franchise where the city alleges that Company has failed to comply with the terms of this franchise. 
N.  Land Use Review. After approval of this franchise by the governing body, if Company proposes to construct additional telecommunications facilities the applicant shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.19. 
O.  Compliance with Law. 
1.  Company and city shall comply with the terms and conditions of Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 except as set forth herein, all other applicable city ordinances, and federal and state laws. 
2.  Company is explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, all other applicable governmental powers, and the city's rights under state and federal laws. 
P.  Severability. The requirements and provisions of this Ordinance and its sections, parts, subparts, paragraphs, and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, section, part, subpart, paragraph, or clause of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the Ordinance be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Q.  Effective Date; Publication. As provided by NMSA 1978, Section 3-42-1, this Ordinance shall not become effective until at least thirty (30) days after its adoption, during which time this Ordinance shall be twice published in full, not less than seven days apart. As required by law, Company shall pay the publication cost. 
R.  Acceptance. Company, within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, shall file with the city clerk an unconditional acceptance of this Ordinance, on a form prescribed by the city. Within ten (10) days after the filing of the acceptance, the city clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of Company's acceptance. If Company does not file said acceptance this Ordinance shall not be or become effective. 
S.  Notice. For the purpose of this Ordinance: 
1.  Notice to the city shall be to: 
City Manager 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
With a copy to: 
City Attorney 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
2.  Notice to Company will be to: 
Attn.: Albert Catanach, President 
CNSP 
1308 Apache Avenue 
Santa Fe, NM 87505 
3.  Notice shall be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or Company notifies the other in writing, of a change in address. All notices shall be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the parties at their respective addresses set forth above. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 9 th day of May, 2018. 
      ALAN M. WEBBER, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
      YOLANDA Y. VIGIL, 
      CITY CLERK   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      GENO ZAMORA, INTERIM CITY ATTORNEY   
ARTICLE III. - CONTERRA ULTRA BROADBAND, LLC 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-14 
AN ORDINANCE 
GRANTING CONTERRA ULTRA BROADBAND, LLC A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO OPERATE A TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITHIN THE CITY OF SANTA FE; THE RIGHT TO USE CITY PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO PROVIDE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 

Section 1. - Legislative Findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  The granting of a franchise to Conterra Ultra Broadband, LLC ("the Company"), is necessary for the access and use of public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city limits in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Telecommunications in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance, Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 ("Article 27-2"). 
B.  The granting of such a franchise permits competitively neutral and non-discriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for providers of telecommunications services; and allows the city to appropriately manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
C.  The granting of a franchise promotes competition among telecommunications services providers and encourages the universal availability of telecommunications services to residents and businesses of the city through the careful management of public rights-of-way. 
D.  It is the intent of the city in the granting of the franchise to obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way through the collection of fees and charges, and to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other adverse effects on the public rights-of-way by Company's commercial use of public rights-of-way. 
E.  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the granting of a franchise allows the city to exercise such other powers, as the city may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers who are residents of the city. 
F.  In accordance with Article 27-2, Company submitted an application for a franchise on November 21, 2017. 
G.  The city is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for telecommunications services within the city. 
H.  The city has reviewed Company's application and has determined that granting a franchise in accordance with Article 27-2 is in the public interest and in the interest of the city and its residents. 
I.  This franchise, as it relates to the city's costs, maintenance, management, and necessary regulation of public rights-of-way, will assist in meeting the telecommunications related needs and interests of the community. 
Section 2. - Franchise Terms. 
    In exchange for Company's compliance with the terms of this Ordinance, the provisions of Article 27-2, and other applicable city codes, there is hereby granted by the city to Company permission to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. All terms of Article 27-2 shall control Company's use of the public rights-of-way except as specifically set out in this Ordinance. 
A.  Short Title; Purpose; Applicability. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be cited as the "Conterra Ultra Broadband Franchise Ordinance". 
2.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to grant Company, the right, privilege, and authority to: 
a.  Furnish and distribute telecommunications services in the city, by means of its network, on, over, under, along and across public rights-of-way, now or hereafter included in the boundaries of the city as such boundaries now exist or may hereafter be extended; and 
b.  Construct, purchase, acquire, locate, maintain, and extend into, within, and through the city, a telecommunications network for the period and upon the terms and conditions specified in this franchise comprised of all facilities and equipment used by Company to provide telecommunications services, including but not limited to "Backhaul Equipment" and "Wireless Communication Equipment." 
This permission is not exclusive and does not prevent the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations or prevent the city itself from constructing or operating its own telecommunications network within the public rights-of-way, with or without a franchise. 
3.  This franchise applies to the placement of telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Bad Debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale of telecommunications at retail, for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. 
    Department means the department of public works. 
    Gross Charge. 
1.  Includes all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a Provider from or in connection with the Telecommunications Services offered within the city through or by means of a Telecommunications Network within the city, exclusive of any Franchise Fee or tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental agencies, received by the Provider for services provided to customers through use of the Network. Gross Charge shall include any revenue received by a Provider or any Affiliate through any means that is intended to have the effect of evading the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the city for Franchise Contract granted pursuant to this ordinance. 
2.  Gross Charge shall not include: 
a.  Proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgages, or other evidence of indebtedness, securities, or stocks; or 
b.  Gross receipts taxes, bad debt write-offs, and customer credits; or 
c.  Revenue of any Affiliate or Provider from long distance service, commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, other wireless communications service, or directory advertising. 
Each of the above are not included in the definition of Gross Charge and, therefore, are not included in the calculation of any fee due under a Franchise. 
3.  Gross Charge shall not include the wholesale revenue of any Provider to the extent that the Person providing such wholesale revenue to the Provider pays to the city, pursuant to an agreement with the city, an annual Franchise Fee under  27-2.5, or an amount equivalent thereto, calculated on the basis of such Person's Gross Charge (as defined in this ordinance) from the provision of Telecommunications Service in the city. 
4.  Gross Charge shall be measured and monitored periodically. 
    Sale of Telecommunications at Retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this chapter previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service Address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the city where bills are sent. 
    Telecommunications Network. Any System which includes facilities and/or equipment placed in the Public Rights-of-Way and used to provide any Telecommunications Service. 
    Telecommunications. 
1.  All transmissions between or among points specified by the user of information of the user's choosing (whether voice, video, or data), without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished by means of a Telecommunications Network. 
2.  Telecommunications shall not include cable services as defined in Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as amended (47 USC  521 et seq.) and shall not include telecommunications services provided and used by a public utility as that term is defined at  62-3-3(G) NMSA 1978, or successor statute, for: 
a.  Its internal system communication needs; and 
b.  Provided directly or indirectly to its customers, including but not limited to electronic meter reading, load control, demand side management, power quality monitoring, and other activities related to the delivery of electricity or natural gas. 
    Telecommunications Provider ("Provider") means: 
1.  Any Person who provides any Telecommunications Service within the city by means of: 
a.  A Telecommunications Network owned by such Person or its Affiliate; 
b.  Specifically identifiable facilities of a Telecommunications Network reserved or made available for the use of such Person or its Affiliate under a lease or any other arrangement for a term longer than one hundred and twenty (120) days; or 
c.  Facilities of a Telecommunications Network not owned by such Person or its Affiliate and not specifically identifiable but obtained from another Person (including another Provider) if the use of such facilities is continuing and substantial. A Person owning or operating telecommunications facilities that merely pass through the city and such Person and facilities do not offer Telecommunications Service to subscribers within the city shall not be subject to this ordinance, provided that Person has received other appropriate authorization from the city to rent or occupy the Public Rights-of-Way. 
2.  Except to the extent that a Provider or a Person uses the Public Rights-of-Way, a Provider or any Person which provides commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, or other wireless communications service shall not be subject to this ordinance with respect to such service. 
    Telecommunications Service. The offering of Telecommunications within the city for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public. 
    Trenchless excavation means any line installation, replacement or rehabilitation through the use of boring, jacking, horizontal drilling or tunneling. 
    Wireless Telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
C.  Infrastructure Maintenance Franchise Fee. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority granted by section  3-42-1 NMSA 1978 and 47 U.S.C. 253(c), there is hereby imposed an infrastructure maintenance franchise fee upon the Company at the rate of two percent (2%) of all gross charges charged by the Company to a service address in the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
2.  The fee imposed by this Chapter shall not be imposed in any circumstances in which the imposition of the fee would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States. 
D.  Filing Returns and Payment of Franchise Fee. 
1.  On or before the last day of each quarter, the Company is required to pay the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this Section and shall file with the city a remittance return and shall pay the fee attributable to gross charges for the preceding quarter. The return shall contain such information as the director may reasonably require. 
2.  No later than February 28th of each year beginning in 2019, the Company shall provide to the city a report certified by an independent certified public accountant attesting to the amount of the infrastructure maintenance fees paid to the city for the preceding calendar year, and that such amount complies with the requirements of this Chapter. 
E.  Collection of Additional Charges by Retailers. 
1.  When the Company makes or effectuates a sale of telecommunications at retail, it shall pay the infrastructure maintenance fee to the city as provided by subsection C, of this Section. The fee shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city. 
2.  The retailer may charge each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the infrastructure maintenance fee attributed to the customer's service address in the city. This additional charge to customers shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item on the bill to each customer separate and apart from the retailer's gross charges to its customers for telecommunications. 
3.  Each retailer may retain two percent (2%) of the additional charges it collects under this Section to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in connection with accounting for and remitting the fee to the city. 
F.  Registration of Providers and Resellers. 
1.  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing a franchise with the Company, the Company shall provide the name and address of every telecommunications reseller or other telecommunications company with whom the Company has a contractual relationship to provide telecommunications services or to make available telecommunications facilities in the public way. The Company shall have a continuing duty to file with the city, within forty-five (45) days after the date of occurrence of any changes in the information provided to the city, including the creation or termination of a contractual relationship described herein. 
2.  Resales. Whenever amounts are claimed to be excluded from gross charges as sales for resale, the reseller shall furnish to the Company the reseller's resale information. The Company shall retain the resale information with its books and records. 
G.  Maintaining Books and Records. The Company shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any liability or exemption. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection by the city with twenty-four (24) hour notice. 
H.  Insurance Requirements. Company shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.9 SFCC 1987, and Company shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this franchise the following types of insurance: 
1.  Commercial comprehensive general liability insurance; 
2.  Workers' Compensation insurance as required by law; and 
3.  Commercial automobile liability insurance providing a minimum coverage in the amount required under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act. 
I.  Term of Franchise. The term of this franchise, and the rights, privileges, and authority granted hereunder shall continue for a period of ten (10) years from the effective date hereof. The term of this franchise shall automatically be renewed annually unless Company provides notice to city of its intent not to renew at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the then current term. Company may surrender permits at any time and remove its telecommunications facilities at any particular location upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to city. Company shall not be obligated to pay the franchise fee for such location following removal of its telecommunications facilities. 
J.  Indemnity. Company and city agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless each other and its officials, agents, volunteers, and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or property arising out of or resulting from the activities of the indemnifying party pursuant to this franchise, except to the extent caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnitee or by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the indemnitee, or it's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or its agents or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage. Neither party shall be liable to the other for consequential, indirect or punitive damages (including lost revenues, loss of service, or loss of data) for any cause of action, whether in contract, tort or otherwise, even if the party was or should have been aware of the possibility of these damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including negligence), strict liability or otherwise. The maximum liability of either party to the other hereunder shall be the amount paid or payable during the preceding twelve (12) months. 
K.  Violations and Penalties. If the Company fails to pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee, as provided by this Chapter, the Company shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the failure to pay continues. Each day that the Company fails to pay shall constitute a separate and distinct violation under this Chapter. Any retailer that becomes subject to this fine may be enjoined from doing business in the city until the Company has paid all sums due under this Chapter. 
    Any telecommunications company who otherwise violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
L.  Dispute Resolution Provision. 
1.  In the event of any other dispute arising from or relating to the franchise or breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations, the following process will be followed during which any of the above remedies and penalties may be imposed. 
2.  All disputes will be mediated prior to litigation. The costs of such mediation will be equally split. The place of the mediation session shall be in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The city and the Company will select a mediator or mediators by mutual agreement and, in cooperation with the mediator(s), shall determine all necessary rules and procedures for the mediation. The city and the Company will fully cooperate in the mediation activities. All mediation communications shall be confidential, not subject to disclosure and shall not be used as evidence in any arbitration, judicial, or administrative proceeding, as set forth in the Mediation Procedures Act, NMSA 1978,  44-7b-1 through 44-7b-6. 
M.  Unauthorized Use of Public Rights-of-Way Unlawful. In accordance with Section 27-2.12 SFCC 1987, Company shall not: 
1.  Use public rights-of-way without authorization to provide telecommunications services. 
2.  Place facilities on public structures or public utility infrastructure to provide telecommunications services which are not allowed under the terms of this franchise. 
    Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to any dispute between the city and Company under this franchise where the city alleges that Company has failed to comply with the terms of this franchise. 
N.  Land Use Review. After approval of this franchise by the governing body, if Company proposes to construct additional telecommunications facilities the applicant shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.19. 
O.  Compliance with Law. 
1.  Company and city shall comply with the terms and conditions of Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 except as set forth herein, all other applicable city ordinances, and federal and state laws. 
2.  Company is explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, all other applicable governmental powers, and the city's rights under state and federal laws. 
P.  Severability. The requirements and provisions of this Ordinance and its sections, parts, subparts, paragraphs, and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, section, part, subpart, paragraph, or clause of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the Ordinance be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Q.  Effective Date; Publication. As provided by NMSA 1978, Section 3-42-1, this Ordinance shall not become effective until at least thirty (30) days after its adoption, during which time this Ordinance shall be twice published in full, not less than seven days apart. As required by law, Company shall pay the publication cost. 
R.  Acceptance. Company, within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, shall file with the city clerk an unconditional acceptance of this Ordinance, on a form prescribed by the city. Within ten (10) days after the filing of the acceptance, the city clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of Company's acceptance. If Company does not file said acceptance this Ordinance shall not be or become effective. 
S.  Notice. For the purpose of this Ordinance: 
1.  Notice to the city shall be to: 
City Manager 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
With a copy to: 
City Attorney 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
2.  Notice to Company will be to: 
Attn.: Legal Department 
Conterra Ultra Broadband, LLC 
2101 Rexford Road 
Suite 200E 
Charlotte, NC 28211 
3.  Notice shall be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or Company notifies the other in writing, of a change in address. All notices shall be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the parties at their respective addresses set forth above. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 9 th day of May, 2018. 
      ALAN M. WEBBER, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
      YOLANDA Y. VIGIL, 
      CITY CLERK   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      GENO ZAMORA, INTERIM CITY ATTORNEY   
ARTICLE IV. - CYBER MESA COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-15 
AN ORDINANCE 
GRANTING CYBER MESA COMPUTER SYSTEMS, INCORPORATED A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO OPERATE A TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITHIN THE CITY OF SANTA FE; THE RIGHT TO USE CITY PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO PROVIDE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 

Section 1. - Legislative Findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  The granting of a franchise to Cyber Mesa Computer Systems, Inc. ("the Company"), is necessary for the access and use of public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city limits in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Telecommunications in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance, Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 ("Article 27-2"). 
B.  The granting of such a franchise permits competitively neutral and non-discriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for providers of telecommunications services; and allows the city to appropriately manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
C.  The granting of a franchise promotes competition among telecommunications services providers and encourages the universal availability of telecommunications services to residents and businesses of the city through the careful management of public rights-of-way. 
D.  It is the intent of the city in the granting of the franchise to obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way through the collection of fees and charges, and to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other adverse effects on the public rights-of-way by Company's commercial use of public rights-of-way. 
E.  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the granting of a franchise allows the city to exercise such other powers, as the city may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers who are residents of the city. 
F.  In accordance with Article 27-2, Company submitted an application for a franchise on September 7, 2012. 
G.  The city is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for telecommunications services within the city. 
H.  The city has reviewed Company's application and has determined that granting a franchise in accordance with Article 27-2 is in the public interest and in the interest of the city and its residents. 
I.  This franchise, as it relates to the city's costs, maintenance, management, and necessary regulation of public rights-of-way, will assist in meeting the telecommunications related needs and interests of the community. 
Section 2. - Franchise Terms. 
    In exchange for Company's compliance with the terms of this Ordinance, the provisions of Article 27-2, and other applicable city codes, there is hereby granted by the city to Company permission to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. All terms of Article 27-2 shall control Company's use of the public rights-of-way except as specifically set out in this Ordinance. 
A.  Short Title; Purpose; Applicability. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be cited as the "Cyber Mesa Franchise Ordinance". 
2.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to grant Company, the right, privilege, and authority to: 
a.  Furnish and distribute telecommunications services in the city, by means of its network, on, over, under, along and across public rights-of-way, now or hereafter included in the boundaries of the city as such boundaries now exist or may hereafter be extended; and 
b.  Construct, purchase, acquire, locate, maintain, and extend into, within, and through the city, a telecommunications network for the period and upon the terms and conditions specified in this franchise comprised of all facilities and equipment used by Company to provide telecommunications services, including but not limited to "Backhaul Equipment" and "Wireless Communication Equipment." 
This permission is not exclusive and does not prevent the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations or prevent the city itself from constructing or operating its own telecommunications network within the public rights-of-way, with or without a franchise. 
3.  This franchise applies to the placement of telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Bad Debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale of telecommunications at retail, for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. 
    Department means the department of public works. 
    Gross Charge. 
1.  Includes all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a Provider from or in connection with the Telecommunications Services offered within the city through or by means of a Telecommunications Network within the city, exclusive of any Franchise Fee or tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental agencies, received by the Provider for services provided to customers through use of the Network. Gross Charge shall include any revenue received by a Provider or any Affiliate through any means that is intended to have the effect of evading the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the city for Franchise Contract granted pursuant to this ordinance. 
2.  Gross Charge shall not include: 
a.  Proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgages, or other evidence of indebtedness, securities, or stocks; or 
b.  Gross receipts taxes, bad debt write-offs, and customer credits; or 
c.  Revenue of any Affiliate or Provider from long distance service, commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, other wireless communications service, or directory advertising. Each of the above are not included in the definition of Gross Charge and, therefore, are not included in the calculation of any fee due under a Franchise. 
3.  Gross Charge shall not include the wholesale revenue of any Provider to the extent that the Person providing such wholesale revenue to the Provider pays to the city, pursuant to an agreement with the city, an annual Franchise Fee under  27-2.5, or an amount equivalent thereto, calculated on the basis of such Person's Gross Charge (as defined in this ordinance) from the provision of Telecommunications Service in the city. 
4.  Gross Charge shall be measured and monitored periodically. 
    Sale of Telecommunications at Retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this chapter previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service Address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the city where bills are sent. 
    Telecommunications Network. Any System which includes facilities and/or equipment placed in the Public Rights-of-Way and used to provide any Telecommunications Service. 
    Telecommunications. 
1.  All transmissions between or among points specified by the user of information of the user's choosing (whether voice, video, or data), without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished by means of a Telecommunications Network. 
2.  Telecommunications shall not include cable services as defined in Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as amended (47 USC  521 et seq.) and shall not include telecommunications services provided and used by a public utility as that term is defined at  62-3-3(G) NMSA 1978, or successor statute, for: 
a.  Its internal system communication needs; and 
b.  Provided directly or indirectly to its customers, including but not limited to electronic meter reading, load control, demand side management, power quality monitoring, and other activities related to the delivery of electricity or natural gas. 
    Telecommunications Provider ("Provider") means: 
1.  Any Person who provides any Telecommunications Service within the city by means of: 
a.  A Telecommunications Network owned by such Person or its Affiliate; 
b.  Specifically identifiable facilities of a Telecommunications Network reserved or made available for the use of such Person or its Affiliate under a lease or any other arrangement for a term longer than one hundred and twenty (120) days; or 
c.  Facilities of a Telecommunications Network not owned by such Person or its Affiliate and not specifically identifiable but obtained from another Person (including another Provider) if the use of such facilities is continuing and substantial. A Person owning or operating telecommunications facilities that merely pass through the city and such Person and facilities do not offer Telecommunications Service to subscribers within the city shall not be subject to this ordinance, provided that Person has received other appropriate authorization from the city to rent or occupy the Public Rights-of-Way. 
2.  Except to the extent that a Provider or a Person uses the Public Rights-of-Way, a Provider or any Person which provides commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, or other wireless communications service shall not be subject to this ordinance with respect to such service. 
    Telecommunications Service. The offering of Telecommunications within the city for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public. 
    Trenchless excavation means any line installation, replacement or rehabilitation through the use of boring, jacking, horizontal drilling or tunneling. 
    Wireless Telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
C.  Infrastructure Maintenance Franchise Fee. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority granted by section  3-42-1 NMSA 1978 and 47 U.S.C. 253(c), there is hereby imposed an infrastructure maintenance franchise fee upon the Company at the rate of two percent (2%) of all gross charges charged by the Company to a service address in the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
2.  The fee imposed by this Section shall not be imposed in any circumstances in which the imposition of the fee would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States. 
D.  Filing Returns and Payment of Franchise Fee. 
1.  On or before the last day of each quarter, the Company is required to pay the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this Section and shall file with the city a remittance return and shall pay the fee attributable to gross charges for the preceding quarter. The return shall contain such information as the director may reasonably require. 
2.  No later than February 28th of each year beginning in 2019, the Company shall provide to the city a report certified by an independent certified public accountant attesting to the amount of the infrastructure maintenance fees paid to the city for the preceding calendar year, and that such amount complies with the requirements of this Chapter. 
E.  Collection of Additional Charges by Retailers. 
1.  When the Company makes or effectuates a sale of telecommunications at retail, it shall pay the infrastructure maintenance fee to the city as provided by subsection C, of this Section. The fee shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city. 
2.  The retailer may charge each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the infrastructure maintenance fee attributed to the customer's service address in the city. This additional charge to customers shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item on the bill to each customer separate and apart from the retailer's gross charges to its customers for telecommunications. 
3.  Each retailer may retain two percent (2%) of the additional charges it collects under this Section to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in connection with accounting for and remitting the fee to the city. 
F.  Registration of Providers and Resellers. 
1.  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing a franchise with the Company, the Company shall provide the name and address of every telecommunications reseller or other telecommunications company with whom the Company has a contractual relationship to provide telecommunications services or to make available telecommunications facilities in the public way. The Company shall have a continuing duty to file with the city, within forty-five (45) days after the date of occurrence of any changes in the information provided to the city, including the creation or termination of a contractual relationship described herein. 
2.  Resales. Whenever amounts are claimed to be excluded from gross charges as sales for resale, the reseller shall furnish to the Company the reseller's resale information. The Company shall retain the resale information with its books and records. 
G.  Maintaining Books and Records. The Company shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any liability or exemption. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection by the city with twenty-four (24) hour notice. 
H.  Insurance Requirements. Company shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.9 SFCC 1987, and Company shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this franchise the following types of insurance: 
a.  Commercial comprehensive general liability insurance; 
b.  Workers' Compensation insurance as required by law; and 
c.  Commercial automobile liability insurance providing a minimum coverage in the amount required under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act. 
I.  Term of Franchise. The term of this franchise, and the rights, privileges, and authority granted hereunder shall continue for a period of ten (10) years from the effective date hereof. The term of this franchise shall automatically be renewed annually unless Company provides notice to city of its intent not to renew at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the then current term. Company may surrender permits at any time and remove its telecommunications facilities at any particular location upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to city. Company shall not be obligated to pay the franchise fee for such location following removal of its telecommunications facilities. 
J.  Indemnity. Company and city agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless each other and its officials, agents, volunteers, and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or property arising out of or resulting from the activities of the indemnifying party pursuant to this franchise, except to the extent caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnitee or by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the indemnitee, or it's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or its agents or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage. Neither party shall be liable to the other for consequential, indirect or punitive damages (including lost revenues, loss of service, or loss of data) for any cause of action, whether in contract, tort or otherwise, even if the party was or should have been aware of the possibility of these damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including negligence), strict liability or otherwise. The maximum liability of either party to the other hereunder shall be the amount paid or payable during the preceding twelve (12) months. 
K.  Violations and Penalties. If the Company fails to pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee, as provided by this Chapter, the Company shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the failure to pay continues. Each day that the Company fails to pay shall constitute a separate and distinct violation under this Chapter. Any retailer that becomes subject to this fine may be enjoined from doing business in the city until the Company has paid all sums due under this Chapter. 
    Any telecommunications company who otherwise violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
L.  Dispute Resolution Provision. 
1.  In the event of any other dispute arising from or relating to the franchise or breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations, the following process will be followed during which any of the above remedies and penalties may be imposed. 
2.  All disputes will be mediated prior to litigation. The costs of such mediation will be equally split. The place of the mediation session shall be in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The city and the Company will select a mediator or mediators by mutual agreement and, in cooperation with the mediator(s), shall determine all necessary rules and procedures for the mediation. The city and the Company will fully cooperate in the mediation activities. All mediation communications shall be confidential, not subject to disclosure and shall not be used as evidence in any arbitration, judicial, or administrative proceeding, as set forth in the Mediation Procedures Act, NMSA 1978,  44-7b-1 through 44-7b-6. 
M.  Unauthorized Use of Public Rights-of-Way Unlawful. In accordance with Section 27-2.12 SFCC 1987, Company shall not: 
1.  Use public rights-of-way without authorization to provide telecommunications services. 
2.  Place facilities on public structures or public utility infrastructure to provide telecommunications services which are not allowed under the terms of this franchise. 
    Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to any dispute between the city and Company under this franchise where the city alleges that Company has failed to comply with the terms of this franchise. 
N.  Land Use Review. After approval of this franchise by the governing body, if Company proposes to construct additional telecommunications facilities the applicant shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.19. 
O.  Compliance with Law. 
1.  Company and city shall comply with the terms and conditions of Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 except as set forth herein, all other applicable city ordinances, and federal and state laws. 
2.  Company is explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, all other applicable governmental powers, and the city's rights under state and federal laws. 
P.  Severability. The requirements and provisions of this Ordinance and its sections, parts, subparts, paragraphs, and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, section, part, subpart, paragraph, or clause of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the Ordinance be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Q.  Effective Date; Publication. As provided by NMSA 1978, Section 3-42-1, this Ordinance shall not become effective until at least thirty (30) days after its adoption, during which time this Ordinance shall be twice published in full, not less than seven days apart. As required by law, Company shall pay the publication cost. 
R.  Acceptance. Company, within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, shall file with the city clerk an unconditional acceptance of this Ordinance, on a form prescribed by the city. Within ten (10) days after the filing of the acceptance, the city clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of Company's acceptance. If Company does not file said acceptance this Ordinance shall not be or become effective. 
S.  Notice. For the purpose of this Ordinance: 
1.  Notice to the city shall be to: 
City Manager 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
With a copy to: 
City Attorney 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
2.  Notice to Company will be to: 
Attn.: Jane Hill, President 
Cyber Mesa Computer Systems, Inc. 
4200 Rodeo Road 
Santa Fe, NM 87507 
3.  Notice shall be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or Company notifies the other in writing, of a change in address. All notices shall be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the parties at their respective addresses set forth above. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 9 th day of May, 2018. 
      ALAN M. WEBBER, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
      YOLANDA Y. VIGIL, 
      CITY CLERK   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      GENO ZAMORA, INTERIM CITY ATTORNEY   
ARTICLE V. - PLATEAU TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-16 
AN ORDINANCE 
GRANTING PLATEAU TELECOMMUNICATIONS, INCORPORATED A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO OPERATE A TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK WITHIN THE CITY OF SANTA FE; THE RIGHT TO USE CITY PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO PROVIDE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY; AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS THEREOF. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 

Section 1. - Legislative Findings. 
    The governing body of the city of Santa Fe finds that: 
A.  The granting of a franchise to Plateau Telecommunications, Incorporated ("the Company"), is necessary for the access and use of public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city limits in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Telecommunications in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance, Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 ("Article 27-2"). 
B.  The granting of such a franchise permits competitively neutral and non-discriminatory access to the public rights-of-way for providers of telecommunications services; and allows the city to appropriately manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the impact and cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
C.  The granting of a franchise promotes competition among telecommunications services providers and encourages the universal availability of telecommunications services to residents and businesses of the city through the careful management of public rights-of-way. 
D.  It is the intent of the city in the granting of the franchise to obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way through the collection of fees and charges, and to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other adverse effects on the public rights-of-way by Company's commercial use of public rights-of-way. 
E.  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the granting of a franchise allows the city to exercise such other powers, as the city may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers who are residents of the city. 
F.  In accordance with Article 27-2, Company submitted an application for a franchise on September 8, 2011. 
G.  The city is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for telecommunications services within the city. 
H.  The city has reviewed Company's application and has determined that granting a franchise in accordance with Article 27-2 is in the public interest and in the interest of the city and its residents. 
I.  This franchise, as it relates to the city's costs, maintenance, management, and necessary regulation of public rights-of-way, will assist in meeting the telecommunications related needs and interests of the community. 
Section 2. - Franchise Terms. 
    In exchange for Company's compliance with the terms of this Ordinance, the provisions of Article 27-2, and other applicable city codes, there is hereby granted by the city to Company permission to use public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services. All terms of Article 27-2 shall control Company's use of the public rights-of-way except as specifically set out in this Ordinance. 
A.  Short Title; Purpose; Applicability. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be cited as the "Plateau Telecommunications Franchise Ordinance". 
2.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to grant Company, the right, privilege, and authority to: 
a.  Furnish and distribute telecommunications services in the city, by means of its network, on, over, under, along and across public rights-of-way, now or hereafter included in the boundaries of the city as such boundaries now exist or may hereafter be extended; and 
b.  Construct, purchase, acquire, locate, maintain, and extend into, within, and through the city, a telecommunications network for the period and upon the terms and conditions specified in this franchise comprised of all facilities and equipment used by Company to provide telecommunications services, including but not limited to "Backhaul Equipment" and "Wireless Communication Equipment." 
This permission is not exclusive and does not prevent the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations or prevent the city itself from constructing or operating its own telecommunications network within the public rights-of-way, with or without a franchise. 
3.  This franchise applies to the placement of telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way. 
B.  Definitions. 
    Bad Debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale of telecommunications at retail, for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that has become worthless or uncollectible as determined under applicable federal income tax standards. 
    Department means the department of public works. 
    Gross Charge. 
1.  Includes all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a Provider from or in connection with the Telecommunications Services offered within the city through or by means of a Telecommunications Network within the city, exclusive of any Franchise Fee or tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental agencies, received by the Provider for services provided to customers through use of the Network. Gross Charge shall include any revenue received by a Provider or any Affiliate through any means that is intended to have the effect of evading the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the city for Franchise Contract granted pursuant to this ordinance. 
2.  Gross Charge shall not include: 
a.  Proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgages, or other evidence of indebtedness, securities, or stocks; or 
b.  Gross receipts taxes, bad debt write-offs, and customer credits; or 
c.  Revenue of any Affiliate or Provider from long distance service, commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, other wireless communications service, or directory advertising. Each of the above are not included in the definition of Gross Charge and, therefore, are not included in the calculation of any fee due under a Franchise. 
3.  Gross Charge shall not include the wholesale revenue of any Provider to the extent that the Person providing such wholesale revenue to the Provider pays to the city, pursuant to an agreement with the city, an annual Franchise Fee under Section 27-2.5, or an amount equivalent thereto, calculated on the basis of such Person's Gross Charge (as defined in this ordinance) from the provision of Telecommunications Service in the city. 
4.  Gross Charge shall be measured and monitored periodically. 
    Sale of Telecommunications at Retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this Chapter previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for use or consumption and not for resale. 
    Service Address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this location is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in the city where bills are sent. 
    Telecommunications Network. Any System which includes facilities and/or equipment placed in the Public Rights-of-Way and used to provide any Telecommunications Service. 
    Telecommunications. 
1.  All transmissions between or among points specified by the user of information of the user's choosing (whether voice, video, or data), without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished by means of a Telecommunications Network. 
2.  Telecommunications shall not include cable services as defined in Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as amended (47 USC  521 et seq.) and shall not include telecommunications services provided and used by a public utility as that term is defined at  62-3-3(G) NMSA 1978, or successor statute, for 
a.  Its internal system communication needs; and 
b.  Provided directly or indirectly to its customers, including but not limited to electronic meter reading, load control, demand side management, power quality monitoring, and other activities related to the delivery of electricity or natural gas. 
    Telecommunications Provider ("Provider") means: 
1.  Any Person who provides any Telecommunications Service within the city by means of: 
a.  A Telecommunications Network owned by such Person or its Affiliate; 
b.  Specifically identifiable facilities of a Telecommunications Network reserved or made available for the use of such Person or its Affiliate under a lease or any other arrangement for a term longer than one hundred and twenty (120) days; or 
c.  Facilities of a Telecommunications Network not owned by such Person or its Affiliate and not specifically identifiable but obtained from another Person (including another Provider) if the use of such facilities is continuing and substantial. A Person owning or operating telecommunications facilities that merely pass through the city and such Person and facilities do not offer Telecommunications Service to subscribers within the city shall not be subject to this Ordinance, provided that Person has received other appropriate authorization from the city to rent or occupy the Public Rights-of-Way. 
2.  Except to the extent that a Provider or a Person uses the Public Rights-of-Way, a Provider or any Person which provides commercial mobile radio service, cellular, personal communications service, or other wireless communications service shall not be subject to this ordinance with respect to such service. 
    Telecommunications Service. The offering of Telecommunications within the city for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public. 
    Trenchless excavation means any line installation, replacement or rehabilitation through the use of boring, jacking, horizontal drilling or tunneling. 
    Wireless Telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law Number 104-104), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
C.  Infrastructure Maintenance Franchise Fee. 
1.  Pursuant to the authority granted by section  3-42-1 NMSA 1978 and 47 U.S.C.  253(c), there is hereby imposed an infrastructure maintenance franchise fee upon the Company at the rate of two percent (2%) of all gross charges charged by the Company to a service address in the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
2.  The fee imposed by this Section shall not be imposed in any circumstances in which the imposition of the fee would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States. 
D.  Filing Returns and Payment of Franchise Fee. 
1.  On or before the last day of each quarter, the Company is required to pay the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this Section and shall file with the city a remittance return and shall pay the fee attributable to gross charges for the preceding quarter. The return shall contain such information as the director may reasonably require. 
2.  No later than February 28th of each year beginning in 2019, the Company shall provide to the city a report certified by an independent certified public accountant attesting to the amount of the infrastructure maintenance fees paid to the city for the preceding calendar year, and that such amount complies with the requirements of this Section. 
E.  Collection of Additional Charges by Retailers. 
1.  When the Company makes or effectuates a sale of telecommunications at retail, it shall pay the infrastructure maintenance fee to the city as provided by subsection C, of this Section. The fee shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the city. 
2.  The retailer may charge each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the infrastructure maintenance fee attributed to the customer's service address in the city. This additional charge to customers shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item on the bill to each customer separate and apart from the retailer's gross charges to its customers for telecommunications. 
3.  Each retailer may retain two percent (2%) of the additional charges it collects under this Chapter to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in connection with accounting for and remitting the fee to the city. 
F.  Registration of Providers and Resellers. 
1.  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing a franchise with the Company, the Company shall provide the name and address of every telecommunications reseller or other telecommunications company with whom the Company has a contractual relationship to provide telecommunications services or to make available telecommunications facilities in the public way. The Company shall have a continuing duty to file with the city, within forty-five (45) days after the date of occurrence of any changes in the information provided to the city, including the creation or termination of a contractual relationship described herein. 
2.  Resales. Whenever amounts are claimed to be excluded from gross charges as sales for resale, the reseller shall furnish to the Company the reseller's resale information. The Company shall retain the resale information with its books and records. 
G.  Maintaining Books and Records. The Company shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any liability or exemption. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to and available for inspection by the city with twenty-four (24) hour notice. 
H.  Insurance Requirements. Company shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.9 SFCC 1987, and Company shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this franchise the following types of insurance: 
1.  Commercial comprehensive general liability insurance; 
2.  Workers' Compensation insurance as required by law; and 
3.  Commercial automobile liability insurance providing a minimum coverage in the amount required under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act. 
I.  Term of Franchise. The term of this franchise, and the rights, privileges, and authority granted hereunder shall continue for a period of ten (10) years from the effective date hereof. The term of this franchise shall automatically be renewed annually unless Company provides notice to city of its intent not to renew at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the then current term. Company may surrender permits at any time and remove its telecommunications facilities at any particular location upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to city. Company shall not be obligated to pay the franchise fee for such location following removal of its telecommunications facilities. 
J.  Indemnity. Company and city agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless each other and its officials, agents, volunteers, and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or property arising out of or resulting from the activities of the indemnifying party pursuant to this franchise, except to the extent caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnitee or by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the indemnitee, or it's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or its agents or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason of the specification of any particular insurance coverage. Neither party shall be liable to the other for consequential, indirect or punitive damages (including lost revenues, loss of service, or loss of data) for any cause of action, whether in contract, tort or otherwise, even if the party was or should have been aware of the possibility of these damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including negligence), strict liability or otherwise. The maximum liability of either party to the other hereunder shall be the amount paid or payable during the preceding twelve (12) months. 
K.  Violations and Penalties. If the Company fails to pay the infrastructure maintenance franchise fee, as provided by this Chapter, the Company shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the failure to pay continues. Each day that the Company fails to pay shall constitute a separate and distinct violation under this Chapter. Any retailer that becomes subject to this fine may be enjoined from doing business in the city until the Company has paid all sums due under this Chapter. 
    Any telecommunications company who otherwise violates this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
L.  Dispute Resolution Provision. 
1.  In the event of any other dispute arising from or relating to the franchise or breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations, the following process will be followed during which any of the above remedies and penalties may be imposed. 
2.  All disputes will be mediated prior to litigation. The costs of such mediation will be equally split. The place of the mediation session shall be in Santa Fe, New Mexico. The city and the Company will select a mediator or mediators by mutual agreement and, in cooperation with the mediator(s), shall determine all necessary rules and procedures for the mediation. The city and the Company will fully cooperate in the mediation activities. All mediation communications shall be confidential, not subject to disclosure and shall not be used as evidence in any arbitration, judicial, or administrative proceeding, as set forth in the Mediation Procedures Act, NMSA 1978,  44-7b-1 through 44-7b-6. 
M.  Unauthorized Use of Public Rights-of-Way Unlawful. In accordance with Section 27-2.12 SFCC 1987, Company shall not: 
1.  Use public rights-of-way without authorization to provide telecommunications services. 
2.  Place facilities on public structures or public utility infrastructure to provide telecommunications services which are not allowed under the terms of this franchise. 
    Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to any dispute between the city and Company under this franchise where the city alleges that Company has failed to comply with the terms of this franchise. 
N.  Land Use Review. After approval of this franchise by the governing body, if Company proposes to construct additional telecommunications facilities the applicant shall comply with the provisions of Section 27-2.19. 
O.  Compliance with Law. 
1.  Company and city shall comply with the terms and conditions of Article 27-2 SFCC 1987 except as set forth herein, all other applicable city ordinances, and federal and state laws. 
2.  Company is explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, all other applicable governmental powers, and the city's rights under state and federal laws. 
P.  Severability. The requirements and provisions of this Ordinance and its sections, parts, subparts, paragraphs, and clauses are severable. In the event that any requirement, provision, section, part, subpart, paragraph, or clause of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, it is the intent of the governing body that the remainder of the Ordinance be enforced to the maximum extent possible consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Q.  Effective Date; Publication. As provided by NMSA 1978, Section 3-42-1, this Ordinance shall not become effective until at least thirty (30) days after its adoption, during which time this Ordinance shall be twice published in full, not less than seven days apart. As required by law, Company shall pay the publication cost. 
R.  Acceptance. Company, within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, shall file with the city clerk an unconditional acceptance of this Ordinance, on a form prescribed by the city. Within ten (10) days after the filing of the acceptance, the city clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of Company's acceptance. If Company does not file said acceptance this Ordinance shall not be or become effective. 
S.  Notice. For the purpose of this Ordinance: 
1.  Notice to the city shall be to: 
City Manager 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
With a copy to: 
City Attorney 
City of Santa Fe 
Post Office Box 909 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-0909 
2.  Notice to Company will be to: 
Attn.: Launa Waller, Regulatory Manager 
Plateau Telecommunications, Inc. 
7111 North Prince Street 
Clovis, NM 88101 
3.  Notice shall be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or Company notifies the other in writing, of a change in address. All notices shall be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the parties at their respective addresses set forth above. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 9 th day of May, 2018. 
      ALAN M. WEBBER, MAYOR   ATTEST: 
      YOLANDA Y. VIGIL, 
      CITY CLERK   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      GENO ZAMORA, INTERIM CITY ATTORNEY   
APPENDIX H - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 
CITY OF SANTA FE, NEW MEXICO 
ORDINANCE NO. 2003-33 
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCES 1986-66,1986-67 AND 1986-68 AND GRANTING A NEW NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COMCAST CABLEVISION OF NEW MEXICO, INC. (AKA COMCAST COMMUNICATIONS OF NEW MEXICO, INC. AND COMCAST CABLE COMMUNICATIONS OF NEW MEXICO, INC.) ("COMCAST") TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND TO PROVIDE CABLE SERVICE WITHIN A FRANCHISE AREA WITH THE CITY OF SANTA FE; ESTABLISHING TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE FRANCHISE RENEWAL (APPENDIX "H" CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES). 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF SANTA FE: 
    Section 1. Comcast (hereinafter called "Company") submitted a request pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 546 for a renewal franchise to construct, upgrade, operate and repair a cable system and to provide cable service in the City of Santa Fe (hereinafter called "Municipality"), and has requested a franchise agreement in order to do same. 
    Section 2. Municipality is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises for the provision of cable service within Municipality by means of a cable system. 
    Section 3. Municipality has reviewed Company's request and has considered the terms and conditions of Municipality's current cable franchise dated December 23, 1996 and finds that Company is in compliance with said franchise. 
    Section 4. Municipality has determined that granting of a franchise on the terms set forth herein is in the public interest and in the interest of Municipality and its residents and will assist in meeting the cable related needs and interests of the community. 
    Section 5. In consideration of the mutual covenants and promises herein contained, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
    Section 6. Definitions of Terms: 
      6.1 Access means the availability of cable system or open video system for noncommercial use by various eligible agencies, institutions, organizations, groups and individuals in the community, including the Municipality and its designees, to acquire, create, receive, and distribute programming and signals as permitted under applicable law including, but not limited to: 
        6.1.1 "Public Access" means access where community based, noncommercial organizations, groups or individual members of the public, on a nondiscriminatory basis, are the primary users. 
        6.1.2 "Educational Access" means access where schools are the primary users having editorial control over non-commercial programming and services. For purposes of this definition, "school" means any State accredited public educational institution with a minimum enrollment of one hundred students. 
        6.1.3 "Government Access" means access where governmental institutions or their designees are the primary users having editorial control over noncommercial programming and services. 
        6.1.4 "Access Channel" means any channel, or portion thereof, designated for access purposes or otherwise made available to facilitate or transmit access programming or services. 
      6.2 Administrator shall mean: 
        6.2.1 For purposes of the public access channel, the Municipality, or as designated by the Municipality, the Santa Fe Community College. 
        6.2.2 For purposes of the educational channel, the Municipality, or as designated by the Municipality, the Santa Fe Community College. 
        6.2.3 For purposes of the government channel, the Municipality or its designee. 
      6.3 Affiliate shall mean a person who (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, or is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with another person. 
      6.4 Authorized Area shall mean the entire area from time to time within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
      6.5 Cable Modem Service shall mean a two-way activated system that provides access to the Internet and data transmission at speeds at least as great as 200 kilobits per second. 
      6.6 Cable Services shall mean: The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming or (ii) other programming services, such as digital audio; and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
      6.7 Cable System or System shall mean a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Authorized Area, but such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to re-transmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right of way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Cable Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such a facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of Section 621 (c) of such Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (iv) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title VI of the Cable Communications Act of 1934, as amended; or (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
      6.8 Company shall mean Comcast Cablevision of Eastern Shore, Inc. 
      6.9 Designated Access Provider means the entity or entities designated by the Municipality to manage or co-manage the Public, Educational or Governmental Access Channel and facilities. The Municipality may be a Designated Access Provider. 
      6.10 Drop shall mean a connection extending no more than 150 feet from the potential subscriber's demarcation point to the nearest point of distribution on the cable system from which cable service can be provided to that subscriber. 
      6.11 FCC shall mean Federal Communications Commission. 
      6.12 Franchise shall mean the initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the Municipality, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, ordinance or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the Cable System, including giving the cable operator the non-exclusive right to occupy the space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over public rights-of-way in the Municipality to provide services within the franchise area. 
      6.13 Franchise Authority shall have the meaning set forth in the introduction to this Franchise Agreement. 
      6.14 Gross Revenues means any and all revenue received by the Company including Company's Affiliates, from the operation of the Company's Cable System to provide Cable Services. Gross Revenues shall be interpreted consistent with FCC regulations and rulings, and any relevant decision by a federal court, and include, by way of example and not limitation, revenues from equipment sales and rentals, services (unless such services are determined by statute, the FCC, a court of competent jurisdiction, or local agreement to be other than a cable service), installation, and other subscriber charges, advertising and shopping services, revenues from program guides; revenue from data transmissions to the extent these transmissions are considered Cable Services under federal law; revenue from the sale of other Cable Services. Gross Revenues shall be construed to include revenues of Company's affiliates (other than those revenues which are already treated as the revenues of the Company upon which a fee is paid), only to the extent necessary to prevent avoidance of fees owed on Company's gross revenues from the delivery of cable services. Gross Revenues shall not include (i) to the extent consistent with GAAP, bad debt, refunds or credits issued; provided, however, that all or part of any bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in Gross Revenues in the period collected; (ii) any capital payments by Company for PEG Access equipment as specified in this document; or (iii) any amounts received by Company as a tax, fee or assessment of general applicability collected by the Company for pass-through to a governmental agency, except that a franchise fee is not a fee of general applicability; or (iv) any value assigned to non-monetary transactions for cable or other services provided by Company. The parties agree that the definition of Gross Revenues set forth above shall be interpreted to the fullest extent allowed by applicable law. Further, it is agreed that any change in federal law subsequent to the Effective Date of this Franchise Agreement shall not effect the definition of Gross Revenues unless the change specifically addresses one of the components of the definition. 
      6.15 Municipality shall mean the City of Santa Fe. 
      6.16 PEG Channel shall mean any channel on the cable system set aside by Company for Public, Educational or Government use. 
      6.17 Public Ways shall mean all dedicated public rights-of-way, streets, highways, and alleys. "Public Ways" shall not include property of Municipality, which is not a dedicated public right-of-way, street, highway, or alley. 
    Section 7. Grant of Rights. 
      7.1 Grant of Franchise. Subject to all the terms and conditions contained in this Franchise, the charter of Municipality and applicable ordinances of Municipality as from time to time in effect, Municipality hereby grants Company a renewal cable franchise which authorizes the Company to erect, construct, install, and maintain a Cable System in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the Franchise Area. Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prohibit the Company from offering any service over its cable system that is not prohibited by federal, state or local law. Company agrees through the term of this Franchise Agreement to erect, construct, install and maintain such Cable System in the Authorized Area. 
      7.2 Nonexclusive. This Franchise and all rights granted hereunder are nonexclusive. Municipality reserves the right to grant such other and future franchises as it deems appropriate. This Franchise does not establish any priority for the use of the public rights-of-way by Company or by any present or future franchisees or other permit holders. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public rights-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to Municipality in the performance of its various functions, and thereafter, as between franchisees and other permit holders, as determined by Municipality in the exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the State of New Mexico. 
      7.3 Grant of Additional Franchises. In the event the Municipality enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind, with any other individual or entity other than the Company, which authorizes the use of the Municipality's public right-of-way for the purpose of constructing or operating a Cable System or providing Cable Service to any part of the Franchise Area, the Municipality shall require as part of the agreement to use the public right of way in any part of the Franchise Area, terms and conditions that are not more favorable or less burdensome to such individual or entity than those contained in this agreement. 
      7.4 Interpretations and Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between the Franchise Agreement and the Telecommunications Ordinance, the Franchise shall control. Nothing herein shall prevent Company from challenging a particular amendment to the Telecommunications Ordinance as an impairment of this Franchise, to the extent that it changes the mutual promises in this contract. Subject to the Municipality's lawful police powers, the Municipality may not alter any of the Company's material rights, benefits, obligations or duties specified herein. 
      7.5 Service/Line-Extension. The Company shall provide Cable Service to every dwelling unit within the Authorized Area reaching the minimum density of at least thirty (30) dwelling units per mile. The Company shall offer Cable Service to all new homes and previously unserved homes located within 150 feet of the Company's distribution cable. The Company may elect to provide Cable Service to areas not meeting the above density standards. The Company may impose an additional charge in excess of its regular installation charge for any service installation requiring a drop in excess of the above standards. Any such additional charge shall be computed on a time plus materials basis to be calculated on that portion of the installation, which exceeds the 150-foot standard set forth above. 
      7.6 Emergencies. Municipality may remove the Cable System in the case of fire, disaster, or other emergencies threatening life or property. In such event, neither Municipality nor any agent, contractor or employee thereof shall be liable to Company or its customers or third parties for any damage caused them or the Cable System, such as for, or in connection with, protecting, breaking through, moving, removal, altering, tearing down, or relocating any part of the Cable System. 
        7.6.1 Public Safety Hazards. In the event of potential hazards to the general public involving Comcast equipment or services, e.g., downed cables, open trench, etc., the City's Director of Information Technology shall have the final authorization in declaring a public safety hazard. Declaration of a public safety hazard would require immediate attention by appropriate Comcast personnel. 
      7.7 Alert System. The Cable System shall include an emergency alert system ("EAS") as prescribed by FCC and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 as amended. Company shall transmit on such system federal, state and local EAS messages. Municipality and Company will agree on the procedures for Municipality to follow to expeditiously use such system in the event of an emergency. 
      7.8 Compliance with Applicable Law. In constructing, maintaining, and operating the Cable System, Company will act in a good and workmanlike manner, observing high standards of engineering and workmanship and using materials that are of good and durable quality. Company shall comply with all lawful and generally applicable codes, including the National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition); National Electric Code, and any other applicable safety codes. 
      7.9 Maintenance and Repair. Company shall adopt comprehensive maintenance guidelines, which shall include procedures for preventative maintenance. Company shall make available to Municipality said maintenance guidelines and procedures. 
      7.10 Easement Usage. To the extent allowed by applicable State and Federal law, this Franchise Agreement authorizes the construction of the Cable System over Public Ways, and through easements, within the Authorized Area and which have been dedicated for compatible uses, subject to the requirements in the balance of this Section and of this Franchise Agreement. In using all easements, Company shall comply with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations governing the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of a Cable System. All transmission and distribution structures, poles and other lines and equipment installed by Company for use in the Cable System in accordance with this Franchise Agreement shall be located so as to ensure that: 
        7.10.1 The safety, functioning and appearance of the property and the safety of individuals shall be maintained during the installation or constructionof facilities necessary for the Cable System; 
        7.10.2 The cost of the installation, construction, operation, or removal of such facilities shall be borne by Company or third-party reimbursement, if appropriate; and 
        7.10.3 The owner of the property is reasonably compensated for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation, or removal of such facilities by Company. 
      7.11 Other Permits. This Franchise does not relieve Company of the obligation to obtain permits, licenses and other approvals from Municipality necessary for the construction, repair or maintenance of the Cable System or provision of Cable Services. Municipality shall not unreasonably withhold or delay granting permits, licenses or other approvals. 
      7.12 Advertising. Comcast shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances and laws related to commercial and political speech in determining advertising sales. 
    Section 8. Public Ways. 
      8.1 Minimum Interference. The Cable System shall be erected and maintained by Company so as to cause the minimum interference with the use of the Public Ways. 
      8.2 Restoration of Property. Company shall as soon as is practicable but not longer than five (5) days, weather permitting, restore at its sole cost and expense, the portion of the Public Ways that is in any way disturbed by the construction, operation, maintenance or removal of the Cable System to a condition that reasonably meets or exceeds the condition of the Public Way that existed prior to the disturbance, and shall at its sole cost and expense restore any private or public property disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by Company to a condition reasonably as good as such property was in immediately prior to the disturbance, damage or injury. Restoration shall start promptly but no more than fifteen (15) days from Company becoming aware of the problem in question. 
      8.3 Relocation of Facilities . Company shall at its own cost and expense, protect, support, disconnect or remove or relocate from the Public Ways any portion of the Cable System when required to do so by Municipality due to street or other public excavation, construction, repair, grading, regrading or traffic conditions; the installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, or municipally-owned facilities of any kind; or the vacation, construction or relocation of streets or any other type of structure or improvement of a public agency or any other type of improvement necessary for the public health, safety or welfare. If public funds are available to any person using such street or public ways for the purpose of defraying costs of any of the foregoing, the Municipality shall, upon written request of the Company, make application for such funds on behalf of the Company. 
      8.4 Joint Use. Company shall permit the joint use of its poles, conduits and facilities located in the Public Ways by Municipality to the extent reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable fee. 
      8.5 Underground Facilities. At Municipality's request, Company shall place its facilities underground if all of the distribution facilities of all of the respective public or municipal utilities in any area of the Authorized Area are underground; provided that such facilities are actually capable of receiving the Company's cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the Cable System's signal quality. In any region(s) of the Authorized Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public or municipal utilities are both aerial and underground, the Company shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the Company to construct, operate, or maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as customer taps, line extenders, system passive devices, amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Section, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of all of the respective public or municipal utilities are required to be placed underground after the effective date of this Franchise Agreement, the Company shall only be required to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public and municipal utilities' facilities at the time that such transmission and distribution facilities are placed underground. All undergrounding of any transmission or distribution facilities shall be done at Company's expense. 
      8.6 New Developments. Company is encouraged to install its Cable System (excluding only Drops to individual dwelling units) in all new subdivisions and developments on the date on which electric or telephone facilities are installed in such subdivision or development unless Company is not notified of the subdivision or development. Municipality shall use its best efforts to provide notice of new subdivisions and developments to Company at the same time utility permits are granted. 
      8.7 Temporary Relocation. Upon fifteen (15) business days notice Company shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or other equipment upon the request of any person, including without limitation a person holding a building moving permit issued by Municipality. Company may charge a reasonable fee for this service and such fee may be required to be paid in advance. 
      8.8 Vacation. If a street or Public Way where Company has facilities is vacated, eliminated, discontinued or closed, Company shall be notified of same and all rights of Company under this Franchise Agreement to use same shall terminate and Company shall remove the Cable System from such street or Public Way unless Company obtains all necessary easements from the affected property owners to use the former street or Public Way or a court orders the provision of such easements. Where reasonably possible and to the extent consistent with the treatment of other utility facilities in the former street or Public Way, Municipality shall reserve easements for Company to continue to use the former street or Public Way. Company shall bear the cost of any removal or relocation of the Cable System unless the vacation is primarily for the benefit of a private party, in which case the private party shall bear such costs. Company shall be provided thirty (30) days notice of any proposed vacation proceedings involving its facilities. 
      8.9 Discontinuance and Removal of the Cable System. Upon the revocation, termination, or expiration of this Franchise, unless an extension is granted, Company shall (subject to the notice provision of Section 19.2) discontinue the provision of Cable Services and all rights of Company to use the Public Ways shall cease. At the direction of Municipality, Company shall remove its Cable System, including all supporting structures, poles, transmission and distribution system and other appurtenances, fixtures or property from the Public Ways subject to any right Company may have to abandon property in place. The Company shall reconstruct, replace, or restore in a timely fashion that portion of any street, alley, or public way or place; and any water, sewer, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic signalization or other facility of the Municipality, disturbed or damaged by the Company, to a condition consistent with reasonable standards of safety and appearance as required by generally applicable law and codes adopted pursuant to exercise of the Municipality's police powers. In the event Company fails or refuses to remove its Cable System, or to satisfactorily restore all areas to the condition in which they existed prior to the original construction of the Cable System, Municipality, at its option, may perform such work and collect the costs thereof from Company. No surety on any performance bond nor any letter of credit shall be discharged until Municipality has certified to Company in writing that the Cable System has been dismantled, removed, and all property restored. 
      8.10 Tree Trimming. Company may trim trees upon and overhanging the Public Ways so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the Cable System. No trimming shall be performed in the Public Ways without previously informing Municipality. All trimming of trees, except in an emergency, on public property shall have the prior approval of Municipality and except in an emergency all trimming of trees on private property shall require the consent of the property owner. 
    Section 9. Customer Service. 
      9.1 Customer Service Standards. Company shall comply with the customer service standards and rules set forth in Part 76,  76.309 of the FCC's rules and regulations. Company shall comply in all respects with the customer service requirements established by the FCC pursuant to  632 (c) of the Cable Act as amended. 
      9.2 Customer Bills . Customer bills shall be designed in such a way as to present the information contained therein clearly and comprehensively to Customers, and in a way that (i) is not misleading, (ii) does not omit material information, and (iii) does not mischaracterize any information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 9.1, above, the Company may, in its sole discretion, consolidate costs on Customer bills as may otherwise be permitted by federal law. 
      9.3 Privacy Protection. Company shall comply with applicable law, including, without limitation, Section 631 of the Cable Act and regulations adopted pursuant hereto to protect Persons against invasion of privacy. 
      9.4 Negative Options . Company will not engage in the practice of "negative option" marketing and will not charge a subscriber for any optional, a la carte or premium service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested. 
      9.5 Free Service. During the term of this Franchise Agreement, Company will provide the following free service: 
        9.5.1 Company will provide without any installation charge or monthly charge one (1) free outlet at each of Municipality's office buildings and in each Municipal public library and each accredited public and private school and college with a student enrollment of 100 or more pupils in the Authorized Area, and within 150 feet of Company's distribution cable, excluding facilities which would require asphalt cuts, bores or permits. None of the entities receiving service under Section 9.5 shall be charged a fee during the term of this Franchise for those channels comprising basic service. 
        9.5.2 If requested, Company will add additional outlets at the preceding facilities (such as to some or all classrooms and auditoriums, but not to dormitories) and will do so at its standard hourly service charge and monthly service rate. Such outlets shall be used only for cable TV purposes. 
        9.5.3 For the preceding facilities, if the Drop to the facility is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet, the owner of the facility will be charged only the incremental cost for Drops or line extensions beyond one hundred fifty (150) feet. Drops or installations of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be free. 
      9.6 Access to Service. Company shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate on the availability or rates, terms or conditions of Cable Services provided to subscribers on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability, age, familial status, marital status, or location within Municipality. Company shall comply at all times with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. Company shall not deny or discriminate against any group of actual or potential subscribers in Municipality on access to or the rates because of the income level of the local area in which such group may be located. 
      9.7 Notification. Company will provide written information on at least each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
        9.7.1 Products and services offered. 
        9.7.2 Prices (rates) and options for Cable Services and conditions of subscription to Cable Service. Prices shall include those for programming, equipment rental, program guides, installation, disconnection, late fees and other fees charged by Company. 
        9.7.3 Installation and service maintenance policies. 
        9.7.4 Instruction on how to use the Cable Services including procedures and options for pay per view and premium channels. 
        9.7.5 Channel positions of programming carried on the Cable System. 
        9.7.6 Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the person or position at Municipality responsible for cable matters. 
      9.8 Office/Phone. 
        9.8.1 Company shall maintain an office to serve the purpose of paying bills, receiving and responding to requests for service, receiving and resolving customer complaints regarding Cable Service, equipment malfunctions, billing and collection disputes, and similar matters. Such office shall be located within Municipality or at such other location as Municipality and Company shall from time to time agree. Company shall have a local telephone number or toll-free telephone number for use by subscribers toll-free twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. The office of Company shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints in person or by telephone during Normal Business Hours. 
        9.8.2 Upon request by Municipality, Company shall provide reports to Municipality showing Company's compliance with the standards of FCC Rules 76.309(c)(1)(ii) and (iv), and 76.309(c)(2)(i), (ii), and (iv) (a copy of the current Rules are attached as Exhibit A). [1] Such report shall show Company's performance excluding periods of abnormal operating conditions, and if Company contends any such conditions occurred during the period in question, it shall also describe the nature and extent of such conditions and show Company's performance including the time periods such conditions were in effect. 
      9.9 Continuity of Service. Company shall interrupt service only with good cause and for the shortest time possible except in emergency situations and as required by the FCC. Services may be interrupted between 1:00 AM and 6:00 AM for routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification. In the event of a System upgrade, Company shall both minimize any interruptions in service caused by the upgrade, and shall meet with Municipality in advance to advise Municipality of the nature, geographic extent and duration of any interruptions. Any test required by the FCC will not require prior notice. 
      9.10 Log of Complaints. Company shall maintain a written log of all subscriber complaints or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed form of all subscriber complaints. Such log shall list the date and time of such complaints, identifying (to the extent allowed by law) the subscribers and describing the nature of the complaints and when and what actions were taken by Company in response thereto. Such log shall be kept at Company's local office reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least three (3) years, and shall be available for Municipality's inspection during Normal Business Hours. 
      9.11 Privacy Protection. The Company shall protect all Persons against invasion of privacy and shall comply with applicable law, including, without limitation, Section 631 of the Cable Act and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
      9.12. Subscriber Information. Except as permitted by federal law, Company shall not record or retain any information as to the programming actually watched by a subscriber. Company shall destroy all subscriber information of a personally identifiable nature after a reasonable period of time except as allowed by the affected subscriber. Company shall not sell or otherwise provide to other persons, without the specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, or otherwise make available to any person or entity, other than Municipality in its enforcement of this Franchise and applicable law, lists of the names and addresses of subscribers. Company may disclose subscriber information as necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a Cable Service or other service provided by Company to the subscriber or to detect unauthorized reception of cable communications. 
      9.13 FCC Technical Standards. Company shall meet or exceed the FCC's technical standards as set forth in 47 C.F.R.  76.601 and any other applicable standards that may be adopted from time to time, provided that, nothing in this section is intended to permit Municipality to exercise any authority that it is prohibited from exercising under applicable law. Company shall prepare reports sufficient to show that testing required by FCC and any other applicable standards have been completed. 
      9.14 FCC-mandated Testing. Company shall notify the Municipality in advance of conducting any proof-of-performance test required by the FCC, so that the Municipality may observe the testing. Upon request, the Municipality shall be provided the test results and any supporting documentation regarding the tests and testing equipment and procedures. 
      9.15 Inspection and Testing. Municipality shall have the right to inspect the cable system during and after the upgrade to ensure compliance with this Franchise and applicable provisions of federal, state and local law. 
      9.16 Back-up Power. Company shall have back-up power capability that starts automatically in the event of loss of conventional power to provide electric service to the Cable System head end and associated equipment in the event of a power failure. Company shall also have back-up power at other locations on Company's Cable System (consistent with accepted industry standards and the system design) where the loss of electric power might disrupt the provision of Cable Service within Municipality such that the Cable System and each portion of it shall operate for at least two (2) hours even if electric service from conventional utility lines is interrupted. 
      9.17 Bond. 
        9.17.1 Company shall provide Municipality no later than thirty (30) days after the acceptance of this Franchise, a performance bond from a Security Company meeting the standards of the Telecommunications Ordinance in the amount of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) in a form reasonably acceptable to Municipality as security for the faithful performance by Company of the provisions of this Agreement, and the payment of Company of any claims, liens or taxes due Municipality which arise by reason of the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the Cable System or provision of Cable Services. 
        9.17.2 The Municipality shall provide ten (10) days written notice that the Company has failed to pay fees, taxes or liens or other performance. The notice shall outline with specificity the reason(s) the Municipality believes it is entitled to draw upon the bond. If the Company does not respond in writing within five (5) days, the Municipality may draw upon the bond. Company and Municipality shall meet within five (5) days of receipt of the Company's response to the notice of intent to draw upon the bond to attempt to reach a resolution. If a resolution cannot be reached at this meeting, the Municipality may proceed to draw upon the bond. Should the Municipality draw upon the bond, the Company shall, within fourteen (14) days, restore the bond to the full required amount. The Municipality may from time to time require Company to change the amount of the required bond to reflect changed risks to Municipality and to the public, including delinquencies in taxes or other payments to Municipality. The bond must be obtained prior to the effective date of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise specifically provides otherwise. 
    Section 10. PEG Access Channels. 
      10.1 PEG Channels. Company shall provide on the Cable System in the basic tier of service (and in the lowest tier of service if different) the following channels collectively known as "PEG Channels": 
        10.1.1 Company shall continue to provide one (1) public access channel for use by members of the general public, to be administered by the Municipality or its designee, or the Santa Fe Community College; and 
        10.1.2 One (1) educational channel administered by the Municipality or its designee, or the Santa Fe Community College or its designee. Company shall provide the channel thirty (30) days after receiving notice from the Municipality that there is a contract in force to administer and provide programming for the channel. 
        10.1.3 One (1) government channel administered by the Municipality, or its designee, or such other unit of State or local government as Municipality may from time to time allow. Company shall provide the channel thirty (30) days after receiving notice from the Municipality that it is prepared to offer programming on the channel. 
      10.2 Company Use. 
        10.2 Company and the City agree that it is their mutual goal to fully and efficiently use the Channel capacity of the Cable System, which may include allowing the Company to use underutilized time on Access Channels. If Company believes that any Access Channel is underutilized, Company may file a request with the Administrator to use the underutilized time. In response to the request, the Administrator will consider a combination of factors, including but not limited to, the community's needs and interests, and the source, quantity, type and schedule of the programming carried on the Access Channel. The Administrator will also consider, taking into account the mission of the Access programming, whether it is feasible for the Designated Access Providers to cluster Access programming into blocks of time such that the Channel space can be compatibly shared between the Designated Access Provider and the Company and/or if several Designated Access Providers can combine their programming onto a single Access Channel. The Administrator shall render his/her decision regarding the matter within sixty (60) days of receiving the request. Should the Administrator find that the Access Channel or portion of the Access Channel, may be used by the Company, then Company may begin using such time ninety (90) days after receipt of the decision. The Company's request shall not be unreasonably denied. Any permission granted pursuant to this subsection for use of an Access Channel or a portion thereof shall be considered temporary. 
        10.3 At such time as a Designated Access Provider believes that it has the resources and ability to utilize the Access Channel time currently used by the Company pursuant to this subsection, a Designated Access Provider may request that the Administrator return such Channel or portion of the Channel for Access purposes. In response to the request, the Administrator will consider a combination of factors, including but not limited to, the community's needs and interests, and the source, quantity, type and schedule of the programming proposed to be carried on the Access Channel as well the applicant's ability and resources to acquire or produce the proposed Access programming. The Administrator will also consider, taking into account the mission of the Access programming, whether it is feasible for the Designated Access Providers to cluster Access programming into blocks of time such that the Channel space can be compatibly shared between the Designated Access Provider and the Company and/or if several Designated Access Providers can combine their programming onto a single Access Channel. The Administrator shall render his/her decision regarding the matter within sixty (60) days of receiving the request. Should the Administrator find that the evidence exists to support the return of the Access Channel or portion of the Access Channel to the Designated Access Provider, then Company shall surrender the requested time on the Access Channel within ninety (90) days of receiving the decision. The Designated Access Provider's request shall not be unreasonably denied. 
      10.3 PEG Access Assistance. Company shall provide to Municipality grants for capital facilities for the PEG Channels on the dates and in the amounts set forth below where "capital facilities" means PEG Channel related facilities and equipment including fiber lines, studios, production facilities, vans and cameras or other property having a useful life of more than one year, as well as any expenditures which increase or add to the value of the facilities or equipment, adapt the facilities or equipment to new or different uses, or maintain, restore, extend or prolong the useful life of such facilities or equipment. Municipality shall allocate such grants among the entities administering the PEG Channels as it determines is in the public interest. The grants and their timing are as follows: 
        10.3.1 PEG Capital Grant. Company shall provide a one-time grant of $23,760.00 for PEG uses within 30 days of the effective date of the Franchise. This one-time payment covers Company's PEG obligation for the first year of the Franchise. As provided by federal law, Company may pass-through to subscribers the expense of the payment. 
        10.3.2 PEG Monthly Capital Funding. Beginning on the anniversary date of the Franchise in 2004, and continuing through 2012, Company shall pay Municipality the amount of 11 cents per month, per residential subscriber for PEG capital funding. Beginning in 2013 and upon direction from the Municipality, this amount may increase to 13 cents per month, per residential subscriber for the remaining term of the Franchise and including any extension thereof. Company shall remit PEG capital payments as set forth in Section 12.1. 
      10.4 Lines and Facilities. Initially and throughout the term of this Agreement, Company shall provide operating return capacity sufficient to enable character generated, pre-recorded and live cablecasts from the City Council Chambers located at 200 Lincoln Avenue, Santa Fe, New Mexico, the Santa Fe County Building, and from the physical location of the designated access provider to the cable system head end to enable the distribution of PEG Access programming to Residential Subscribers. The City and Company agree to partner together to explore opportunities to provide connectivity on the Plaza for the purpose of providing PEG Access programming to residential subscribers. 
    Section 11. Indemnity and Insurance. 
      11.1 Insurance. Throughout the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain Comprehensive General Liability Insurance and provide the Municipality, certificates of insurance designating the Municipality and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees as additional insured and demonstrating that the Company has obtained the insurance required in this Section. Such policy or policies shall be in the minimum amount of One Million Fifty Thousand Dollars ($1,050,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any two or more persons resulting from one occurrence, and One Million Fifty Thousand Dollars ($1,050,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such policy or policies shall be non-cancelable except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Municipality. The Company shall ensure its compliance with the New Mexico Workers' Compensation Act and in that regard shall secure insurance to cover its obligations with respect to workers compensation claims, or take other appropriate steps, which insurance and steps shall be in a form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Municipality. The Company shall indemnify and hold harmless the Franchise Authority from any workers' compensation claims to which the Company may become subject during the term of this Franchise Agreement. 
      11.2 Indemnification. The Company shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Municipality, its officers, employees, agents, consultants, representatives and independent contractors from and against any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Company's construction, operation, or maintenance of its Cable System, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. Provided that the Municipality shall give the Company written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Municipality within ten (10) business days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this Section. 
    Section 12. Fees and Payments. 
      12.1 Franchise Fee. Company shall pay Municipality throughout the term of this Franchise an amount equal to five (5) percent of Company's Cable Gross Revenues as defined herein. Once per calendar year Municipality by resolution may elect to reduce such percentage to a smaller percentage, and by resolution in a subsequent calendar year may change or revoke such election. Such payments shall be made quarterly, and are due within forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a written report to Municipality, verified by an officer of Company containing an accurate statement in itemized form of Company's Cable Gross Revenues and the computation of the payment amount in accordance with GAAP principles. 
      12.2 Audits. On an annual basis, and with reasonable advance written notice, Municipality may audit Company's records reasonably related to the administration or enforcement of this Franchise to verify the accuracy of Franchise Fees paid Municipality. Any additional amount due Municipality shall be paid within thirty (30) days of Municipality's submitting an invoice for such sum, and if such sum exceeds ten (10%) percent of the total Franchise Fee which the audit determines should have been paid for any calendar year, Company shall pay Municipality's reasonable cost of auditing that calendar year. The Municipality's right to audit and the Company's obligation to retain records related to a franchise fee audit shall expire three (3) years after each franchise fee payment has been made to the Municipality. 
        12.2.1 Upon the completion of any such audit conducted by the Municipality, the Municipality shall provide to the Company a final audit report, which sets forth the Franchising Authority's findings in detail, including any and all substantiating evidence. The Company shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the audit report to provide the Municipality with a written response to the audit report, including any substantiating evidence. Any "Finally Settled Amount(s)" due to the Municipality by the Company shall be paid within thirty (30) days from receipt of written notice of the Final Settlement Amount from the Municipality. For purposes of this Section 12 the term "Finally Settled Amount(s)" shall mean the agreed upon underpayment, if any. The Municipality shall bear the expense of any inspection or audit of the Company's books and records. 
      12.3 Other Payments. The preceding fees and payments are in addition to all sums that may be due Municipality for property taxes (real and personal), income taxes, license fees, permit fees or other fees, taxes or charges which Municipality may from time to time impose. 
      12.4 Interest. All sums not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate equal to the rate published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds for the period of delinquency computed monthly, and shall be paid with interest within thirty (30) days of due date. 
    Section 13. Rates and Regulations. 
      13.1 Rates. Municipality may regulate Company's rates and charges for the provision of Cable Service to the extent permitted by law. 
      13.2 Regulation. With respect to any rates, the regulation of which is governed by FCC regulations, Municipality will follow FCC rate regulations in its regulation of Company, notwithstanding any difference or inconsistent provisions in this agreement. 
    Section 14. Franchise Term. 
      14.1 Initial Term. The term of this Franchise shall be ten (10) years. The term shall be extended an additional five (5) years if the Company upgrades its Cable System to provide cable modem service within 18 months of the effective date of this agreement. 
      14.2 Renewal. Any renewal of this Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended. 
    Section 15. Effect of Change in Law. 
    In the event that state or federal laws, rules, or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this franchise, then the provision shall be read to be preempted or limited to the extent and for the time, but only to the extent and for the time, that such laws, rules or regulations acted to preempt or limit such provision. In the event such state or federal law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof that had been preempted or limited is no longer so affected, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto, without the requirement of further action on the part of the Municipality. 
    Section 16. Transfers, Ownership and Control. 
      16.1 Consent Required. No transfer of this franchise, Company, or cable system, or of control over the same (including, but not limited to, transfer by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or any other means) shall occur unless prior application is made by the Company to Municipality and Municipality's prior written consent is obtained, pursuant to this Franchise, and upon such terms and conditions as Municipality reasonably deems necessary and proper to protect the public interest. Municipality will not unreasonably withhold consent to a requested transfer. Any transfer that is made without the prior approval of Municipality shall be without effect. The granting of approval for a transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer. An application for a transfer must be submitted at least 120 days prior to the date the transaction is scheduled to be consummated. If the Municipality does not act upon an application for transfer within 120 days, it shall be deemed approved. Such consent shall not be required for a transfer in order to secure indebtedness such as a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of Company in the Franchise or Cable System. 
      16.2 Transfer or Transferred. A change of control of the Franchise, Company, or Cable System shall be deemed to have occurred whenever there is a change, acquisition or transfer of control of more than a twenty-five percent (25%) ownership in the Company or its direct or indirect parents by any person, or a group of persons acting in concert who did not prior to the time of such change, acquisition or transfer already own twenty-five percent (25%) or greater ownership interest in the Company or the direct or indirect parent, except where such change, acquisition or transfer involves only limited partner interests. Without limiting the above, any change in the general partners of Company (if any) will be presumed a change in control. A transfer also occurs whenever there is a change in actual working control (but not including non-ownership management), in whatever manner exercised, over the affairs of a Company or its direct or indirect parents. 
      16.3 Applications for Transfer. Company shall submit an application for transfer in the form required by FCC Form 394 (as it exists on the date of the application) and such additional information required by Municipality to understand and evaluate the FCC Form 394 and all information required by an applicant under federal and state law. 
        16.3.1 Municipality shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to any proposed transfer, and may grant its consent outright, may grant such consent with conditions that it finds are in the public interest, or may deny consent. 
            16.3.2 For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer, the Municipality or its agents may inquire into legal, financial and technical qualifications of the prospective transferee. 
      16.4 Transfer Consent for Current Renewals. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Agreement, Municipality agrees that no consent is required for a merger involving Company or its parent which is currently pending, including the announced merger of AT&T Broadband and Comcast Corporation. 
    Section 17. Enforcement and Termination of Franchise. 
      17.1 Notice of Violation or Default. In the event the Municipality believes that the Company has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, the Municipality shall informally discuss the matter with the Company. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Municipality shall notify the Company in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance or default. 
      17.2 Company's Right to Cure or Respond. The Company shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the Municipality's notice described in Section 17.1, above: 1) to respond to the Municipality, contesting the assertion of noncompliance or default, or 2) to cure such default, or 3) in the event that, by nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Municipality of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
      17.3 Default Determination. In the event of a good-faith dispute between Company and Municipality concerning a determination of default, Company may request a meeting with Municipality to discuss the basis for the determination. Both Company and Municipality shall exchange information concerning the alleged default, including steps Company has taken to cure the default, and any obstacles Company has faced in accomplishing a cure. If Company and Municipality are unable to resolve the dispute regarding the default determination, Municipality shall within thirty (30) days following the meeting, provide Company with a written determination of default. The written determination of default will describe with specificity the alleged default and state the reasons Municipality believes the default has not been timely cured. 
      17.4 Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the Municipality determines that the Company is in default of any provision of the Franchise, the Municipality may: 
        17.4.1 Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or 
        17.4.2 Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or 
        17.4.3. In the case of substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, seek to revoke the Franchise in accordance with Section 17.5. 
      17.5 Revocation . Should the Municipality seek to revoke the Franchise, the Municipality shall give written notice to the Company of its intent to revoke the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Franchise. The notice shall set forth with specificity the exact nature and pattern of noncompliance. The Company shall have ninety (90) days from the receipt of such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. Within that ninety (90) day period the Company and Municipality shall meet at least once to discuss ways to avoid revocation of the Franchise Agreement. If the parties cannot agree on a plan to avoid revocation, or if the Municipality has not received a satisfactory response from the Company within ninety (90) days, the Municipality shall notify the Company in writing that the Franchise shall be revoked. The Municipality may extend the time for revocation of the Franchise. 
        17.5.1 The Municipality may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce its rights under the Franchise in lieu of revocation. 
        17.5.2 Company may appeal the Municipality's decision to revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures set forth in Rule 1-075 New Mexico Rules Annotated to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
      17.6 Technical Violations. The parties hereby agree that it is not the Municipality's intention to subject the Company to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the Franchise for violations of the Franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Subscribers within the service area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Company which outweigh the benefit to be derived by the Municipality and/or Subscribers. 
    Section 18. Remedies. 
      18.1 Remedies. Upon a finding by Municipality that Company has committed a material breach of the franchise or repeatedly failed to comply with the terms of the franchise, Municipality shall be entitled to exercise any and all of the following cumulative remedies: 
        18.1.1 Municipality shall have the right to forfeit and terminate the Franchise and upon the forfeiture and termination thereof the Franchise shall be automatically deemed null and void and have no force or effect, Company shall remove the Cable System as and when requested by Municipality and Municipality shall retain any portion of the Franchise Fee and other fees or payments paid to it, or which are due and payable to it, to the date of the forfeiture and termination. Municipality's right to forfeit and terminate the grant of the Franchise pursuant to this section is not a limitation on Municipality's right of revocation. 
        18.1.2 Remedies Not Exclusive. The rights and remedies of Municipality set forth in this Franchise shall be in addition to and not in limitation of, any other rights and remedies provided by law or in equity. Company reserves all rights to contest and/or adjudicate the application of a remedy. Municipality is not entitled to recover damages for the same injury or violation under two separate sections where doing so would result in a double recovery. 
      18.2 Maintenance of Books, Records, and Files. 
        18.2.1 Books and Records. Throughout the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Municipality, upon reasonable prior written notice to the Company, may review such of the Company's books and records regarding the operation of the Cable System and the provision of Cable Service in the Franchise Area at the Company's business office, during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure the Company's compliance with the terms and conditions of this Franchise. Such books and records shall include, without limitation, any records required in a public file by the Company pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. All such documents pertaining to financial matters, which may be the subject of an audit of franchise fees by the Municipality shall be retained by the Company for a minimum period of three (3) years. 
        18.2.2 File for Public Inspection. Throughout the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Company shall maintain at its business office, in a file available for public inspection during normal business hours, those documents required pursuant to FCC rules and regulations. 
      18.3 Proprietary Information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Section, the Company shall not be required to disclose information that it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The Municipality agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Company as confidential and only to disclose it to its employees, representative, and agents of the Municipality. The Company shall not be required to provide Customer information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act. For purposes of this Section the terms "proprietary or confidential" include, but are not limited to, information relating to the Cable System design, Customer lists, Cable Service and marketing plans, financial information unrelated to the calculation of franchise fees or rates pursuant to FCC rules or other information that is reasonably determined by the Company to be competitively sensitive. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Company agrees that this limitation shall be consistent with New Mexico state law and that the Municipality shall not be held liable nor be deemed to be in breach of this section if it is required to disclose any "proprietary information" either pursuant to a records request recognized under the New Mexico State Public Records Act, a subpoena or any court ordered disclosure. 
    Section 19. General. 
      19.1 Entire Agreement. This Franchise Agreement including the Exhibits attached hereto, [2] contains the entire agreement between the parties and all prior franchises, negotiations and agreements are merged herein and hereby superseded and of no force and effect, except that any obligation of Company to indemnify Municipality under a prior franchise or agreement shall be continuing as to those matters (if any) occurring during the term of said prior franchise or agreement on which Company was obligated to indemnify Municipality. No matter arising under the prior franchise shall be considered a breach of this Franchise or give rise to any proceeding for damages, revocation or termination. 
      19.2 Notices. Except as otherwise specified herein, all notices, consents, approvals, requests and other communications (herein collectively "Notices") required or permitted under this Franchise Agreement shall be given in writing and mailed first-class, postage prepaid or sent overnight delivery to the addresses as follows: 
If to Municipality: City of Santa Fe 
Richard Carlisle, Director 
Technology & Telecommunications 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504 If to Company: Comcast Cablevision of Eastern Shore, Inc. 
Kevin Bethke, Southwest Area Vice President 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87107  
All Notices shall be deemed given on the day of mailing. Either party to this Franchise Agreement may change its address for the receipt of Notices at any time by giving notice thereof to the other as provided in this Section. Any notice given by a party hereunder must be signed by an authorized representative of such party. 
      19.3 Conferences. The parties hereby agree to meet at reasonable times on reasonable notice to discuss any aspect of this Franchise Agreement, the provision of Cable Services or the Cable System during the term of this Franchise Agreement. 
      19.4 Governing Law. This Franchise Agreement shall be construed pursuant to the laws of the State of New Mexico and the United States of America. 
      19.5 Waiver of Compliance. No failure by either party to insist upon the strict performance of any covenant, agreement, term or condition of this Franchise Agreement, or to exercise any right, term or remedy consequent upon a breach thereof shall constitute a waiver of any such breach or such covenant, agreement, term or condition. No waiver of any breach shall affect or alter this Franchise Agreement, but each and every covenant, agreement, term or condition of this Franchise Agreement shall continue in full force and effect with respect to any other then existing or subsequent breach thereof. Municipality may waive any obligation of Company under this Franchise Agreement, in whole or in part, at any time. 
      19.6 Severability. If any section, paragraph, or provision of this Franchise Agreement shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Franchise Agreement. 
      19.7 Effective Date. This Franchise Agreement shall be effective 30 days from passage of this Ordinance ("Effective Date"). Any prior franchise shall terminate as of midnight of the day immediately preceding the Effective Date of this Franchise Agreement, except as provided in Section 19.1. 
      19.8 Captions. All captions are for convenience of use and have no substantive effect, except for those captions in the Definitions section of this Franchise Agreement. 
      19.9 Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between this Franchise Agreement and the provisions of any Ordinance, prior franchise or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with Company, the provisions of this Franchise Agreement shall control. 
      19.10 Force Majeure . The Company shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provision of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination, cancellation or revocation of the Franchise), where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic act of nature, labor disputes, governmental, administrative or judicial order or regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond the Company's ability to anticipate or control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which the Company's cable and/or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
      19.11 Franchise Agreement Accepted. Company further acknowledges by acceptance of this Franchise Agreement that it accepts the Municipality's legal right to issue and enforce this Franchise regardless of whether such provisions are contained in the Franchise Agreement or such cable ordinance, or both. As of the Effective Date and without waiving any rights, Company may have to challenge the lawfulness or enforceability of this Franchise Agreement or municipal ordinances in the future, Company does not contend that any provision of the Franchise Agreement is unlawful or unenforceable. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 

--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The exhibits referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 

APPENDIX I - CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Santa Fe
City Code
1981Santa Fe
City Code
1987-1-1 1-1.1 1-1-2 1-1.2 1-1-3 1-1.3 1-1-4 1-1.4 1-1-5 1-2 1-1-6 1-3.1 1-1-7 1-4 1-1-8 1-5.1 1-1-9 1-5.2 1-1-10 2-1.1 1-1-11 2-3.1 1-1-12 2-3.2 1-1-13 2-3.3 1-1-14 2-3.4 1-1-15 2-3.5 1-1-16 2-3.6 1-1-17 1-3.3 1-1-18 1-3.4 -1-19 1-3.5 1-1-20 2-1.2 1-1-21 2-1.3 1-1-22 2-1.4 1-1-23 2-1.5 1-1-24 2-1.6 1-1-25 2-1.7 1-1-26 2-1.8 1-1-27 2-1.9 1-1-28 2-1.10 1-1-29 2-1.11 1-1-30 2-1.12 1-1-31 2-1.13 1-1-32 2-1.14 1-1-33 2-1.15 1-1-34 2-2.1 1-1-35 2-2.2 1-1-36 2-2.3 1-1-37 2-2.4 1-1-38 2-2.5 1-1-39 2-2.6 1-1-40 2-2.7 1-1-41 2-2.8 1-1-42 2-2.9 1-2-1 9-1.1 1-2-2 9-1.2 1-2-3 Deleted 1-2-4 9-1.11 1-2-5 9-1.12 1-2-6 9-1.13 1-2-7 9-1.14 1-3-1 9-2.1 1-3-2 9-2.2 1-3-3 9-2.3 1-3-4 9-2.4 1-3-5 9-2.5 1-3-6 Deleted 1-3-7 9-2.7 1-3-8 9-2.8 1-3-9 9-2.9 1-3-10 9-2.10 1-4-1 1-6.1 1-4-2 1-6.2 1-4-3 1-6.3 1-4-4 1-6.4 1-4-5 1-6.5 1-4-6 1-6.6 1-5-1 1-7.1 1-5-2 1-7.2 1-5-3 1-7.4 1-5-4 1-7.5 1-5-5 1-7.6 1-5-6 1-7.7 1-5-7 1-7.8 1-5-8 1-7.9 1-5-9 1-7.10 1-5-10 1-7.11 2-1-1 2-4.1 2-1-2 2-4.2 2-1-3 2-4.3 2-1-4 2-4.4 2-1-5 2-4.5 2-1-6 2-4.6 2-1-7 2-4.7 2-1-8 2-4.8 2-1-9 2-4.9 2-1-10 2-4.10 2-1-11 2-4.11 2-1-12 2-4.12 2-1-13 2-7.1 2-1-14 2-7.2 2-1-15 2-7.3 2-1-16 2-5.1 2-1-17 2-5.2 2-1-18 2-5.3 2-1-19 2-5.4 2-1-20 2-5.5 2-1-21 2-5.6 2-1-22 2-6.1 2-1-23 2-6.2 2-1-24 2-6.3 2-1-25 2-6.4 2-1-26 2-6.5 2-2-1 19-1 2-2-2 19-2 2-2-3 19-3.1 2-2-4 19-3.2 2-2-5 19-3.3 2-2-6 19-3.4 2-2-7 19-3.5 2-2-8 19-3.6 2-2-9 19-3.7 2-2-10 19-3.8 2-2-11 19-3.9 2-2-12 19-3.10 2-2-13 19-3.11 2-2-14 19-3.12 2-3-1 19-4.1 2-3-2 19-4.2 2-3-3 19-4.3 2-3-4 19-4.4 2-4-1 19-5.1 2-4-2 19-5.2 2-4-3 19-5.3 2-4-4 19-5.4 2-5-1 19-6.1 2-5-2 19-6.2 2-6-1 19-7.1 2-6-2 19-7.2 2-6-3 19-7.3 2-6-4 19-7.4 2-6-5 19-7.5 2-6-6 19-7.6 2-6-7 19-7.7 2-6-8 19-7.8 2-7-1 19-8.1 2-7-2 19-8.2 2-7-3 19-8.3 2-7-4 19-8.4 2-7-5 19-8.5 2-7-6 19-8.6 2-7-7 19-8.7 2-7-8 19-8.8 2-7-9 19-8.9 2-8-1 19-9.1 2-8-2 19-9.2 2-8-3 19-9.3 2-8-4 19-9.4 2-9-1 19-10.1 2-9-2 19-10.2 2-9-3 19-10.3 2-9-4 19-10.4 2-9-5 19-10.5 2-10-1 19-11.1 2-10-2 19-11.2 2-10-3 19-11.3 2-10-4 19-11.4 2-11-1 19-12.1 2-11-2 19-12.2 2-12-1 1-8.1 2-12-2 1-8.2 3-1-1 2-12.1 3-1-2 14-39.1 3-1-3 14-39.2 3-1-4 14-39.3 3-1-5 14-39.4 3-1-6 14-39.5 3-1-7 14-39.6 3-2-1 Repealed 3-2-2 14-2.1 3-2-3 14-2.4 3-2-4 14-2.5 3-2-5 Repealed 3-2-6 Repealed 3-2-7 Repealed 3-2-7-1 14-3.1 3-2-8 14-3.2 3-2-9 14-3.3 3-2-10 14-2 3-2-11 14-2.6 3-2-12.1 14-2.7 3-2A-1 14-4 3-2A-2 14-4 3-2A-3 14-4 3-2A-4 14-4 3-2A-5 14-4 3-3-1 14-80 3-3-2 14-81 3-3-3 14-82 3-3-4 14-83 3-3-5 14-84 3-3-6 14-85 3-3-7 14-86 3-3-8 14-87 3-3-10 14-88.1 3-3-11 14-88.2 3-3-12 14-88.3 3-3-13 14-88.4 3-3-14 14-88.5 3-3-15 14-88.6 3-3-16 14-88.7 3-3-17 14-88.8 3-3-18 14-88.9 3-3-19 14-88.10 3-3A-1 14-1.1 3-3A-2 14-1.2 3-3A-3 14-1.2 3-3A-4 14-1.2 3-3A-4.1 14-1.2 3-3A-5 14-1.2 3-3A-6 14-1.2 3-3A-7 14-1.2 3-3A-8 14-1.2 3-3A-9 14-1.2 3-3A-10 14-1.2 3-3A-11 14-1.2 3-3A-12 14-1.2 3-3A-13 14-1.2 3-3A-14 14-1.2 3-3A-15 14-1.2 3-3A-16 14-1.2 3-3A-17 14-1.2 3-3A-18 14-1.2 3-3A-19 14-1.2 3-3A-20 14-1.2 3-3A-21 14-1.2 3-3A-22 14-1.2 3-3A-23 14-1.2 3-3A-24 14-1.2 3-3A-25 14-1.2 3-3A-26 14-1.2 3-3A-27 14-1.2 3-3A-28 14-1.2 3-3A-29 14-1.2 3-3A-30 14-1.2 3-3A-31 14-1.2 3-3A-32 14-1.2 3-3A-33 14-1.2 3-3A-33.1 14-1.2 3-3A-34 14-1.2 3-3A-35 14-1.2 3-3A-36 14-1.2 3-3A-37 14-1.2 3-3A-38 14-1.2 3-3A-39 14-1.2 3-3A-40 14-1.2 3-3A-41 14-1.2 3-3A-42 14-1.2 3-3A-43 14-1.2 3-3A-44 14-1.2 3-3A-45 14-1.2 3-3A-46 14-1.2 3-3A-47 14-1.2 3-3A-47.1 14-1.2 3-3A-48 14-1.2 3-3A-49 14-1.2 3-3A-50 14-1.2 3-3A-50.1 14-1.2 3-3A-51 14-1.2 3-3A-52 14-1.2 3-3A-53 14-1.2 3-3A-54 14-1.2 3-3A-55 14-1.2 3-3A-56 14-1.2 3-3A-57 14-1.2 3-3A-58 14-1.2 3-3A-59 14-1.2 3-3A-60 14-1.2 3-3A-61 14-1.2 3-3A-62 14-1.2 3-3A-63 14-1.2 3-3A-64 14-1.2 3-3A-65 14-1.2 3-3A-66 14-1.2 3-3A-67 14-1.2 3-3A-68 14-1.2 3-3A-69 14-1.2 3-3A-70 14-1.2 3-3A-71 14-1.2 3-3A-72 14-1.2 3-3A-73 14-1.2 3-3A-74 14-1.2 3-3A-75 14-1.2 3-3A-76 14-1.2 3-3A-77 14-1.2 3-3A-78 14-1.2 3-3A-79 14-1.2 3-3A-80 14-1.2 3-3A-81 14-1.2 3-3A-82 14-1.2 3-3A-82.1 14-1.2 3-3A-83 14-1.2 3-3A-84 14-1.2 3-3A-85 14-1.2 3-3A-86 14-1.2 3-3A-87 14-1.2 3-3A-88 14-1.2 3-3A-89 14-1.2 3-3A-90 14-1.2 3-3A-91 14-1.2 3-3A-92 14-1.2 3-3A-93 14-1.2 3-3A-94 14-1.2 3-3A-95 14-1.2 3-3A-96 14-1.2 3-3A-97 14-1.2 3-3A-98 14-1.2 3-4-1 14-45 3-4-3 14-47.1 3-4-4 14-47.2 3-4-5 14-38.1 3-4-6 14-48.2 14-48.1 3-4-7 14-49.1 3-4-7.1 14-49.2 3-4-7.2 14-49.3 3-4-7.3 14-49.4 3-4-7.4 14-49.5 3-4-7.5 14-49.6 3-4-8 14-49.7 3-4-9 14-50.1 3-4-10 14-51.1 3-4-10A 14-51.2 3-4-11 14-51.3 3-4-11A 14-51.4 3-4-12 14-51.5 3-4-13 14-51.6 3-4-14 14-51.7 3-4-14.1 14-93.1 3-4-14.2 14-93.2 3-4-14.3 14-93.3 3-4-14.4 14-93.4 3-4-14.5 14-93.5 3-4-14.6 14-93.6 3-4-14.7 14-93.7 3-4-14.8 14-93.8 3-4-15 14-7.1 3-4-16 14-7.2 3-4-17 14-7.3 3-4-18 14-7.4 3-4-19 14-7.5 3-4-20 14-7.6 3-4-21 14-7.7 3-4-22 14-7.8 3-4-23 14-7.9 3-4-24 14-7.10 3-4-25 14-7.11 3-5-1 14-15.1 3-5-2 14-15.2 3-5-3 14-15.3 3-5-4 14-15.4 3-5-5 14-15.5 3-5-6 14-15.6 3-5-7 14-15.7 3-5-8 14-53.1 3-5-9 14-53.2 3-5-9.1 14-53.3 3-5-10 Deleted 3-5-11 14-53.5 3-6-1 14-8.1 3-6-2 14-8.2 3-6-3 14-8.3 3-6-4 14-8.4 3-6-5 14-8.5 3-6-6 14-8.6 3-6-7 14-8.7 3-6-8 14-8.8 3-6-9 14-8.9 3-7-1 14-5.1 3-7-2 14-5.2 3-7-3 14-5.3 3-7-4 14-5.4 3-8-1 14-9.1 3-8-2 14-9.11 3-8-3 14-9.12 3-8-4 14-9.2 3-8-5 14-9.15 3-8-6 14-9.16 3-8-7 14-9.17 3-8-8 14-9.18 3-10A-1 14-90.1 3-10A-2 14-90.2 3-10A-3 14-90.3 3-10A-4 14-90.4 3-10A-5 14-90.5 3-10A-6 14-90.6 3-10A-7 14-94.1 3-10A-8 14-94.2 3-10A-9 14-94.3 3-10A-10 14-46.1 3-10A-11 14-90 3-11-1 14-17.1 3-11-2 14-17.2 3-11-3 14-17.3 3-11-4 14-17.4 3-11-5 14-17.5 3-11-6 14-17.6 3-11-7 Deleted 3-11-8 14-17.8 3-11-9 14-17.9 3-11-10 14-17.10 3-11-11 14-17.11 3-11-12 14-17.12 3-11-13 Repealed 3-11-14 Deleted 3-11-16 14-17.14 3-11-17 Deleted 3-11-18 14-17.16 3-11-19 Deleted 3-11-20 14-17.18 3-11-21 14-17.19 3-11-22 14-17.20 3-12-1 14-18.1 3-12-2 14-18.2 3-12-3 14-18.3 3-12-4 14-18.4 3-12-5 14-18.5 3-12-6 14-18.6 3-12-7 14-18.7 3-12-8 14-18.8 3-12-9 14-18.9 3-12-10 14-18.10 3-12-11 Deleted 3-12-12 14-18.12 3-12-13 14-18.13 3-12-14 14-18.14 3-12-15 14-18.15 3-12-16 14-18.16 3-12-17 14-18.17 3-12-18 14-18.18 3-13-1 14-19.1 3-13-2 14-19.2 3-13-3 14-19.3 3-13-4 14-19.4 3-13-5 14-19.5 3-13-6 14-19.6 3-13-7 14-19.7 3-13-8 14-19.8 3-13-9 14-19.9 3-13-10 14-19.10 3-13-11 14-19.11 3-13-12 14-19.12 3-13-13 14-19.13 3-13-14 14-19.14 3-13-15 14-19.15 3-13-16 14-19.16 3-14-1 14-20.1 3-14-2 14-20.2 3-14-3 14-20.3 3-14-4 14-20.4 3-14-5 14-20.5 3-14-6 14-20.6 3-14-7 14-20.7 3-14-8 14-20.8 3-14-9 14-20.9 3-14-10 14-20.10 3-14-11 14-20.11 3-14-12 14-20.12 3-14-13 14-20.13 3-14-14 14-20.14 3-14-15 14-20.15 3-15-1 14-21.1 3-15-2 14-21.2 3-15-3 14-21.3 3-15-4 14-21.4 3-15-5 14-21.5 3-15-6 14-21.6 3-15-7 14-21.7 3-15-8 14-21.8 3-15-9 14-21.9 3-15-10 14-21.10 3-15-11 14-21.11 3-16-1 14-22.1 3-16-2 14-22.2 3-16-3 14-22.3 3-16-4 14-22.4 3-16-5 14-22.5 3-16-6 14-22.6 3-16-7 14-22.7 3-16-8 14-22.8 3-16-9 14-22.9 3-16-9.1 14-22.10 3-16-10 14-22.11 3-16-11 14-22.12 3-16-12 14-22.13 3-17-1 14-23.1 3-17-2 14-23.2 3-17-3 14-23.3 3-17-4 14-23.4 3-17-5 14-23.5 3-17-6 14-23.6 3-17-7 14-23.7 3-17-8 14-23.8 3-17-9 14-23.9 3-17-10 14-23.10 3-17-11 14-23.11 3-18-1 14-24.1 3-18-2 14-24.2 3-18-3 14-24.3 3-18-4 14-24.4 3-18-5 14-24.5 3-18-6 14-24.6 3-18-7 14-24.7 3-18-8 14-24.8 3-18-9 14-24.9 3-18-10 14-24.10 3-18-11 14-24.11 3-19A-1 14-26.1 3-19A-2 14-26.2 3-19A-2.1 14-26.3 3-19A-3 14-26.4 3-19A-4 14-26.5 3-19A-5 14-26.6 3-19A-6 14-26.7 3-19A-7 14-26.8 3-19A-7.1 14-26.9 3-19A-10 14-26.10 3-19A-11 14-26.11 3-19A-11.1 14-26.12 3-19A-12 14-26.13 3-19A-12.1 14-26.14 3-19A-13 14-26.15 3-19A-14 14-26.16 3-19A-15 14-26.106 3-19A-16 14-26.107 3-19A-17 14-26.108 3-19A-18 14-26.109 3-19A-19 14-26.110 3-19A-20 14-26.111 3-19A-21 14-26.112 3-19A-22 14-26.113 3-19A-23 14-26.114 3-19A-24 14-26.115 3-19A-25 14-26.76 3-19A-26 14-26.77 3-19A-27 14-26.78 3-19A-28 14-26.79 3-19A-29 14-26.80 3-19A-30 14-26.81 3-19A-31 14-26.82 3-19A-32 14-26.83 3-19A-33 14-26.84 3-19A-34 14-26.85 3-19A-35 14-26.56 3-19A-36 14-26.57 3-19A-37 14-26.58 3-19A-38 14-26.59 3-19A-39 14-26.60 3-19A-40 14-26.61 3-19A-41 14-26.62 3-19A-42 14-26.63 3-19A-43 14-26.64 3-19A-44 14-26.65 3-19A-45 14-26.86 3-19A-46 14-26.87 3-19A-47 14-26.88 3-19A-48 14-26.89 3-19A-49 14-26.90 3-19A-50 14-26.91 3-19A-51 14-26.92 3-19A-52 14-26.93 3-19A-53 14-26.94 3-19A-54 14-26.95 3-19A-55 14-26.116 3-19A-56 14-26.117 3-19A-57 14-26.118 3-19A-58 14-26.119 3-19A-59 14-26.120 3-19A-60 14-26.121 3-19A-61 14-26.122 3-19A-62 14-26.123 3-19A-63 14-26.124 3-19A-64 14-26.125 3-19A-65 14-26.17 3-19A-66 14-26.18 3-19A-67 14-26.19 3-19A-68 14-26.20 3-19A-69 14-26.21 3-19A-70 14-26.22 3-19A-71 14-26.23 3-19A-72 14-26.24 3-19A-73 14-26.25 3-19A-74 14-26.26 3-19A-75 14-26.136 3-19A-76 14-26.137 3-19A-77 14-26.138 3-19A-78 14-26.139 3-19A-79 14-26.140 3-19A-80 14-26.141 3-19A-81 14-26.142 3-19A-82 14-26.143 3-19A-83 14-26.144 3-19A-84 14-26.145 3-19A-85 14-26.27 3-19A-86 14-26.28 3-19A-87 14-26.29 3-19A-88 14-26.30 3-19A-89 14-26.31 3-19A-90 14-26.32 3-19A-91 14-26.33 3-19A-92 14-26.34 3-19A-93 14-26.35 3-19A-94 14-26.36 3-19A-95 14-26.96 3-19A-96 14-26.97 3-19A-97 14-26.98 3-19A-98 14-26.99 3-19A-99 14-26.100 3-19A-100 14-26.101 3-19A-101 14-26.102 3-19A-102 14-26.103 3-19A-103 14-26.104 3-19A-104 14-26.105 3-19A-105 14-26.126 3-19A-106 14-26.127 3-19A-107 14-26.128 3-19A-108 14-26.129 3-19A-109 14-26.130 3-19A-110 14-26.131 3-19A-111 14-26.132 3-19A-112 14-26.133 3-19A-113 14-26.134 3-19A-114 14-26.135 3-19A-115 14-26.37 3-19A-116 14-26.38 3-19A-117 14-26.39 3-19A-118 14-26.40 3-19A-119 14-26.41 3-19A-120 14-26.42 3-19A-121 14-26.43 3-19A-122 14-26.44 3-19A-123 14-26.45 3-19A-124 14-26.46 3-19A-125 14-26.47 3-19A-126 14-26.48 3-19A-127 14-26.49 3-19A-128 14-26.50 3-19A-129 14-26.51 3-19A-130 14-26.52 3-19A-131 14-26.53 3-19A-132 14-26.54 3-19A-133 14-26.55 3-19A-134 14-26.146 3-19A-135 14-26.147 3-19A-136 14-26.148 3-19A-137 14-26.149 3-19A-138 14-26.150 3-19A-139 14-26.151 3-19A-140 14-26.152 3-19A-141 14-26.153 3-19A-142 14-26.154 3-19A-142.1 14-26.66 3-19A-142.2 14-26.67 3-19A-142.3 14-26.68 3-19A-142.4 14-26.69 3-19A-142.5 14-26.70 3-19A-142.6 14-26.71 3-19A-142.7 14-26.72 3-19A-142.8 14-26.73 3-19A-142.9 14-26.74 3-19A-142.10 14-26.75 3-19A-143 14-26.155 3-19A-144 14-26.156 3-19A-144.1 14-26.157 3-19A-144.2 14-26.158 3-19A-145 14-26.159 3-19A-146 14-26.160 3-19A-147 14-26.161 3-19A-148 14-26.162 3-19A-149 14-26.163 3-19A-150 14-26.164 3-19A-151 14-26.165 3-19B-1 14-25.1 3-19B-2 14-25.2 3-19B-3 14-25.3 3-19B-4 14-25.4 3-19B-5 14-25.5 3-19B-6 14-25.6 3-19B-7 14-25.7 3-19B-8 14-25.8 3-19B-9 14-25.9 3-19B-10 14-25.10 3-19B-11 14-25.11 3-19B-12 14-25.12 3-19B-13 14-25.13 3-19B-14 14-25.14 3-20-1 14-27.1 3-20-2 14-27.2 3-20-3 14-27.3 3-20-4 14-27.4 3-20-5 14-27.5 3-20-6 14-27.6 3-20-7 14-27.7 3-20-8 14-27.8 3-20-9 14-27.9 3-20-10 14-27.10 3-20-11 14-27.11 3-21-1 14-28.1 3-21-2 14-28.2 3-21-3 14-28.3 3-21-4 14-28.4 3-21-5 14-28.5 3-21-6 14-28.6 3-21-7 14-28.7 3-21-8 14-28.8 3-21-9 14-28.9 3-21-10 14-28.10 3-21-11 14-28.11 3-22-1 14-29.1 3-22-2 14-29.2 3-22-3 14-29.3 3-22-4 14-29.4 3-22-5 14-29.5 3-22-6 14-29.6 3-22-7 14-29.7 3-22-8 14-29.8 3-22-9 14-29.9 3-22-10 14-29.10 3-22-11 14-29.11 3-22-12 14-29.12 3-22-13 14-29.13 3-22-14 14-29.14 3-23-1 14-30.1 3-23-2 14-30.2 3-23-3 14-30.3 3-23-4 14-30.4 3-23-5 14-30.5 3-23-6 14-30.6 3-23-7 14-30.7 3-23-8 14-30.8 3-23-9 14-30.9 3-23-10 14-30.10 3-23-11 14-30.11 3-23-12 14-30.12 3-23-13 14-30.13 3-23-14 14-30.14 3-24-1 14-31.1 3-24-2 14-31.2 3-24-3 14-31.3 3-24-4 14-31.4 3-24-5 14-31.5 3-24-6 14-31.6 3-24-7 14-31.7 3-24A-1 14-32.1 3-24A-2 14-32.2 3-24A-3 14-32.3 3-24A-4 14-32.4 3-24A-5 14-32.5 3-24A-6 14-32.6 3-24A-7 14-32.7 3-25-1 14-33.1 3-25-2 14-33.2 3-25-3 14-33.3 3-25-4 14-33.4 3-25-5 14-33.6 3-25-6 14-33.7 3-25-7 14-33.8 3-25-8 14-33.9 3-25-9 14-33.10 3-25-10 14-33.11 3-25-11 14-33.12 3-25-12 14-33.13 3-25-13 14-33.14 3-25-14 14-33.15 3-25-15 14-33.16 3-25-16 14-33.17 3-25-17 14-33.18 3-25-18 14-33.19 3-25-19 14-33.20 3-25-20 14-33.21 3-25-21 14-33.22 3-26-1 14-34.1 3-26-2 14-34.2 3-26-3 14-34.3 3-26-4 14-34.4 3-26-5 14-34.5 3-26-6 14-34.6 3-26-7 14-34.7 3-26-8 14-34.8 3-26-9 14-34.9 3-26-10 14-34.10 3-26-11 14-34.11 3-26-12 14-34.12 3-26-13 14-34.13 3-26-14 14-34.14 3-27-1 14-92.1 3-27-2 14-92.2 3-27-3 14-92.3 3-27-4 14-92.4 3-27-5 14-92.5 3-27-6 14-92.6 3-27-7 14-92.7 3-27-8 14-92.8 3-27-9 14-92.9 3-27-10 14-92.10 3-27-11 14-92.11 3-28-1 14-35.1 3-28-2 14-35.2 3-28-3 14-35.3 3-28-4 14-35.4 3-28-5 14-35.5 3-28-6 14-35.6 3-28-7 14-35.7 3-28-8 14-35.8 3-28-9 14-35.9 3-28-10 14-35.10 3-28-11 14-35.11 3-28-12 14-35.12 3-28-13 14-35.13 3-28-14 14-35.14 3-28-15 14-35.15 3-28A-1 14-54.1 3-28A-2 14-54.2 3-28A-3 14-54.3 3-28A-4 14-54.4 3-28A-5 14-55 3-28A-5.1 14-57 3-28A-6 14-56 3-29-1 14-70.1 3-29-1.1 14-70.2 3-29-1.2 14-70.3 3-29-1.3 14-70.4 3-29-1.4 14-70.5 3-29-2 14-70.6 3-29-2.1 14-70.7 3-29-3 14-70.8 3-29-4 14-70.9 3-29-5 14-70.10 3-29-5.1 14-70.11 3-29-6 14-70.12 3-29-6.1 14-70.13 3-29-6.2 14-70.14 3-29-6.3 14-70.15 3-29-6.4 14-70.16 3-29-6.5 14-70.17 3-29-6.6 14-70.18 3-29-7 14-70.19 3-29-8 14-70.20 3-29-9 14-70.21 3-29-10 14-70.22 3-29-11 14-70.23 3-29-12 14-70.24 3-29-12.1 14-70.25 3-29-13 14-70.26 3-29-14 14-70.27 3-29-15 14-70.28 3-29-15.1 14-70.29 3-29-16 14-70.30 3-29-17 14-70.31 3-29-18 14-70.32 3-29-19 14-70.33 3-29-20 14-70.34 3-29-21 14-70.35 3-29-22 14-70.36 3-29-23 14-70.37 3-29-25 14-70.38 3-29-25.1 14-70.39 3-29-26 14-70.40 3-29-27 14-70.41 3-29-28 14-70.42 3-29-29 14-70.43 3-29-30 14-70.44 3-29-31 14-70.45 3-29-32 14-70.46 3-29-33 14-70.47 3-29-34 14-70.48 3-29-35 14-70.49 3-29-36 14-70.50 3-29-37 14-70.51 3-29-38 14-70.52 3-29-39 14-70.53 3-29-40 14-70.54 3-29-41 14-70.55 3-29-42 14-70.56 3-29-42.1 14-70.57 3-29-42.2 14-70.58 3-29-42.3 14-70.59 3-29-44 14-70.60 3-29-45 14-70.61 3-29-46 14-70.62 3-29-48 14-70.63 3-29-49 14-70.64 3-29-50 14-70.65 3-29-51 14-70.66 3-29-53 14-70.67 3-29-54 14-70.68 3-29-55 14-70.69 3-29-56 14-70.70 3-29A-1 14-58.1 3-29A-2 14-58.2 3-29A-3 Deleted 3-29A-4 14-58.4 3-29A-5 14-58.5 3-29A-6 14-58.6 3-29A-7 14-58.7 3-29A-8 14-58.8 3-29B-1 14-71.1 3-29B-2 14-71.2 3-29B-3 14-71.3 3-29B-4 14-71.4 3-29B-5 14-71.5 3-29C-1 14-72.1 3-29C-2 14-72.2 3-29C-3 14-72.3 3-29C-4 14-72.4 3-29C-5 14-72.5 3-29C-6 14-72.6 3-29C-7 14-72.7 3-29C-8 14-72.8 3-29C-9 14-72.9 3-29D-1 14-73.1 3-29D-2 14-73.2 3-29D-3 14-73.3 3-29D-4 14-73.4 3-29D-5 14-73.5 3-29E-1 14-74.1 3-29E-2 14-74.2 3-29E-3 14-74.3 3-29E-4 14-74.4 3-29E-5 14-74.5 3-30-1 14-16.1 3-30-2 14-16.2 3-30-3 14-16.3 3-30-4 14-16.4 3-30-5 14-16.5 3-30-6 14-16.6 3-30-7 14-16.7 3-31-1 10-4.1 3-31-2 10-4.2 3-31-3 10-4.3 3-31-4 10-4.4 3-31-5 10-4.5 3-31-6 10-4.6 3-31-7 10-4.7 3-31-8 10-4.8 3-31-9 10-4.9 3-31-10 10-4.10 3-31-11 10-4.11 3-32-1 14-91.1 3-32-2 14-91.2 3-32-3 14-91.3 3-32-4 14-91.4 3-32-5 14-91.5 3-32-6 14-91.6 3-32-7 14-91.7 3-32-8 14-91.8 3-32-9 14-91.9 3-33-1 Repealed 3-33-2 Repealed 3-33-3 Repealed 3-33-4 Repealed 3-34-1 3-34-2 6-4.1 3-34-3 6-4.2 3-34-4 6-4.3 4-1-1 2-14.1 4-1-2 21-1.1 4-1-3 21-1.2 4-1-4 21-1.3 4-1-5 21-1.4 4-1-6 21-1.5 4-2-1 21-1.6 4-2-2 21-1.7 4-2-3 21-1.8 4-2-4 21-1.9 4-2-5 21-1.10 4-2-6 21-1.11 4-2-7 21-1.12 4-2-8 21-1.13 4-2-8.1 21-1.14 4-2-9 21-1.15 4-2-10 21-1.16 4-2-11 21-1.17 4-3-1 10-1.1 4-3-2 10-1.2 4-3-3 10-1.3 4-3-4 10-1.4 4-3-5 10-1.5 4-3-6 10-1.6 4-3-7 10-1.7 4-3-8 10-1.8 4-3-9 10-1.9 4-3-10 10-1.10 4-3-11 10-1.11 4-3-12 10-1.12 4-3-13 10-1.13 4-3-14 10-1.14 4-3-15 10-1.15 4-3-16 10-1.16 4-4-1 22-1.1 4-4-2 22-1.2 4-4-3 22-1.3 4-4-4 22-1.4 4-4-5 22-1.5 4-4-6 22-1.6 4-5-1 22-2.1 4-5-2 22-2.2 4-5-3 22-2.3 4-5-4 22-2.4 4-5-5 22-2.5 4-5-6 22-2.6 4-5-7 22-2.7 4-5-8 22-2.8 4-5-10 22-2.9 4-5-11 22-2.10 4-5-12 22-2.11 4-5-13 22-2.12 4-6-1 22-3.1 4-6-2 22-3.2 4-6-3 22-3.3 4-6-4 22-3.4 4-6-5 22-3.5 4-6-6 22-3.6 4-6-7 22-3.7 4-6-8 22-3.8 4-6-9 22-3.9 4-7-1 22-4.1 4-7-2 22-4.2 4-7-3 22-4.3 4-7-4 22-4.4 4-7-5 22-4.5 4-7-5.1 22-4.6 4-7-5.2 22-4.7 4-7-6 22-4.8 4-8-1 22-5.1 4-8-2 22-5.2 4-8-3 22-5.3 4-8-4 22-5.4 4-8-5 22-5.5 4-8-6 22-5.6 4-8-7 22-5.7 4-8-8 22-5.8 4-8-9 22-5.9 4-8-10 22-5.10 4-8-11 22-5.11 4-8-12 22-5.12 4-9-1 22-6 4-10-1 22-7.1 4-10-2 22-7.2 4-10-3 22-7.3 4-10-4 22-7.4 4-10-5 22-7.5 4-10-6 22-7.6 4-10-7 22-7.7 4-10-8 22-7.8 4-10-9 22-7.9 4-10-10 22-7.10 4-10-11 22-7.11 4-10-12 22-7.12 4-10-13 22-7.13 4-11-1 23-1.1 4-11-2 23-1.2 4-11-3 23-1.3 4-11-4 23-1.4 4-11-5 23-1.4 4-11-6 23-1.4 4-11-7 23-1.5 4-11-8 23-1.6 4-11-9 23-1.7 4-11-10 23-1.8 4-11-11 23-1.9 4-11-12 23-1.10 4-11-13 23-1.11 4-11-14 23-1.12 4-12-1 23-2 4-12-2 23-2 4-12-3 23-2 4-12-4 23-2 4-12-5 23-2 4-12-6 23-2 4-12-7 23-2 4-12-8 23-2 4-12-9 23-2 4-12-10 23-2 4-12-11 23-2 4-13-1 23-3.1 4-13-2 23-3.2 4-13-3 23-3.3 4-13-4 23-3.4 4-13-5 23-3.5 4-13-6 23-3.6 4-13-7 23-3.7 4-13-8 23-3.8 4-13-9 23-3.9 4-13-10 23-3.10 4-13-11 23-3.11 4-13-12 23-3.12 4-13-13 Deleted 4-13-14 Deleted 4-13-15 23-3.15 4-13-16 23-3.16 4-13-17 23-3.17 4-13-18 23-3.18 4-14-1 25-1.1 4-14-2 25-1.2 4-14-3 25-1.3 4-14-4 25-1.4 4-14-5 25-1.5 4-14-6 25-1.6 4-14-7 25-1.7 4-14-8 25-1.8 4-14-9 25-1.9 4-15-1 25-2.1 4-15-2 25-2.2 4-15-3 25-2.3 4-15-4 25-2.4 4-15-5 25-2.5 4-16-1 6-12.1 4-16-2 6-12.2 4-16-3 6-12.3 4-16-4 6-12.4 4-16-5 6-12.5 4-16-5B 4-16-6 6-12.6 4-16-7 6-12.7 4-16-8 6-12.8 4-16-9 6-12.9 4-16-10 6-12.10 4-16-11 6-12.11 4-17-1 23-4.1 4-17-2 23-4.2 4-17-3 23-4.3 4-17-4 23-4.4 4-17-5 23-4.5 4-17-6 23-4.6 4-17-7 23-4.7 4-17-8 18-8.1 4-17-8.1 18-8.2 4-17-8.2 18-8.3 4-17-8.3 18-8.4 4-17-8.4 18-8.5 4-17-8.5 18-8.6 4-17-8.6 18-8.7 4-17-8.7 18-8.8 4-17-8.8 18-8.9 4-17-8.9 18-8.10 4-17-10 23-4.8 4-17-11 23-4.9 4-17-12 23-4.10 4-17-13 23-4.11 4-17-14 23-5.1 4-17-15 23-5.2 4-17-16 23-5.3 4-17-17 23-5.4 4-17-18 18-9.1 4-17-18.1 18-9.2 4-17-18.2 18-9.3 4-17-19 23-5.5 5-1-1 2-9.1 5-1-2 2-9.2 5-1-3 2-9.3 5-1-4 2-9.4 5-1-5 2-9.5 5-2-1 20-24.1 5-2-2 20-24.2 5-2-3 20-24.3 5-2-4 20-24.4 5-2-5 20-24.5 5-3-1 2-9.6 5-3-2 2-9.6 5-3-3 2-9.6 5-3-4 2-9.6 5-3-5 2-9.6 5-3-6 2-9.6 5-3-7 2-9.6 5-4-1 20-1.1 5-4-2 20-1.2 5-4-3 20-1.3 5-4-4 20-1.4 5-4-5 20-1.5 5-5-1 20-8 5-5-2 20-9 5-5-3 20-2.1 5-5-4 20-3 5-5-5 20-17 5-5-6 20-16 5-5-7 20-11 5-5-8 20-20 5-5-9 20-13 5-5-10 20-10 5-5-11 20-18 5-5-12 20-4.1 5-5-13 20-4.2 5-5-14 20-4.3 5-5-15 20-7 5-5-16 20-14 5-5-17 20-15.1 5-5-18 20-15.2 5-5-19 20-6 5-5-20 20-5 5-5-21 20-12.1 5-5-22 20-12.2 5-5-23 20-12.3 5-5-24 20-12.4 5-5-25 20-19 5-5-26 Deleted 5-5-27 Deleted 5-5-28 Deleted 5-5-29 Deleted 5-5-30 Deleted 5-5-31 Deleted 5-5-32 Deleted 5-5-33 Deleted 5-6-1 24-1 5-6-2 24-1 5-6-3 24-1 5-6-3.1 24-1 5-6-4 24-1 5-6-4.1 24-1 5-6-5 24-1 5-6-6 24-1 5-6-7 24-1 5-6-8 24-1 5-6-9 24-1 5-6-10 24-1 5-6-10.1 24-1 5-6-11 24-1 5-6-12 24-1 6-1-1 2-11.1 6-1-2 2-11.1 6-2-1 5-1 6-2-2 5-2 6-3-1 5-3.1 6-3-2 5-3.2 6-3-3 5-3.3 6-4-1 5-4.1 6-4-3 5-4.2 6-4-4 5-4.3 6-4-5 5-4.4 6-5-1 5-5.1 6-5-2 5-5.2 6-5-3 5-5.3 6-5-4 5-5.4 6-5-5 5-5.5 6-5-6 5-5.6 6-6-1 5-6.1 6-6-2 5-6.2 6-6-3 5-6.3 6-6-4 5-6.4 6-6-5 5-6.5 6-6-6 5-6.6 6-7-1 5-7.1 6-7-2 5-7.2 6-7-3 5-7.3 6-7-4 5-7.4 6-7-5 5-7.5 6-7-6 5-7.6 6-7-7 5-7.7 6-7-8 5-7.8 6-7-9 5-7.9 6-7-10 5-7.10 6-7-11 5-7.11 6-7-12 5-7.11 6-7-13 5-7.12 6-7-14 5-7.13 6-8-1 5-8.1 6-8-2 5-8.2 6-8-3 5-8.3 6-8-4 5-8.4 6-8-5 5-8.5 6-8-6 5-8.6 6-8-7 5-8.7 6-8-8 5-8.8 6-8-9 5-8.9 6-8-10 5-8.10 6-8-11 5-8.11 6-8-12 5-8.12 6-9-1 5-9.1 6-9-2 5-9.2 6-9-3 5-9.3 6-9-4 5-9.4 6-10-1 5-10.1 6-10-2 5-10.2 6-10-3 5-10.3 6-11-1 5-11.1 6-12-1 5-12 6-13-1 7-1.1 6-13-4 7-1.15 6-13-5 7-1.15 6-13-6 7-1.15 6-13-7 7-1.15 6-13-8 7-1.2 6-13-9 7-1.3 6-13-10 7-1.4 6-13-11 7-1.5 6-13-12 7-1.6 6-13-13 7-1.7 6-13-14 7-1.8 6-13-15 7-1.9 6-13-16 7-1.10 6-13-17 7-1.11 6-13-18 7-1.12 6-13-19 7-1.13 6-13A-1 7-2.1 6-13A-2 7-2.2 6-13A-3 7-2.2 6-13A-4 7-2.2 6-13A-5 7-2.2 6-13A-6 7-2.2 6-13A-7 7-2.2 6-13A-8 7-2.2 6-13A-9 7-2.3 6-13A-10 7-2.4 6-14-1 7-3.1 6-14-2 7-3.2 6-14-3 7-3.2 6-14-4 7-3.2 6-15-1 7-4.1 6-15-2 7-4.2 6-15-3 7-4.3 6-15-4 7-4.4 6-15-5 7-4.5 6-15-6 7-4.6 6-15-7 7-4.7 6-15-8 7-4.8 6-15-9 7-4.9 6-15-10 7-4.10 6-15-11 7-4.11 6-16-1 7-5.1 6-16-2 7-5.2 6-16-3 7-5.3 6-16-4 7-5.4 6-16-5 7-5.5 6-16-6 7-5.6 6-16-7 7-5.7 6-16-8 7-5.8 6-17-1 7-6.1 6-17-2 7-6.2 6-18-1 7-7.1 6-19-1 7-8.1 6-19-2 7-8.2 6-20-1 7-9.1 6-21-1 7-10.1 6-22-1 7-11.1 6-23-1 10-2.1 6-23-2 10-2.2 6-23-3 10-2.3 6-23-4 10-2.4 6-23-5 10-2.5 6-23-6 10-2.6 6-23-7 10-2.7 6-23-8 10-2.8 6-23-9 10-2.9 6-23-10 10-2.10 6-23-11 10-2.11 6-23-12 10-2.12 6-23-13 10-2.13 6-23-14 10-2.14 6-23-15 10-2.15 6-23-16 10-2 6-24-1 10-3.1 6-24-2 10-3.2 6-24-3 10-3.3 6-24-4 10-3.4 6-24-5 10-3 7-1-1 12-1 7-2-1 2-10.1 7-2-2 2-10.2 7-2-3 2-10.3 7-2-4 2-10.4 7-2-5 2-10.5 7-3-1 12-2.1 7-3-2 12-2.2 7-3-3 12-2.3 7-3-4 12-2.4 7-3-5 12-2.5 7-3-6 12-2.6 7-3-7 12-2.7 7-4-1 12-3.1 7-4-2 12-3.2 7-4-3 12-3.3 7-4-4 12-3.4 7-4-5 12-3.5 7-4-6 12-3.6 7-4-7 12-3.7 7-4-8 12-3.8 7-5-1 6-3.1 7-5-2 6-3.2 7-5-3 6-3.3 7-5-4 6-3.4 7-5-5 6-3.5 7-6-1 2-16.1 7-6-2 2-16.2 7-6-3 2-16.3 7-6-4 2-16.4 8-1-1 8-1-2 2-17.1 8-1-3 2-17.2 8-1-4 2-17.3 8-1-5 2-17.4 8-1-6 2-17.5 8-2-1 6-11.1 8-2-2 6-11.2 8-2-3 6-11.3 8-2-4 6-11.4 8-2-5 6-11.5 8-3-1 6-1.1 8-3-2 6-1 8-3-3 6-1 8-3-4 6-1 8-3-5 6-1 8-5-1 2-18.1 8-5-2 2-18.2 8-5-3 2-18.3 8-5-4 2-18.4 9-1-1 2-8.1 9-1-7 2-8.2 9-1-8 2-8.2 9-1-9 2-8.2 9-1-10 2-8.3 9-2-1 4-1 9-2-2 4-2.1 9-2-3 4-2.2 9-2-4 4-3.1 9-2-5 4-3.2 9-2-6 4-4.1 9-2-7 4-4.2 9-2-8 4-4.3 9-2-9 4-4.4 9-2-10 4-4.5 9-2-11 4-5 9-3-1 11-1 9-3-2 11-2.1 9-3-3 11-2.2 9-3-4 11-2.3 9-3-5 11-3 9-3-6 11-4 9-3-7 11-5.1 9-3-8 11-5.2 9-3-9 11-6 9-3-10 11-7 9-3-11 11-8 9-3-12 11-9.1 9-3-13 11-9.2 9-3-14 11-9.3 9-3-15 11-10.1- 11-10.2 9-4-1 18-1.1 9-4-2 18-1.2 9-4-3 18-1.3 9-4-4 18-1.4 9-4-5 18-1.5 9-4-6 18-1.6 9-4-7 18-1.7 9-4-8 18-1.8 9-4-9 18-1.9 9-4-10 18-1.10 9-4-11 18-1.11 9-4-12 18-1.12 9-4-13 18-1.13 9-4-14 18-1.14 9-4-15 18-1.15 9-4-22 18-10.1 9-4-23 18-10.3 9-4-24 9-4A-1 18-2.1 9-4A-2 18-2.2 9-4A-3 18-2.3 9-4A-4 18-2.4 9-4A-5 18-2.5 9-4A-6 18-2.6 9-4A-7 18-2.7 9-4A-8 18-2.8 9-4A-9 18-2.9 9-4A-10 18-2.10 9-4A-11 18-2.11 9-4A-12 18-2.12 9-5-1 18-7.1 9-5-2 18-7.2 9-6-1 18-3.1 9-6-2 18-3.2 9-6-3 18-3.3 9-6-4 18-3.4 9-7-1 18-4.1 9-7-2 18-4.2 9-7-3 18-4.3 9-7-4 18-4.4 9-7-5 18-4.5 9-7-6 18-4.6 9-7-7 18-4.7 9-7-8 18-4.8 9-7-9 18-4.9 9-7-10 18-4.10 9-7-11 18-4.11 9-7-12 18-4.12 9-7-13 18-4.13 9-7-14 18-4.14 9-7-15 18-4.15 9-7-16 18-4.16 9-7-17 18-4.17 9-7-18 18-4.18 9-7-19 18-4.19 9-7-21 18-4.20 9-9-1 18-5.1 9-9-2 18-5.2 9-9-3 18-5.3 9-9-4 18-5.4 9-9-5 18-5.5 9-9-6 18-5.6 9-9-7 18-5.7 9-9-8 18-5.8 9-9-9 18-5.9 9-9-10 18-5.10 9-9-11 18-5.11 9-9-12 18-5.12 9-9-13 18-5.13 9-9-14 18-5.14 9-9-15 18-5.15 9-9-16 18-5.16 9-9-17 18-5.17 9-9-18 18-5.18 9-9-19 18-5.19 9-9-20 18-5.20 9-9-21 18-5.21 9-9-22 18-5.22 9-9-23 18-5.23 9-9-24 18-5.24 9-9-25 18-5.25 9-9-26 18-5.26 9-9-27 18-5.27 9-9-28 18-5.28 9-10-1 10-2.16 9-10-2 10-2.16 9-11-1 18-11.1 9-11-2 18-11.2 9-11-3 18-11.3 9-11-4 18-11.4 9-11-6 18-11.5 9-11-7 18-11.6 9-11-8 18-11.7 9-11-9 18-11.8 9-11-10 18-11.9 9-11-11 18-11.10 9-11-12 18-11.11 9-11-13 18-11.12 9-11-14 18-11.13 9-11-15 18-11.14 9-11-16 18-11.15 9-11-17 18-11.16 9-11-18 18-11.17 9-12-1 18-6.1 9-12-2 18-6.2 9-12-3 18-6.3 9-12-4 18-6.4 9-12-5 18-6.5 9-12-6 18-6.6 9-12-7 18-6.7 9-12-8 18-6.8 9-12-9 18-6.9 9-12-10 18-6.10 9-12-11 18-6.11 9-12-12 18-6.12 9-13-1 18-6.13 9-13-2 18-6.14 9-13-3 18-6.15 9-13-4 18-6.16 9-13-5 18-6.17 9-13-6 18-6.18 9-13-7 18-6.19 9-13-8 18-6.20 9-13-9 18-6.21 9-13-10 18-6.22 9-13-11 18-6.23 9-13-12 18-6.24 9-13-13 18-6.25 9-13-14 18-6.26 9-13-15 18-6.27 9-14-1 18-6.28 9-14-2 18-6.29 9-14-3 18-6.30 9-14-4 18-6.31 9-14-5 18-6.32 9-14-6 18-6.33 9-14-7 18-6.34 9-14-8 18-6.35 9-14-9 18-6.36 9-14-10 18-6.37 9-14-11 18-6.38 9-14-12 18-6.39 9-14-13 18-6.40 9-14-14 18-6.41 9-14-15 18-6.42 9-14-16 18-6.43 9-14-17 18-6.44 9-14-18 18-6.45 9-14-19 18-6.46 9-15-1 18-6.47 9-15-2 18-6.48 9-15-3 18-6.49 9-15-4 18-6.50 9-15-5 18-6.51 9-15-6 18-6.52 9-15-7 18-6.53 9-15-8 18-6.54 9-15-9 18-6.55 9-15-10 18-6.56 10-1-1 2-11.1 11-1-1 2-13.1 11-1.2 2-13.2  
APPENDIX J - ORDINANCE LIST 
Supplement No. 76 (8/11) includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2011-29, adopted August 30, 2011. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2011-10 4-13-11 Annexation of property (amends Ordinance No. 2006-29) (Special) 2011-11 5-25-11 Bond Ordinance (Special) 2011-12 5-25-11 Streets and sidewalk fees-obstruction permits, 23-1.4, Street cut permits and penalties, 23-2.10 2011-13 5-25-11 Chapter 25, Ex. A, Rule 10-responsibility for water service equipment 2011-14 5-25-11 Authorize transfer of Enterprise Funds to General Fund, 11-12.1 2011-15 5-25-11 Telecommunications Advisory Committee, 27-2.16 2011-16 5-25-11 Telecommunications facilities outside public right-of-way, 14-6.2 2011-17 6-8-11 Reduce percentage requirements of Santa Fe Homes Program, 14-8.11, 26-1.8, 26-1.15 2011-18 6-8-11 Building and related Codes, Ch. 7 2011-19 6-8-11 Sale of property (Special) 2011-20 6-8-11 International Fire Code, 12-2 2011-21 6-8-11 Vehicle Towing Services, 20-21 2011-22 6-8-11 Sewer Service Rule 8 and Rule 12, Exh. A, Ch. 22 2011-23 6-29-11 Uniform Traffic Ordinance, Not codified per clerk 2011-24 6-29-11 Water Project Fund Loan/Grant Agreement (Special) 2011-25 7-13-11 Definition distressed merchandise sale, 18-1.2, Sign regulations, 14-8.10 2011-26 7-27-11 Lease Agreement (Special) 2011-27 8-1-11 Municipal Election District Map, 9-1.3, 9-1.4 2011-28 8-10-11 Amend Santa Fe Election Code, 9-1, 9-3, 6-16.7 2011-29 8-30-11 Secondhand dealers, pawnbrokers, junk dealers, core recyclers and precious metal dealers, 18-4, 18-8.10  
Supplement No. 77 (2/12) includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2012-9, adopted February 8, 2012. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2011-30 9-27-11 Licensing of taxicabs, 18-6; business license fee for taxicabs, 18-8.10 2011-31 10-12-11 Lease agreement (Special) 2011-32 10-12-11 Lease agreement (Special) 2011-33 Village Plaza annexation (Special) 2011-34 Village Plaza rezoning (Special) 2011-35 11-9-11 Lease agreement (Special) 2011-36 11-9-11 Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property (Fort Marcy Ball Park), 23-6 2011-37 11-30-11 Land Development-repeal and readopt Article 14-1-14-4; repeal and readopt 14-5.1, 14-5.3-14-5.5, 14-5.7-14-5.10; repeal and readopt Articles 14-6, 14-7; repeal and readopt  14-8.1-14-8.9, 14-8.11-14-8.16 and other "necessary changes." 2011-38 11-30-11 Water warning-"Orange" implementation stage, Ch. 25, Exhibit C; water emergency "Red" implementation stage, Ch. 25, Exhibit D. 2011-39 11-30-11 Regulate sale of goods by street performers, 23-8.5; penalties, 23-8.7 2011-40 11-30-11 Zoning Map amendment (Special) 2011-41 11-30-11 Zoning Map amendment (Special) 2012-1 1-11-12 Municipal Court Judge-classification and salary, 2-3.3 2012-2 1-25-12 Land Development-Reduces impact fee for residential development, 14-8.14 2012-3 1-11-12 Exemptions when applying for city water-compliance with Chapter 14, Land Development, 25-1.3 2012-4 1-11-12 Residential Green Building Code, 7-4.2 and Exhibit A 2012-5 1-11-12 Zoning Map amendment (Special) 2012-6 1-25-12 Bond (Special) 2012-7 1-25-12 Bond (Special) 2012-8 2-8-12 Alcoholic liquors in unlicensed places, 4-2.2 2012-9 2-8-12 Vehicle forfeiture-seizure, procedure, 24-9.5  
Supplement No. 78 (6/12) includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2012-21, adopted May 30, 2012. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2012-10 2-29-12 Santa Fe River Target Flow for a living river initiative, 25-13 2012-11 2-29-12 Land Development-Technical amendments to Ch. 14-14-2.3(C)(7), 14-2.7(E)(3)(d); 14-2.9(B); 14-3.1(H)(1)(a),(b); 14-3.10(E); 14-3.13(B)(5)(e); 14-4.2(J)(1); 14-4.3(K)(1)(d); 14-5.5(A)(4)(a)(iii); 14-5.5(A)(4)(a)(iv); 14-5.10(A)(3); 14-6.2(C)(4)(c); 14-6.3(D)(1)(i); 14-6.3(D)(2)(a); 14-6.3(D)(2)(c)(iv); 14-6.3(D)(2)(d)(ii); 14-7.1(C)(1); 14-7.3(B)(1)(b)(iii); 14-8.5(A)(1); 14-8.6, 14-9.2(D); 14-9.2(K)(1); Tables 14-7.2.1, 14-9.2-1; repeal 14-5.10(E); enact 14-8.8(A)(6); reenact 14-8.11(F); amend definitions, 14-12; delete all references to Historic Design Review Board, substitute Historic Districts Review Board 2012-12 2-29-12 Community workforce agreements, 28-8 2012-13 2-29-12 License application information required for alarm systems, 18-1.4 2012-14 3-14-12 Lease agreement (Special) 2012-15 3-28-12 Staff designation for Children and Youth Commission, 6-10.3 2012-16 3-28-12 Santa Fe Procurement Code, 11-13 2012-17 3-28-12 Sewer service charges, Ch. 22, Exhibit A, Rule 8 2012-18 Beaver Toyota annexation (Special) 2012-19 5-9-12 Land Development-Flood-Floodplain Administrator, 14-3.10(B); enforcement, 14-3.10(C); flood regulations, 14-8.3; definitions, 14-12 2012-20 5-30-12 Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property, 23-6 2012-21 5-30-12 Land Development-Residential condominiums, 14-3.20, 14-6.3, 14-10.6, 14-12  
Supplement No. 79 (12/12) includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2012-37, adopted November 28, 2012. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2012-22 7-11-12 Flouride level in water, 25-1.8 (rescinded 7-25-12) 2012-23 7-11-12 Water usage of existing structures or uses applied to development water budgets, 14-8.13 2012-24 7-11-12 Environmental Services-Conditions of service-residential collections, 21-4.3; enforcement, 21-9.1; Refuse and recycling rate and fee schedule-Exhibit B 2012-25 8-8-12 Rules of order; appointment of Parliamentarian, training, 2-1.11 2012-26 8-8-12 Amend zoning map 2012-27 Extend truck ban on Camino Rey to Calle de Oriente Norte, 24-2.6 2012-28 9-12-12 Amend zoning map 2012-29 9-24-12 Panhandling on public property, 20-2.2 2012-30 9-24-12 Telecommunications facilities-definitions, 27-2.3; compensation and charges, 27-2.5; land use review, 27-2.13 2012-31 12-30-12 Land Development-Distress merchandise sales, 14-8.10B, 14-8.10H; Distress Merchandise sale license, 18-5.1 2012-32 12-30-12 Internal Audit Department, 2-22 2012-33 Land Development-Legal nonconforming uses, 14-10.2 2012-34 Rezone 2012-35 11-14-12 Sale of property 2012-36 11-14-12 Bond 2012-37 11-28-12 Land Development-MHP-Purpose, 14-4.2; Table of Permitted Uses, 14-6.1C; 14-6.1.1; Mobile Home Park, 14-6.2; Mobile Home Park standards, 14-7.2; definitions, mobile home park, 14-12  
Supplement No. 80 includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2013-17, adopted April 10, 2013. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2013-1 1-9-13 Airport Road Overlay District, 14-5.5C, 14-12 2013-2 1-9-13 Approve amended local economic development project participation agreement with Rodeo Property Inc., Special 2013-3 1-9-13 Exempt public schools from compliance with portions of Chapter 14 regarding water supplies, 25-1.3 2013-4 2-13-13 Zoning reclassification; amend Zoning Map, Special 2013-5 2-13-13 Zoning reclassification; amend Zoning Map, Special 2013-6 2-13-13 Zoning reclassification; amend Zoning Map, Special 2013-7 2-27-13 Possession of marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids prohibited, 16-15.1 2013-8 2-27-13 Annual water budget, 25-9.5 2013-9 2-27-13 Voluntary River Conservation Fund, 25-8.2 2013-10 2-27-13 Repeal Community Workforce Agreements of City of Santa Fe Purchasing Manual (subsection 28.8) 2013-11 3-13-13 Parks, other prohibited activities, 23-4.11; camping regulations on City property, 23-4.12 2013-12 3-13-13 Zoning reclassification and amend Zoning Map, Special 2013-13 3-27-13 Taxable drinking water state revolving loan fund agreement, Special 2013-14 3-27-13 Zoning reclassification and amend Zoning Map, Special 2013-15 3-27-13 Zoning reclassification and amend Zoning Map, Special 2013-16 3-27-13 Amend Ch. 14-Technical corrections and minor clarifications, 14-2.3, 14-2.4, 14-2.8, 14-3.1, 14-3.3, 14-3.6, 14-3.7, 14-3.8, 14-3.12, 14-3.13, 14-3.16, 14-3.17, 14-3.19, 14-4.3, 14-6.1 - Table 14-6.1-1, 14-6.2, 14-6.3, 14-6.4, 14-7.1, 14-7.2 Table 14-7.2-1, 14-7.3, 14-7.3-1, 14-7.4, 14-8.2, 14-8.3, 14-8.4, 14-8.5, 14-8.6, 14-8.10, 14-8.14, 14-9.2, 14-9.5, 14-10.1, 14-10.4, 14-11.5, 14-12, App. B Parking space standards 2013-17 4-10-13 Airport Road Overlay District-commercial recycling containers; building-mounted outdoor advertising of alcoholic beverages; packaging of alcoholic beverages, 14-5.5  
Supplement No. 81 includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2013-28, adopted July 31, 2013. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2013-18 5-8-13 Bond, Special 2013-19 5-8-13 Bond, Special 2013-20 5-8-13 Fire Department Authority and powers, 2-10.3 2013-21 5-8-13 Amend Purchasing Manual, Special 2013-22 5-8-13 Personnel-Benefits for domestic partners, 19-3.8 2013-23 5-29-13 Lease and services agreement, Special 2013-24 6-12-13 Bond, Special 2013-25 6-12-13 Lease agreements, Special 2013-26 6-12-13 Fees, Municipal Recreation Complex, 23-7; City sports fields-fees and requirements, 23-4.13; Voluntary sports field maintenance fund, 23-4.14 2013-27 6-26-13 Water rates and charges, 25-4.2; commercial water user rebate regulations, 25-4.3 2013-28 7-31-13 Amend Campaign Code 9-2.3, 9-2.5, 9-2.9, 9-2.11, 9-2.12; Campaign Finance Code 9-3.3, 9-3.6, 9-3.7, 9-3.8, 9-3.10, 9-3.11, 9-3.14  
Supplement No. 82 includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2014-4, adopted January 8, 2014. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2013-29 8-27-13 Single-Use plastic bag/carryout bags, 21-8 2013-30 9-11-13 Include Precinct 89 in District 3, 9-1.3 2013-31 9-11-13 Duties-Campaign treasurer and deputy campaign treasurer, 9-2.9; campaign finance statement, 9-2.11; reporting of expenditures requirements and exceptions, 9-3.14 2013-32 9-25-13 Sale and consumption of alcohol on city property, 23-6.2 2013-33 10-9-13 General obligation bonds, 11-9.1; taxes, new or increased, 18-9 2013-34 10-30-13 Internal Audit Department, 2-22.2-2-22.7, 2-22.9-2-22.11 2013-35 10-30-13 Audit Committee, 6-5 2013-36 11-13-13 Annexation of property, Special 2013-37 12-11-13 Fraud, waste and abuse hotline, 19-2 2014-1 1-8-14 Sewer rates-properties outside city limits, 22-6.2; Ch. 22 Exhibit A, Rule 8A 2014-2 1-8-14 Definitions-Santa Fe Campaign Code, 9-2.3; Public Campaign Finance Code, 9-3.3 2014-3 1-8-14 Amends Uniform Traffic Ordinance-Not codified 2014-4 1-8-14 Standards for off-street parking spaces and parking lots, 14-8.6  
Supplement No. 83 includes permanent ordinances through
Ordinance No. 2014-15, adopted March 26, 2014. 
Ord. No. Date Title 2014-5 2-12-14 Procurement of tobacco products by minors prohibited, 16-15.4 2014-6 2-12-14 Amends smoke-free ordinance adds regulations for electronic smoking devices and vaping bars, 10-6.2, 10-6.3, 10-6.8 2014-7 2-12-14 Amends Animal Services Chapter, 5-1, 5-2, 5-3.1, 5-3.2, 5-4.2, 5-5.1, 5-5.3, 5-5.5, 5-6.1-5-6.3, 5-6.5, 5-6.7, 5-7.1, 5-7.4, 5-7.6, 5-7.9, 5-7.11, 5-7.13, 5-7.16, 5-8.6, 5-8.7, 5-8.9, 5-8.11, 5-9.5, 5-10.1-5-10.3, 5-12 2014-8 2-26-14 Land Development-Impact fees, 14-8.14 2014-9 2-26-14 Santa Fe Housing Code-include veterans to list to qualify for expanded eligibility standards for SFHP homes, 26-1.21 2014-10 2-26-14 Amends Santa Fe Homes program (SFHP), 26-1.4, 26-1.8, 26-1.15-26-1.18, 26-1.21, 26-1.22, 26-1.24, 26-1.28, 26-1.31, 26-1.33 2014-11 2-26-14 Add Residential Addition and Remodel Green Building Code, 7-4.3; amend Exhibit A, Ch. 8, add Ch. 2, 11, 12; add Exhibit B 2014-12 2-26-14 Code of Ethics-definitions, 1-7.5; Campaign Contributions-definitions 9-2.3, campaign finance statement, 9-2.11 2014-13 2-26-14 Amends single-use bag ordinance, 21-8.1, 21-8.4, 21-8.6 2014-14 3-26-14 Community Development Commission-membership, 6-4.2 2014-15 3-26-14 Code of Ethics-improper gifts; improper transactions; representation of private interests; additional prohibitions, 1-7.7  
Ordinances included in Supplement No. 84 (10/14) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2014-16 4-9-14 Zoning reclassification; amend zoning map, Special 2014-17 4-9-14 Zoning reclassification; amend zoning map, Special 2014-18 4-30-14 City sports fields; league and school fees; requirements, 23-4.13, 23-7.5 2014-19 4-30-14 Street performers, 23-8.4, 23-8.5, 23-8.7, 23-8.8 2014-20 4-30-14 Zoning reclassification; amend zoning map, Special 2014-21 6-26-14 Loan agreement with New Mexico Finance Authority, Special 2014-22 7-9-14 Repeal Administrative Services Department and Create Parks and Recreation Department, 2-19; repeal Convention and Visitors Bureau and create TOURISM Santa Fe Department, 2-21 2014-23 7-9-14 Bond, Special 2014-24 7-9-14 Amend Santa Fe Local Economic Development Project Participation Agreement (Santa Fe Business Incubator Ordinance), Special 2014-25 6-30-14 Zoning reclassification; amend zoning map, Special 2014-26 8-13-14 Amend Uniform Traffic Ordinance-prohibited activities while driving 2014-27 8-27-14 Bond, Special 2014-28 8-27-14 Amend impact fees, 14-8.14C, E, F, J; dedication and development of land for parks, open space, trails and recreation facilities, 14-8.15C; definitions, 14-12 2014-29 8-27-14 Marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids-possession prohibited, 16-15.1; possession, delivery or manufacture of drug paraphernalia prohibited, 16-15.2; marijuana and marijuana paraphernalia possession prohibited, 20-6 2014-30 10-8-14 Require public hearing before voting on reallocation of proceeds from a voter-approved general obligation bond, 11-9.1 or tax that deviates materially from the information provided to electorate, 18-9 2014-31 10-8-14 Development plans, 14-3.8; Master plans, 14-3.9(C),(D); certificates of occupancy, 14-3.12(A); expiration, extension and amendment of development plans, 14-3.19(A); rules for interpreting boundaries, 14-4.1(E); archeological clearance permit, 14-5.3(D); permitted and prohibited uses, 14-6.1(B), Table 14-6.1-1; specific use telecommunications facilities 14-6.2(E); permitted accessory uses and structures, 14-6.3(B); standards for specific accessory uses, 14-6.3(D); temporary structures treated as permanent structures, 14-6.4(C); building envelope and open space standards and measurements-dimensional calculations, 14-7.1(B); visibility at driveways and yards, 14-7.1(F); Table of Dimensional Standards, 14-7.2-1; residential districts, calculation of allowable dwelling units, 14-7.2(B); lot averaging in single-family subdivisions, 14-7.2(C) minimum yard requirements, 14-7.2(D), maximum nonresidential use area in RAC District, 14-7.2(H); nonresidential and mixed uses districts-Table of dimensional standards, 14-7.3; open space standards, 14-7.5; standards for all grading, 14-8.2(D), submittal requirements for other development, 14-8.2(F); landscape and site design-plant material standards, 14-8.4(F), street tree standards, 14-8.4(G), open space parking requirements, 14-8.4(H), parking lots, 14-8.4(I), screening and buffering, 14-8.4(J); off-street parking and loading-standards for parking spaces and parking lots, 14-8.6(B), loading standards, 14-8.6(D); signs-general provisions, 14-8.10B; development water budgets-applicability, 14-8.13(C); impact fees-miscellaneous provisions, 14-8.14(J); public trail dedication requirements, 14-8.15(D); street improvement and design standards-street network, 14-9.2(A), street types-design criteria, 14-9.2(B); nonconformities-determination of nonconformity status, 14-10.1(C); change of tenancy or ownership, 14-10.1(D); use of legal nonconforming lot, 14-10.4(A); revocation of approvals, 14-11.4(D); definitions, 14-12.1 2014-32 10-8-14 Zoning reclassification and amend zoning map, Special  
Supplement No. 85 (3/15): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2014-33 10-29-14 Zoning reclassification; amend Zoning Map, Special 2014-34 11-12-14 Amends sewer service charges, Chapter 22, Exhibit A, Rule 8 Rule 12 2014-35 11-12-14 Amends marijuana-possession prohibited; lowest enforcement priority, civil fine, 20-6.1 2014-36 12-10-14 Amends Early Neighborhood Notification (ENN)-applicability to city capital improvement projects, 14-3.1 2014-37 12-10-14 Adds Independent Citizens' Redistricting Commission, 6-18; amends districting, 9-1.4 2014-38 12-10-14 Amends business licensing and registration, 18-1.4, 18-1.5, 18-2.4, 18-2.5 2014-39 12-10-14 Amends Uniform Traffic Ordinance (Article IX, Parking), not codified 2015-1 1-14-15 Amends plaza pushcart vendors-license requirements; selection process; conditions of operation, 23-5.5 2015-2 2-11-15 Amends animal services-definitions, 5-2; adds trapping, 5-8.13 2015-3 2-25-15 Amends building and housing-adoption of codes, 7-1.1 2015-4 2-25-15 Loan agreement, Special 2015-5 2-25-15 Lease agreement, Special 2015-6 3-11-15 Amends city sports fields, 23-4.13; amends MRC Sports Fields, 23-7.5  
Supplement No. 86 (6/15): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2015-7 3-25-15 Amends 23-6.2, sale and consumption of alcohol at Railyard Park for Bike and Brew 2015-8 3-25-15 Zone reclassification; amends Zoning Map, Special 2015-9 3-25-15 Zone reclassification; amends Zoning Map, Special 2015-10 4-8-15 Sale of property, Special 2015-11 4-8-15 Adds 10-11, Single serving alcoholic beverage sales 2015-12 4-29-15 Amends 21-8, single-use carryout bags, 21-8.1, 21-8.2, 21-8.4, 21-8.6 2015-13 5-13-15 Amends 18-1.2, definition of itinerant food vendor and itinerant vendor; amends title of 18-8 to be pushcarts on private property; amends 18-8.9, vehicle vendors; amends 18-8.10, business license-fees; amends 23-5.1 definition of special event; amends 23-5.2, Plaza uses; events; allowed uses 2015-14 6-10-15 Amends 14-6.1C, Table 14-6.1-1, Table of Allowed Uses 2015-15 6-10-15 Amends 20-5.6, alarm registration; duration and renewal; 20-5.14, fees and fines 2015-16 6-10-15 Amends City of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Ordinance-12-6-1.3, Speed zones, not codified 2015-17 6-24-15 Adds 7-16 Gender neutral restrooms 2015-18 6-24-15 Amends 9-1.3, revise district precincts to reflect Redistricting Plan "A" approved by Independent Citizens Redistricting Commission  
Supplement No. 87 (7/15): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2015-19 7-8-15 Amends Ch. 11, Finance and Budget, 11-12.1, enterprise fund expenditures 2015-20 7-29-15 Amends Zoning Map, zone reclassification, Special 2015-21 7-29-15 Amends Zoning Map, zone reclassification, Special 2015-22 7-29-15 Amends Ch. 9, Election and Political Campaign Codes, 9-3, Public Campaign Finance Code, 9-3.9, definitions; 9-3.11, use of payments from fund; fund as exclusive source; 9-3.14 reports of expenditures; exemption 2015-23 7-29-15 Amends Ch. 9, Election and Political Campaign Codes, 9-2 Campaign Codes, 9-2.3, definitions; 9-2.5, identification of campaign material; 9-2.6, independently sponsored campaign communications and reporting; 9-2.9, Campaign treasurer, deputy campaign treasurer, duties; 9-2.11, campaign finance statement, contents; 9-2.12 campaign finance statement, signing 2015-24 7-29-15 Amends Ch. 11, Finance and Budget, 11-9.1, general obligation bonds; amends Ch. 18, Licenses and Taxes, 11-9.1, general obligation bonds 2015-25 7-29-15 Amends Ch. 14, Land Development, 14-2.3D, Planning Commission, membership and procedures 2015-26 7-29-15 Amends Uniform Traffic Ordinance, prohibits parking of motor vehicles in bicycle lane, Not codified 2015-27 7-29-15 Sale of property, Special  
Supplement No. 88 (10/15): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2015-28 8-12-15 Amends Ch. 23, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-6.2, permits locations for the sale and consumption of alcohol on City property 2015-29 8-12-15 Amends Zoning Map; zoning reclassification; approves preliminary development plan; provides effective date for Rezoning Case No. 2015-46), Special 2015-30 9-9-15 Amends Zoning Map; zoning reclassification 2015-31 9-30-15 Amends Ch. 18, Licenses and Taxes; 18-5.1, distress merchandise sale license 2015-32 9-30-15 Amends Ch. 9, Election and Political Campaign Codes; 9-1.7, polling places; early voting 2015-33 10-14-15 Amends Ch. 23, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-4.13, City sports fields; league and school fees; requirements  
Supplement No. 89 (2/16): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2015-34 11-10-15 Amends Zoning Map; zoning reclassification, Special 2015-35 12-9-15 Amends Ch. XXI, Environmental Services; 21-2.1, definitions; 21-3, collection authority; enterprise fund established; repeals 21-3.3, Santa Fe Homes Program applicability; amends 21-4.3, refuse collection-conditions of service-residential collection; 21-6, refuse diversion and recycling; 21-7, service rates and charges; Exhibit B, Refuse and Recycling Rate and Fee Schedule 2016-1 1-13-16 Amends Ch. XXIV, Traffic; 24-2.6, restricted traffic 2016-2 1-13-16 Lease of property, Special 2016-3 1-13-16 Amends Uniform Traffic Ordinance Article IX and XII-parking violations (not codified) 2016-4 1-13-16 Amends Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Ordinance Article I and Article VII-autocycles and motorcycles (not codified) 2016-5 1-13-16 Amends Ch. XVIII, Licenses and Taxes, 18-10, Municipal Gross Receipts Tax 2016-6 2-10-16 Amends Ch. XXIV, Traffic; 24-2.6, restricted traffic 2016-7 2-10-16 Amends Ch. I, General Provisions; 1-7.7, improper gifts; improper transactions; representation of private interests; and other prohibitions 2016-8 2-10-16 Amends Ch. VII, Building and Housing; 7-1.1, adoption of Codes; 7-1.8, amendments to Sections 710.0 and 710.1 of Uniform Plumbing Code; 7-1.9, amendment to Sections 1702.9 of Uniform Plumbing Code 2016-9 2-10-16 Amends Ch. XXVI, Housing; 26-1.5, definitions; 26-1.22, requirements for SFHP rental units; 26-1.33, alternate means of compliance; 26-1.36, effective date 2016-10 2-10-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-8.6E, off-street bicycle parking; amends Exhibit C, Off-Street Bicycle Parking Tables 14-8.6-3, 14-8.6-4, 14-8.6-5, 14-8.6-6; adds Exhibit D-Standards and Dimensions  
Supplement No. 90 (5/16): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2016-11 3-9-16 Water Trust Board-NMFA Grant, Special 2016-12 3-9-16 Amends Zoning Map-rezone, Special 2016-13 3-30-16 Amends Uniform Traffic Ordinance parking in designated ADA accessible parking, Special 2016-14 3-30-16 Amends Ch. XI, Finance and Budget; 11-12.1, enterprise fund expenditure 2016-15 3-30-16 Amends Ch. XVIII, Licenses and Taxes; 18-10.1, 18-10.3, 18-10.4, 18-10.5, municipal gross receipts tax 2016-16 4-27-16 Amends Ch. XXIII, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-6.2F, permitted locations for sale and consumption of alcohol on city property-Fort Marcy Park Beer and Brew Event-limit maximum alcohol content of beer to seven percent 2016-17 4-27-16 Amends Ch. XXIII, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-6.2D, permitted locations for sale and consumption of alcohol on city property-addition of wine for sale and consumption in certain areas of Fort Marcy Ballpark 2016-18 4-27-16 Bond reallocation, Special 2016-19 5-11-16 Water System refunding bonds, Special 2016-20 5-11-16 Amends Ch. 14, Land Development; 14-6.2A, Use-Specific Standards, Residential Uses 2016-21 5-25-16 GRT Refunding Bond, Special 2016-22 5-25-16 Authorize 2008 bond reallocation, Special 2016-23 5-25-16 Amends Ch. IV, Alcoholic Beverage Control, 4-1, definitions; 4-4.4, city liquor license tax; staggered liquor license renewal dates  
Supplement No. 91 (11-9-16): 
Ord. No. Date Title 2016-24 6-23-16 Loan Agreement, Special 2016-25 6-23-16 Amends Ch. XVIII Licenses and Taxes, repeals 18-18 Municipal Capital Outlay Gross Receipts Tax upon effective date 2016-26 6-23-16 Amends Ch. XXIII, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; amends 23-6.2, Permitted Locations for the Sale and Consumption of Alcohol on City Property 2016-27 6-29-16 Approves and Adopts a Local Economic Development Project Participation Agreement between the City of Santa Fe and the Santa Fe Farmers' Market Institute for Improvements to the Farmers' Market Pavilion, Special 2016-28 7-13-16 Adopts a Local Economic Development Project Participation Agreement between the City of Santa Fe and the Santa Fe Distillery, LLC, "Santa Fe Spirits", Special 2016-29 7-13-16 Approves and Adopts a Local Economic Development Project Between the City of Santa Fe and Wildflower International Ltd, Special 2016-30 7-27-16 Sale of Property, Special 2016-31 7-27-16 Sale of Property, Special 2016-32 7-27-16 Amends Ch. XVIII Licenses and Taxes, 18-8.9 Vehicle Vendors; Amends Ch. XXIII Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 23-5.1 Definitions, adds Definition of Canyon Road Periphery Area 2016-33 7-27-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development, 14-6.2 Use-Specific Standards, Prohibits Use of Short-Term Rental Units Located in Residentially-Zoned Districts for Commercial Activities or Events 2016-34 7-27-16 Amends Ch. XVIII, Licenses and Taxes, Amends 18-10, Municipal Gross Receipts Tax (replaces Ord. No. 2016-15) 2016-35 8-10-16 Amends Ch. XVIII Licenses and Taxes, 18-19 Health and Human Services Fund 2016-36 9-14-16 Amends Ch. IX Election and Political Campaign Codes, 9-3.4, Public Campaign Finance Fund 2016-37 10-13-16 Repeals Ord. No. 2016-15 (Ord. No. 2016-34 replaces Ord. 2016-15 for 1/4% municipal gross receipts tax; 18-10) 2016-38 10-26-16 Amends Ch. XVIII Licenses and Taxes; 18-1.4 License Applications; creates 18-5.29 Native American Arts and Crafts District 2016-39 10-26-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; creates 14-5.5(D) amends 14-3.8(B); Table 14-6.1-1; 14-6.2(A); 14-8.6(B); Table 14-8.7-2; 14-8.13(E); 14-8.14(D) Amends Chapter VII Building and Housing Code; 7-1.10 Amends Ch. XXII Sewers; 22-6.6 Exhibit A, Section 7; Amends Ch. XXV Water; 25-4.2 Exhibit B Rate Schedule 8; Amends Ch. XXVI Housing; 26-3.6 2016-40 10-26-16 Amends Ch. VII Building and Housing 7-4.2 Residential Green Building Code; Amends 14-8.2(D) Terrain and Stormwater Management, Standards for All Grading 2016-41 11-9-16 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-6.2 Use Specific Standards, Agricultural Uses; Table 14-6.1.1, 14-6.3(D) Standards for Specific Accessory Uses; 14-12 Definitions 2016-42 11-9-16 Amends Ch. XXVII Telecommunications services; amends 27-2.3 through 27-2.22 2016-43 11-9-16 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-1.2 Compensation of Mayor and City Councilors; create 6-19 Independent Salary Commission  
Republication (2017) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2016-44 12-14-16 Zoning Map amendment (Special) 2017-1 1-11-17 Bond reallocation ordinance (Special) 2017-2 3-8-17 Amends Ch. XXIV Traffic 24-2.6 Restricted Traffic 2017-3 3-8-17 Amends Ch. XXIII Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places 23-6.2 Permitted Locations for the Sale and Consumption of Alcohol on City Property and 23-6.3 Regulations for the Sale and Consumption of Alcohol on City Property; Administration  
Supplement 1 (2018) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2017-4  3- 8-17 An ordinance creating a dedicated city of Santa Fe Fund to support early childhood education by creating a new Section 18-20 SFCC 1987 to establish a Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax in the amount of two cents ($0.20) per fluid ounce, pursuant to Article 10,  6(D) of the New Mexico Constitution, and  3-18-2(D) NMSA 1978. 2017-5  3-29-17 An ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of a loan agreement by and between the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico (the "Governmental Unit") and the New Mexico Finance Authority, evidencing a special, limited obligation of the Governmental Unit to pay a principal amount of $1,300,582 for the purpose of acquiring equipment for its environmental services department and paying a loan processing fee. 2017-6 4-12-17 Amends Ch. VII Building and Housing; 7-1.1 Adoption of codes 2017-7 4-12-17 Amends Ch. VI Boards, Committees and Commissions; 6-17(title) City Economic Development Advisory Committee; 6-17.1 Creation; purpose; 6-17.3 Membership; terms; repealed 6-17.5 Review; amends 6-17.6 Economic development review subcommittee 2017-8  4-26-17 An ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico taxable subordinate lien gross receipts tax refunding revenues bonds, Series 2017 in an aggregate principal amount of $4,530,000 for the purpose of defraying the cost of refunding, paying and defeasing the outstanding city of Santa Fe, New Mexico subordinate lien gross receipts tax improvement revenue bonds, Series 2012C. 2017-9 5-10-17 Amends Ch. XXIII Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-5.4 Plaza Prohibited Uses 2017-10 5-31-17 Amends Ch. VII Building and Housing; 7-4.2(B) Residential Green Building Code; applicability; 7-4.2(E) Requirements 2017-11  5-31-17 An ordinance relating to the city of Santa Fe Economic Development Plan Ordinance, Article 11-11 SFCC 1987; approving and adopting a local economic development project participation agreement between the city of Santa Fe and Second Street Brewery, Inc. for expansion of the manufacturing facility, a local economic development project. 2017-12  7-26-17 An ordinance authorizing the sale of 1,491 square feet of real property consisting of a portion of the former Bower Street right-of-way adjacent to 322 Paseo De Peralta and described as "Parcel 1" as shown and delineated on a survey entitled, "Plat of Boundary Survey for the city of Santa Fe Parcel 1" prepared by Sierra Land Surveying, Inc., David E. Cooper, N.M.P.S. No. 9052, dated February 15, 2017, lying and being situate within the city and county of Santa Fe, New Mexico. 2017-13  7-26-17 An ordinance amending the annexation agreement for the Raven Ridge Apartments, adopted by Ordinance 2006-31, to delete an irrevocable offer of dedication of right-of-way for Raven Ridge Drive. the property is located at 4141 Lucia Lane. ("Mustang Village Apartments Development Plan And Annexation Agreement Amendment" Case No. 2017-18). 2017-14  7-26-17 An ordinance relating to the city of Santa Fe Economic Development Plan Ordinance, Article 11-11 SFCC 1987; approving and adopting a local economic development project participation agreement between the city of Santa Fe and Meow Wolf, Inc. for acquisition and expansion of a new production and cultural facility, a local economic development project. 2017-15 7-26-17 Amends. Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-6.3(B)(2)(c) Multiple Principal Uses; Accessory Uses or Structures 2017-24 12-13-17 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-5.5(C)(1), 14-5.5(C)(5), 14-5.5(C)(11) Highway Corridor Protection Districts. 2017-25 12-13-17 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; adds 14-5.11 West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District. 2017-16 8-9-17 Amends Ch. XXV Water; repeals 25.11 Water Conservation Credit Program. 2017-17 8-30-17 Amends Ch. XXIV Traffic; 24-4.2 Findings and Intent; 24-4.3 Definitions; 24-4.4 Violation; 24-4.5 Enforcement. 2017-18 8-30-17 Amends Ch. XXVII Telecommunications Services; 27-2.19 Land Use Review; 27-2.20 Compliance with Other Codes; repeals 27-2.21 Appointment of telecommunications advisory committee. 2017-19 9-13-17 Amends Ch. V Animal Services; 5-2 Definitions; 5-10.1 Wild or exotic animals. 2017-20  9-17-17 An ordinance amending the official zoning map of the city of Santa Fe; changing the zoning classification from R-2 (Residential, 2 Dwellings/Acre) to R-21 (Residential, 21 Dwellings/Acre); and providing an effective date with respect to a certain parcel of land comprising 19.99 acres located on the east side of South Meadows Road, South of SR 599 and north of Agua Fria Street (The Village @ 599 Rezoning, Case No. 2017-20). 2017-21 10-11-17 Amends Ch. XXIII Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-5.3 Plaza Artists/Artisans; Licenses; Requirements; Selection Process; Conditions of Operations; 23-5.5 Plaza Pushcart Vendors; Licenses; Requirements; Selection process; Conditions of Operations. 2017-22 11-8-17 Amends Ch. XXIII Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; 23-6.2 Permitted Locations for the Sale and Consumption of Alcohol on City Property; 23-6.3 Regulations for the Sale and Consumption of Alcohol on City Property; Administration. 2017-23 11- 8-17 An ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico gasoline tax I subordinate lien gross receipts tax improvement revenue bonds, Series 2017 in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $13,500,000 for the purpose of defraying the cost of constructing, reconstructing, resurfacing, maintaining, acquiring rights of way, repairing and otherwise improving municipal alleys, streets, public roads and bridges or any combination of the foregoing purposes. 2017-24 12-13-17 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-5.5(C)(1), 14-5.5(C)(5), 14-5.5(C)(11) Highway Corridor Protection Districts. 2017-25 12-13-17 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; adds 14-5.11 West Santa Fe River Corridor Overlay Zoning District. 2017-26 12-20-17 Amends Ch. IX Election and Political Campaign Codes; adds 9-1.15 Ranked Choice Voting. 2017-27 12-20-17 Amends Ch. IX Election and Political Campaign Codes; 9-1.16 Plurality of Votes Cast Required for Election.  
Supplement 2 (2018) 
Ord. No. Date Title 2018-1  1-10-18 Amends 11-4 Budget Adjustments; Amends 11-13 Adoption of City's Procurement Code. 2018-2  1-10-18 An Ordinance Relating to the City of Santa Fe Economic Development Plan Ordinance, Article 11-11 SFCC 1987; Approving and Adopting a Local Economic Development Project Participation Agreement Between the City of Santa Fe and Descartes Labs, Inc. for Design, Development and Construction of Tenant Improvements; and Lease Payments for Expansion of a New World Headquarters Facility, a Local Economic Development Project. 2018-3  1-10-18 Amends 18-4.1 Children and Youth Fund - Dedication; Amends 6-10.1 Children and Youth Commission - Creation; Duties and Powers; 6-10.2 Appointment; Terms; 6-10.3 Staff. 2018-4  1-10-18 Amends 11-11.2, 11-11.4 - 11-11.11, 11-11 - 11-13 Economic Development Plan; Amends Chapter 22, Exhibit A, Section 7 Wastewater Utility Expansion Charge (UEC). 2018-5  1-10-18 Amends 9-3.4 Public Campaign Finance Fund. 2018-6  1-10-18 An Ordinance Amending Section 14-3.11(B) of the Land Development Code to Require Public Posting of Construction Permits for Properties That Do Not Abut Public Streets or Roads. 2018-7  2-14-18 Amends the city of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 2018-8  3-28-18 Amends 23-7.4 MRC Golf Rates. 2018-9  4-11-18 Amends 6-5 Audit Committee; Adds 6-5.5 Administrative Procedures. 2018-10  4-11-18 Amending the Official Zoning Map of the city of Santa Fe; changing the zoning classification from R-5 (Residential-Five Dwelling Units Per Acre) to C-1 (Office and Related Commercial) for the area comprising approximately 0.34 acres located north of 1773-1787 Hopewell Street within T17N, R9E, projected Section 34 N.M.P.M., Santa Fe County New Mexico); and providing an effective date. (Hopewell Mann Rezoning, Case No. 2017-134) 2018-11  4-11-18 Amending the Official Zoning Map of the city of Santa Fe; changing the zoning classification from R-21 (Residential-Twenty One Dwelling Units Per Acre) to C-1 (Office and Related Commercial) for the area comprising approximately 5.49 acres located north and south of Hopewell and Mann Streets and west of Espinacitas Street within T17N, R9E, projected Section 34 N.M.P.M., Santa Fe County New Mexico. (Hopewell Mann Rezoning, Planning Commission Case No. 2017-139.) 2018-12  5- 9-18 Amending Appendix G by adding a telecommunication franchise: An ordinance granting Broadband Network of New Mexico, LLC a non-exclusive franchise to operate a telecommunications network within the city of Santa Fe; the right to use city public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city; and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 2018-13  5- 9-18 Amending Appendix G by adding a telecommunication franchise: An ordinance granting Computer Network Service Professionals, Incorporated DBA NMSURF a non-exclusive franchise to operate a telecommunications network within the city of Santa Fe; the right to use city public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city; and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 2018-14  5- 9-18 Amending Appendix G by adding a telecommunication franchise: Granting Conterra Ultra Broadband, LLC a non-exclusive franchise to operate a telecommunications network within the city of Santa Fe; the right to use city public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city; and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 2018-15  5- 9-18 Amending Appendix G by adding a telecommunication franchise: Granting Cyber Mesa Computer Systems, Incorporated a non-exclusive franchise to operate a telecommunications network within the city of Santa Fe; the right to use city public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city; and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 2018-16  5- 9-18 Amending Appendix G by adding a telecommunication franchise: Granting Plateau Telecommunications, Incorporated a non-exclusive franchise to operate a telecommunications network within the city of Santa Fe; the right to use city public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services within the city; and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 2018-17  5-30-18 Amending and adding to Chapter 3 SFCC 1987 regarding the Santa Fe Regional Airport to fully comply with federal requirements for commercial air service. 2018-18  6-13-18 Amending the official zoning mpa of the City of Santa Fe; changing the classification from R-8 (Residential, 8 dwelling units per acre) to BCD-RED (Business Capitol District-Railyard Redevelopment District); and providing an effective date with respect to a certain parcel of land comprising 2.9 acres within T17N, R9E, Section 23 and 26 N.M.P.M, Santa Fe County, New Mexico, located at 551 Alarid Street, (Case No. 2018-03, 551 Alarid Street rezoning). 2018-19  7-11-18 Authorizing the sale of approximately 0.059 acres of real property adjoining the northerly boundary of 436 Cerrillos Road and 423 (425) Sandoval Street and described as "Tract C" as shown and delineated on a survey entitled, "Plat or Survey for PBS Limited Liability Co." prepared by Smith Williamson & Associates, Richard E. Smith, N.M.P.S. No. 5837, dated February 8, 2000, lying and being situated within the city and county of Santa Fe, New Mexico. 2018-20  8- 8-18 Amends the city of Santa Fe Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 2018-21  8-29-2018 Amends Ch. 14 Land Development; 14-5.5(C)(3), 14-5.5(C)(5), 14-5.5(C)(7) Highway Corridor Protection Districts. 2018-22  9-12-2018 Amending Chapter 4 SFCC 1987 to designate a hearing officer to conduct public hearings related to liquor license applications and waivers of distance requirements from churches or schools, when applicable, for liquor license applications, special dispenser permits and public celebration permits. 2018-23  9-12-2018 Amending the Official Zoning Map of the city of Santa Fe; changing the classification from MU (Mixed Use) to R-21 (Residential - Twenty-One Dwelling Units Per Acre); and providing an effective date with respect to a certain parcel of land comprising 13.24+ acres between Governor Miles and Interstate 25 and Cerrillos Road and Richards Avenue, (Las Soleras Lot 11-B Rezoning, Case No. 2018-49). 2018-23A 10-31-18 An Ordinance Amending the Official Zoning Map of the City of Santa Fe; Changing the Classification From MU (Mixed Use) to R-21 (Residential - Twenty-One Dwelling Units Per Acre); and Providing an Effective Date With Respect to a Certain Parcel of Land Comprising 13.24+ Acres Between Governor Miles and Interstate 25 and Cerrillos Road and Richards Avenue, (Las Soleras Lot 11-B Rezoning, Case No. 2018-49). 2018-24 10-10-2018 An ordinancerelating to the Santa Fe Election Code, Chapter 9 SFCC 1987; amending Subsection 9-1.2 to opt-in to the Local Election Act and to set the regular municipal election day as the first Tuesday in November in odd-numbered years; establishing a new Subsection 9-1.18 to create a temporary transition period during which the terms of the city councilors elected in 2016 and the municipal judge will end on December 31, 2019 and the terms of the mayor and city councilors elected in 2018 will end December 31, 2021; and establishing a new Subsection 9-1.19 to create effective date contingent upon the voters' approval of Santa Fe Municipal Charter Amendments at the November 2018 General Election. 2018-25 10-31-18 An Ordinance Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico Senior Lien Gross Receipts Tax Improvement Revenue Bonds, Series 2018A in an Aggregate Principal Amount Not to Exceed $20,000,000 for the Purpose of Defraying the Cost of Constructing, Purchasing, Furnishing, Equipping, Rehabilitating, Making Additions to or Making Improvements to Public Buildings and Facilities or Purchasing or Improving Any Ground Relating Thereto, or Any Combination of the Foregoing Purposes, and Reconstructing, Resurfacing, Maintaining, Repairing or Otherwise Improving Existing Alleys, Streets, Roads or Bridges or Any Combination of the Foregoing; Provided that Any of the Foregoing Improvements May Include but are Not Limited to Acquisition of Rights of Way; Providing that the Bonds will be Payable and Collectible from Certain Gross Receipts Tax Revenues Distributed to the City; Approving the Selection of an Underwriter and Forms of a Preliminary Official Statement and Bond Purchase Agreement; Delegating Authority to the Mayor or, in the Mayor's Absence, the City Manager or Finance Director, to Approve the Final Principal Amount, Interest Rates and Other Details of the Bonds within the Parameters Set Forth in this Authorizing Ordinance, and to Execute and Deliver a Bond Purchase Agreement and Pricing Certificate for the Sale of the Bonds to the Underwriter; Providing for the Collection of Certain Gross Receipts Tax Revenues; Approving Certain Other Agreements and Documents in Connection with the Bonds; Ratifying Action Previously Taken in Connection with the Bonds; Repealing all Ordinances in Conflict herewith; and Related Matters. 2018-26 10-31-18 An Ordinance Relating to the Land Development Code, Chapter 14 SFCC 1987; Amending Sections 14-10.2 and 14-10.3 to Provide Exceptions for Legal Nonconforming Single Family Dwellings; and Making Such Other Changes that Are Necessary to Carry Out the Purpose of this Ordinance. 2018-27 12-12-18 An Ordinance Amending Subsection 6-17.2 to Remove References to the Economic Development Review Subcommittee; Repealing Section 6-17.6 Regarding the Economic Development Review Subcommittee; Repealing Subsection 11-11.6 Regarding the Economic Development Review Subcommittee; Amending Subsection 11-11.8 to Remove References to the Economic Development Review Subcommittee; and Repealing Sections 6-8 and 19-10 Regarding the Grievance Review Board. 2018-28 12-12-18 An Ordinance Amending Section 9-3 SFCC 1987, the Public Campaign Finance Code, to Include a Definition for Qualified Small Contribution; Establishing a Ceiling for the Public Campaign Finance Fund; Establishing a New Section Regarding Qualified Small Contributions; Establishing a New Section Mandating Matching Payments by the City; Establishing a New Section Regarding Reporting of Qualified Small Contributions and Matching Payments; and Replacing All References in Chapter 9 of Municipal Clerk to City Clerk. 2019-1 1-09-19 Ordinance relating to the city of Santa Fe economic development plan ordinance, Article 11-11 SFCC 1987; approving and adopting a local economic development project participation agreement between the city of Santa Fe and Marty's Meals, Inc. for Lease payment for the expansion of a new headquarters and manufacturing facility, a local economic development project. 2019-2 1-30-19 An Ordinance Concerning the Municipal Wastewater Utility System of the City of Santa Fe, New Mexico (The "System"); Providing for the Issuance of the City's Net Wastewater Utility System /Environmental Services Gross Receipts Tax Improvement Revenue Bonds, Series 2019, in an Aggregate Principal Amount not to Exceed $16,525,000 for the Extension, Enlargement, Betterment, Repair and Other Improvement of the System; Providing that the Bonds Shall be Payable Solely Out of the Net Revenues Derived from the Operation of the System and the City's Environmental Services Gross Receipts Tax Revenues; Providing for the Acquisition of a Reserve Fund Insurance Policy in Connection with the Debt Service Reserve Fund Established in Connection with the Bonds; Providing for the Disposition of the Revenues Derived from the Operation of the System; Providing the Form, Terms and Condition of the Bonds, the Method of Paying the Principal of and Interest on the Bonds and the Security Therefor; Prescribing Other Details Concerning the System Revenues, Bonds and the System, Including but Not Limited to Covenants and Agreements in Connection Therewith and with Future Financing Therefor; Approving Forms of a Preliminary Official Statement and a Continuing Disclosure Undertaking Agreement in Connection with the Bonds; Delegating Authority to the Mayor, City Manager, and Finance Director of the City to Determine the Exact Principal Amounts, Maturity Dates, Interest Rates, Prices, Redemption Features and Other Final Terms of the Bonds Pursuant to a Pricing Certificate; Amending Certain Provisions of Ordinance No. 2012-6 Concerning the Issuance of Additional Wastewater System Revenue Bonds; Ratifying Action Previously Taken In Connection Therewith; and Repealing All Ordinances in Conflict Herewith. 2019-3 3-27-19 An Ordinance Amending Section 24-2.6 SFCC 1987 to Extend the Truck and Other Large Vehicles Traffic Restriction on Camino Carlos Rey from Cerrillos Road to Zia Road.  
