TULAROSA, NEW MEXICO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Village Government; Officials
31. Judicial Administration; Police
32. Personnel
33. Civil Defense Organization
34. Elections
35. Public Library
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Solid Waste
51. General Water and Sewer Provisions
52. Water
53. Industrial Waste
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
91. Fair Housing
92. Littering
93. Abandoned Vehicles
94. Noise Regulations
95. Animals
96. Clean Indoor Air
1
2008 S-4
2 Tularosa - Table of Contents
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Licensing and Registration Provisions
111. Commercial Solicitors
112. Pawnbrokers; Second-Hand Dealers
113. Alcoholic Beverages
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Provisions
131. Offenses Against Property
132. Offenses Against Morals
133. Offenses Against or Pertaining to Minors
134. Offenses Against Public Administration
135. Offenses Against Animals
136. Offenses Against Persons
137. Weapons
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. General Provisions
151. Building Regulations; Construction
152. Subdivisions
153. Signs
154. Zoning
155. Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks
156. Flood Damage Prevention
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Franchise Agreements
II. Annexations
III. Agreements
IV. Real Estate Transactions
2011 S-8
Table of Contents 3
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978
References to 1975 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
4 Tularosa - Table of Contents

ORDINANCE NO. 203
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF TULAROSA, NEW MEXICO, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of New Mexico empower and authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Governing Body of the Village of Tularosa has authorized a general compilation, revision and recodification of the ordinances of the Village of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the Village and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the Village that this ordinance takes effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE VILLAGE OF TULAROSA, NEW MEXICO:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision presently codified as the"Municipal Code, Tularosa, New Mexico 1975" and as further revised, amended, restated, recodified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Village of Tularosa" as published by the American Legal Publishing Corporation - 2002.
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following Titles:
1
2003 S-1
2 Tularosa - Adopting Ordinance
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. Village Government; Officials
31. Judicial Administration; Police
32. Personnel
33. Civil Defense Organization
34. Elections
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Solid Waste
51. General Water and Sewer Provisions
52. Water
53. Industrial Waste
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
91. Fair Housing
92. Littering
93. Abandoned Vehicles
94. Noise Regulations
95. Animals
2003 S-1
Adopting Ordinance 3
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Licensing and Registration Provisions
111. Commercial Solicitors
112. Pawnbrokers; Secondhand Dealers
113. Alcoholic Beverages
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Provisions
131. Offenses Against Property
132. Offenses Against Morals
133. Offenses Against or Pertaining to Minors
134. Offenses Against Public Administration
135. Offenses Against Animals
136. Offenses Against Persons
137. Weapons
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. General Provisions
151. Building Regulations; Construction
152. Subdivisions
153. Signs
154. Zoning
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Franchise Agreements
II. Annexations
III. Agreements
2003 S-1
4 Tularosa - Adopting Ordinance
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978
References to 1975 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
Section 3. All prior ordinances and the "Municipal Code of Tularosa, New Mexico 1975" pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in such revised Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the revised Code.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Governing Body of the Village of Tularosa on this 15th day of April, 2003.
Demetrio H. Montoya /s/
Mayor
ATTEST:
Margaret G. Gonzales /s/
Village Clerk
2003 S-1

TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
1
2 Tularosa - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Rules of interpretation
10.07 Severability
10.08 Reference to other sections
10.09 Reference to offices
10.10 Errors and omissions
10.11 Official time
10.12 Reasonable time
10.13 Ordinances repealed
10.14 Ordinances unaffected
10.15 Effective date of ordinances
10.16 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.17 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.18 Section histories; statutory references
10.19 Copies of code
10.99 General penalty
' 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
This 2002 codification of ordinances by and for the Village of Tularosa, New Mexico, shall be designated as the ATularosa Code of Ordinances,@ and may be cited herein as Athis code@ or Athis code of ordinances.@
' 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
3
2003 S-1
4 Tularosa - General Provisions
' 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
' 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, subchapter and section number are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
' 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
(B) For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPOINTED OFFICIAL. Any person appointed in accordance with state law or any person appointed to a board, commission or advisory body, in accordance with this code of ordinances. APPOINTED OFFICIALS are not subject to the provisions of the village personnel ordinance and shall serve at the pleasure of the Governing Body and the Mayor.
CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the village who is entitled to grievance in accordance with the personnel policies and work rules and who is not exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
CODE or CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village's code of ordinances, as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new chapters, subchapters or sections.
COUNTY. Otero County, New Mexico.
ELECTED OFFICIAL. Those village officials elected under the laws of the state, specifically, the Mayor, Trustees and the Municipal Judge.
GOVERNING BODY. The Mayor and the Trustees are the Governing Body. The corporate authority of the municipality is vested in this body.
2003 S-1
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 5
INTERPRETATION. For the purpose of this code and ensuing chapters and appendices and when not inconsistent with the context:
(a) Words used in the present tense include the future;
(b) Words in the future tense include the present;
(c) Words in the plural include the singular;
(d) Words in the singular include the plural;
(e) The word SHALL is always mandatory and not merely directory; the word MAY is permissive; and
(f) The impersonal pronouns HE, HIM, and HIMSELF shall denote either the feminine or the masculine gender.
MAYOR. The elected officer of the village who exercises administrative control and supervision over the village and hires or appoints directors of all village departments and other employees pursuant to state law. Where applicable, the term MAYOR means those persons whose authority has been granted by the MAYOR.
MONTH. A calendar month.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER. Any appointed employee. A MUNICIPAL OFFICER is limited to a DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an OATH and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office, employee, commission or department of the village unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes, without limitation, person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
6 Tularosa - General Provisions
STATE. The State of New Mexico.
VILLAGE or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Tularosa, New Mexico, a fully empowered municipal corporation. VILLAGE, MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL shall always refer to the village.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
The construction of all ordinances of the village shall be by the following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Governing Body or of the context of the same ordinance:
(A) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written and/or, if the sense requires it.
(B) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the requirement shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(C) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
' 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this code of ordinances are severable, and if any provision, subchapter, section, division, clause, sentence or part thereof is held to be illegal, invalid, unconstitutional or inapplicable, to any person, persons, circumstances, situation or otherwise, the illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sentences, clauses, divisions, sections, subchapter or parts of this code of ordinances, or their applicability to other persons, circumstances or situations.
' 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
2003 S-1
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 7
' 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
' 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
(A) If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
(B) No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
' 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within the village for the transaction of all village business.
' 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) (1) The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
(2) If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or village holiday, it shall be excluded.
8 Tularosa - General Provisions
' 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
' 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
' 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
An ordinance shall not become effective until five days after it has been published unless passed and approved as an emergency measure, in which event it shall become effective immediately following publication or at a subsequent date determined by the Governing Body.
' 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
' 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the Governing Body shall desire to amend any existing chapter, subchapter or section of this code, the chapter, subchapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter, subchapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 9
(B) (1) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter, subchapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter, subchapter or section.
(2) In addition to the indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
' 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number of the old code section, original ordinance and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (`75 Code, ' 4-1-1) (Ord. 93, passed 1-20-1980; Am. Ord. 98, passed 1-20-1990; Am. Ord. 99, passed 1-20-2000)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (NMSA ' 3-8-9) (`75 Code, ' 3-1-1) (Ord. 90, passed 1-20-1980; Am. Ord. 92, passed 1-20-1990)
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a Astatutory reference@ following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
' 39.01 MUNICIPAL ELECTION CODE.
The Municipal Election Code, NMSA ' 3-8-9, as amended and as supplemented from time to time, shall govern the conduct of all aspects of all municipal elections, except when the Municipal Election Code is silent on a matter, then the State Election Code, NMSA Ch. 1, shall govern, as appropriate; however, if any provision of either the Municipal Election Code or the State Election Code is inconsistent with the terms hereof, this chapter shall take precedence.
(`75 Code, ' 22-7-1) (Ord. 92, passed 1-20-1990)
Statutory reference:
Terms of the Municipal Election Code, see NMSA '' 3-8-1 et seq. and '' 3-9-1 et seq.
Terms of the State Election Code, see NMSA Ch. 1
' 10.19 COPIES OF CODE.
The Tularosa Code of Ordinances may be inspected at the Village Office at 705 St. Francis Drive, Tularosa, New Mexico during normal business hours and a copy may be obtained from the Village Clerk upon payment of a reasonable reproduction fee.
(Ord. 203, passed 4-15-2003)
2003 S-1
10 Tularosa - General Provisions
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Except as to Chapter 32, any person who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both unless a different specific penalty is provided. Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction, each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) (1) Any person convicted of violating any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or any ordinance that may be enforced by imposition of a term of imprisonment, shall pay to the Municipal Judge, who shall collect the following fees as court costs:
(a) A corrections fee of $20;
(b) A judicial education fee of $3;
(c) A court automation fee of $6.
(2) Any person violating an ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle for which a penalty assessment schedule has been established, and who chooses to pay the penalty assessment, shall pay in addition to the penalty assessment, the fees set forth in ' 70.02.
(3) All corrections fees collected pursuant to division (B) shall be deposited in a special fund in the municipal treasury and shall be used for:
(a) Municipal jailer or juvenile detention officer training;
(b) The construction planning, construction, operation and maintenance of a municipal jail or juvenile detention facility;
(c) Paying the cost of housing municipal prisoners in a county jail or detention facility or housing juveniles in a detention facility;
(d) Complying with match or contribution requirements for the receipt of federal funds relating to jails or juvenile detention facilities;
(e) Providing inpatient treatment or other substance abuse programs in conjunction with or as an alternative to jail sentencing;
(f) Defraying the cost of transporting prisoners to jails or juveniles to juvenile detention facilities; or
2010 S-7
Rules of Construction; General Penalty 11
(g) Providing electronic monitoring system;
(h) The interest collected from fees deposited in the special fund pursuant to this section shall be credited to the municipality's general fund.
(4) All judicial education fees collected shall be remitted monthly to the State Treasurer for credit to the judicial education fund and shall be used for the education and training, including production of bench books and other written materials of municipal judges and other municipal court employees.
(5) All court automation fees shall be remitted monthly to the State Treasurer for credit to the municipal court automation fund and shall be used for the purchase and maintenance of court automation systems in the municipal courts. The court automation systems shall have the capability of providing, on a timely basis, electronic records in a format specified by the judicial information system council.
(Am. Ord. 236, passed 8-19-2009)
Statutory reference:
Penalty for misdemeanor, see NMSA ' 3-17-1
2010 S-7
12 Tularosa - General Provisions

TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. VILLAGE GOVERNMENT; OFFICIALS
31. JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION; POLICE
32. PERSONNEL
33. CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
34. ELECTIONS
35. PUBLIC LIBRARY
1
2004 S-2
2 Tularosa - Administration
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE GOVERNMENT; OFFICIALS
Section
30.01 Duties of Mayor and Trustees
30.02 Compensation
30.03 DMV administrative fees
' 30.01 DUTIES OF MAYOR AND TRUSTEES.
The Mayor and the Trustees shall perform the duties and obligations prescribed by state law.
(`75 Code, ' 1-1-2) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 30.02 COMPENSATION.
The Mayor shall receive a salary of $600 per month. Each trustee shall receive a salary of $300 per month. The monthly salary herein established shall not be deemed to increase or decrease the current salary of the Mayor or any trustee in office at the time this section is adopted and during the term he or she is then serving.
(Ord. 230, passed 10-21-2008)
' 30.03 DMV ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
The Village Clerk/Treasurer shall cause to be collected an administrative fee of $2 from each person requesting a service in connection with every transaction processed for the New Mexico Taxation and Revenue Department, Motor Vehicle Division (MVD) by the Village of Tularosa as an agent of MVD. The Village Treasurer shall deposit the fees so collected in the General Fund of the village.
(Ord. 242, passed 9-15-2010)
3
2011 S-8
4 Tularosa - Administration
CHAPTER 31: JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION; POLICE
Section
General Provisions
31.01 Municipal Judge
31.02 Temporary Municipal Judge
31.03 Incarceration of convicted
31.04 Suspension; probation; community service
31.05 Mandatory fees
Police Reserve Corps
31.15 Creation
31.16 Authority; Chief of Police; rules and regulations
31.17 Qualifications for membership
31.18 Training
31.19 Rank or rating
31.20 Identification cards; insignia; uniform
31.21 Carrying firearms
31.22 Powers and duties
31.23 Assisting regular police officers
31.24 Workman=s compensation benefits; indemnity insurance
31.25 Termination of membership
31.26 Impersonating member prohibited
2010 S-7 5
6 Tularosa - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 31.01 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
(A) The Municipal Judge of the village shall receive a salary of $1,000 per month.
(`75 Code, ' 2-1-1)
(B) The monthly salary herein established for the Municipal Judge shall not be deemed to increase or decrease the current salary of the duly elected Municipal Judge in office at the time this section is adopted and during the term he or she is then serving.
(`75 Code, ' 2-1-2) (Am. Ord. 230, passed 10-21-2008)
' 31.02 TEMPORARY MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
(A) In the event of the temporary incapacity or absence of the Municipal Judge, the duly elected and qualified Municipal Judge or in his or her absence, the Governing Body may designate any registered voter of the village to hear and determine cases arising under municipal ordinances in the Municipal Court in his or her place and stead; provided, however, that the temporary Municipal Judge so appointed may be subject to the approval of the Governing Body in the event the Governing Body shall desire to appoint and designate the temporary Municipal Judge.
(`75 Code, ' 2-2-1)
(B) The temporary Municipal Judge so designated and appointed shall be paid the sum of $10 for each day that he or she shall sit and serve as Municipal Judge, the sum to be paid out of the General Fund of the village; provided, however, that, in the event the duly elected and qualified Municipal Judge shall be incapacitated or absent from his or her duties as Municipal Judge for more than 30 days in any calendar year, then and in such event, the compensation for the temporary Judge shall be deducted from the salary of the Municipal Judge in a manner to be determined by the Governing Body.
(`75 Code, ' 2-2-2)
' 31.03 INCARCERATION OF CONVICTED.
(A) Any person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed upon conviction of the violation of any ordinance of the village, may, upon order of the Municipal Judge convicting him or her, be committed to the Otero County Jail or other place provided by the village for the incarceration of offenders until the fine or penalty is fully paid.
(B) Every defendant so committed shall work for the village, at the direction of the Municipal Judge, at the labor as his or her strength will permit, within or without the prison or other place provided for the incarceration, not exceeding ten hours each working day.
2009 S-5
Judicial Administration; Police 7
(C) All persons, except indigents, shall pay any fines imposed by the Municipal Court. Persons able to pay the fines who choose not to pay them shall be imprisoned. Persons unable to pay the fines and who so testify under oath or so swear by affidavit shall be allowed to pay the fines over a reasonable period of time or perform appropriate community service as directed by the Municipal Judge. Persons not complying with the Judge's order concerning installment payments of fines or performance of assigned civic duties may be imprisoned if found to be in contempt of court.
(D) Each convicted defendant shall receive a credit of $5 per day in reduction of any fine so imposed for each day served by him or her in a civic service or in the County Jail.
(`75 Code, ' 2-3-2)
' 31.04 SUSPENSION; PROBATION; COMMUNITY SERVICE.
(A) Upon a plea of guilty or a judgment of conviction for violation of a municipal ordinance, the Municipal Court may suspend, in whole or in part, the execution of sentence or place the defendant on probation for a period not exceeding one year on terms and conditions the Court deems best or both.
(B) Suspension of execution of the sentence or probation, or both, shall be granted only when the Municipal Judge is satisfied it will serve the ends of justice and of the public.
(C) The defendant's liability for any fine or other punishment imposed shall be fully discharged upon successful completion of the terms of probation.
(D) (1) The Municipal Court may, as a condition of probation, require the defendant to serve a period of time in volunteer labor to be known as community service.
(2) The type of labor and period of service shall be at the sole discretion of the Court; provided that, any person receiving community service shall be immune from any civil liability other than gross negligence arising out of the community service and any person who performs community service, pursuant to Court order or any criminal diversion program, shall not be entitled to any wages, shall not be considered an employee for any purpose and shall not be entitled to worker's compensation, unemployment benefits or any other benefits otherwise provided by law.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMUNITY SERVICE. Any labor that benefits the public at large or any public, charitable or educational entity or institution.
(`75 Code, ' 2-3-3) (Am. Ord. 125, passed 10-6-1987)
8 Tularosa - Administration
' 31.05 MANDATORY FEES.
(A) Any person convicted of violating any ordinance relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or any ordinance that may be enforced by imposition of a term of imprisonment, shall pay to the Municipal Judge who shall collect the following fees as Court costs:
(1) A corrections fee as provided in ' 10.99(B)(1)(a).
(2) A judicial education fee as provided in ' 10.99(B)(l)(b).
(3) A court automation fee as provided in ' 10.99(B)(1)(c).
(B) All fees collected shall be disbursed and accounted for as provided in this code and NMSA ' 35-14-11.
(`75 Code, ' 2-3-4) (Am. Ord. 181, passed 5-19-1998; Am. Ord. 237, passed 9-16-2009)
POLICE RESERVE CORPS
' 31.15 CREATION.
There is hereby created a Village Police Reserve Corps, hereinafter called Corps, which shall be a voluntary organization composed of volunteer members to serve without compensation, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Governing Body upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-1)
2010 S-7
Judicial Administration; Police 9
' 31.16 AUTHORITY; CHIEF OF POLICE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(A) The Chief of Police shall have full authority and control over members of the Corps, subject, however, to the discretion and direction of the Village Governing Body and in accordance with ordinances of the village and laws of the state; provided that, members of the Corps, upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Governing Body upon majority vote of all the members.
(B) The Chief of Police shall, from time to time, promulgate and establish in writing appropriate rules and regulations to govern and control the corps, including, but not limited to the enumeration of specific duties which may be assigned for the performance of its members and providing for the preservation of discipline and the maintaining of good order and esprit de corps.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-2)
' 31.17 QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP.
(A) No person shall be recommended for appointment as a member of the Corps unless he or she shall have then attained the age of 18 years, shall be a citizen of the United States and a bona fide resident of the county. He or she shall be of good moral character, and further, shall satisfy all requirements as shall be prescribed from time to time by the Chief of Police.
(B) In addition to the foregoing requirements, each applicant for membership shall be fingerprinted and cleared for appointment through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, evidencing the absence of police record and free of arrest for any violation of law other than minor traffic violations and petty misdemeanors not involving moral turpitude. The applicant shall agree to successfully complete a prescribed course of training in police subjects, conduct, ethics and procedures together with other and further requirements as shall be promulgated from time to time by the Chief of Police. When all of the requirements have been satisfied, the Chief of Police may recommend the applicant for appointment to the Corps in the manner above stated, and if accepted for membership by appointment, the applicant shall be sworn into office by the Mayor or his or her authorized representative by administering the oath of office for village officials, as provided by law.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-3) (Am. Ord. 112, passed 2-7-1984)
' 31.18 TRAINING.
(A) The Chief of Police shall be held responsible and shall make adequate provision for the proper training of members of the Corps in all phases of police activity and conduct.
(B) For this purpose, he or she may assign any one or more of the various police duties to Corps members, and may designate a regularly employed police officer to direct and supervise the Corps
10 Tularosa - Administration
activities, including the assignment by name of a regularly employed police officer who shall be responsible for the instruction, guidance and conduct of a particular member of the Corps in the performance of assigned duty, in the event the assignment of a regular police officer shall be fitting and proper.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-4)
' 31.19 RANK OR RATING.
No rating or rank shall be awarded to any member of the Corps, and the Corps members shall be and remain subject to the direct and lawful order and authority of any regularly employed member of the Village Police Force; provided, however, that the Chief of Police, or in his or her absence a regularly employed member of the village police to whom a Corps member is assigned, can delegate specific authority to any member of the Corps to act in the absence of the Chief of Police or regular village police officer.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-5)
' 31.20 IDENTIFICATION CARDS; INSIGNIA; UNIFORM.
(A) Upon being sworn in as a duly appointed member of the Corps, an auxiliary police or reserve commission card, civil defense identification card, badge, cap device and other insignia or evidence of identification, as the Chief of Police may prescribe, shall be issued to each member of the Corps, together with a copy of the rules and regulations governing the conduct, duties and obligations of Corps members. The commission card shall be carried on his or her person by the Corps member, at all times, when assigned to police duty by the Chief of Police or his or her authorized representative; provided, however, that the commission card shall be surrendered and turned in to the Village Police Department at the end of each assigned tour of duty.
(B) While on assigned duty, the uniform for members of the Corps shall be such as shall be prescribed by the Chief of Police. No member of the Corps shall wear the prescribed uniform, badge or other insignia, except while engaged in the performance of the duty or duties as shall have been assigned to him or her by the Chief of Police.
(C) Each member of the Corps shall pay to the village the cost of the reserve commission card or civil defense identification card, as the Chief of Police may prescribe.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-6)
Judicial Administration; Police 11
' 31.21 CARRYING FIREARMS.
No member of the Corps shall be authorized to carry any firearm unless and until he or she shall have been first properly instructed and qualified in the use of firearms and permission to carry any firearm shall first have been issued to him or her by the Chief of Police when he or she is called upon to perform an assigned police duty, as herein provided, and unless, in the performance of which duty, he or she is directed by the Chief of Police to carry the firearm while on duty.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-7)
' 31.22 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) When any member of the Corps has been assigned to any police duty by the Chief of Police or his or her authorized representative and is in proper uniform with prescribed badges and insignia, he or she shall have like powers and authority as are lawfully appurtenant to the office of a regularly employed village police officer and as shall be necessary for the performance of and commensurate with his or her assigned duty or duties, subject however, to the limitations and conditions, if any, as shall be imposed by the Chief of Police.
(B) No member of the Corps shall be deemed to be on duty unless and until he or she has actually been assigned the duty or duties and is in the actual performance of the assignment.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-8)
' 31.23 ASSISTING REGULAR POLICE OFFICERS.
Duly appointed members of the Corps, in the performance of the duty or duties as shall be assigned to them under the supervision of regularly employed village police officers, shall assist regular officers in the performance of routine police functions of law enforcement and preservation of the public peace and order in accordance with the rules, regulations and orders as shall be promulgated from time to time by the Chief of Police or the Governing Body of the village.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-9)
' 31.24 WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION BENEFITS; INDEMNITY INSURANCE.
(A) It is hereby declared to be a condition precedent to the appointment of any applicant as a Corps member that the applicant first expressly agree that, if appointed, he or she shall not, in any way, be entitled to, eligible for, nor shall he or she receive compensation in any form by way of worker's compensation benefits as are accorded by law to regularly employed village employees for personal injury sustained within the scope of their employment; provided, however, that it shall be the duty of
12 Tularosa - Administration
the Chief of Police, before permitting any duly appointed Corps member to perform any police duty whatsoever for and on behalf of the village, to insure that the duly appointed Corps member is included in and covered by adequate personal injury underwriter's coverage or the equivalent thereof as will indemnify the village of, from and against any and all liability by virtue of claims for compensation, demands and chooses an action, accrued or accruing, as shall in any way arise out of or incident to personal injury sustained by any Corps member while engaged in the performance of his or her lawfully assigned police duty or duties for and on behalf of the village.
(B) Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the authority of any Corps member to perform any police duty for and on behalf of the village shall be subject to and coexistent with the indemnity insurance coverages in being and in full force and effect.
(C) The indemnity insurance coverage shall be purchased by each Corps member or otherwise acquired by each Corps member without expense to the village.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-10)
' 31.25 TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP.
(A) Membership of any person in the Corps may be terminated at any time by the Chief of Police for any reason, by notice in writing directed to the Corps member, and any Corps member may elect to resign at any time on notice in writing thereof to the Chief of Police.
(B) Upon termination of membership in the Corps, the member shall surrender and account for all village property theretofore issued to him or her.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-11)
' 31.26 IMPERSONATING MEMBER PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person not a bona fide member of the Corps to wear, carry or display a Corps identification card, commission card, badge, cap piece, insignia or uniform or in any manner to represent himself or herself to be a Corps member or affiliated or connected with the Corps.
(`75 Code, ' 1-2-12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
CHAPTER 32: PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
32.01 Purpose
32.02 Conflicts
32.03 Definitions
32.04 Employee rights
32.05 Management rights
Employer/Employee Relations
32.15 Appropriate bargaining units
32.16 Elections
32.17 Exclusive representation
32.18 Decertification
32.19 Scope of bargaining
32.20 Negotiations; impasse resolution
32.21 Prohibited practices; employers
32.22 Prohibited practices; employees, labor organization or representative
32.23 Strikes and lockouts
32.24 Valid agreements
32.25 Judicial enforcement; standard of review
Labor Management Relations Board
32.35 Creation and terms
32.36 Powers and duties
32.37 Hearing procedures
Cross-reference:
Duties of mayor and trustees, see ' 30.01
Municipal judge, see ' 31.01
Police reserve corps, see '' 31.15 through 31.26
Temporary municipal judge, see ' 31.02
13
14 Tularosa - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 32.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is:
(A) To guarantee employees the right to organize and bargain collectively with their employers;
(B) To promote harmonious and cooperative relationships between employers and employees;
(C) To protect the rights of employers; and
(D) To acknowledge the rights of the citizens to orderly and uninterrupted delivery of village services.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.02 CONFLICTS.
In the event of conflict with other village ordinances, the provisions hereof shall supersede any other previously enacted ordinances with respect to labor relations. Village sanctioned rules and regulations, administrative directives, departmental rules and regulations and work place practices shall control unless there is a conflict with a collective bargaining agreement. Where a conflict exists, the collective bargaining agreement shall control.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT. A group of employees designated by the Board for the purpose of collective bargaining. Appropriate units shall be formed by occupational group, such as blue collar (unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled), white collar (clerical, secretarial, administrative, technical and para-professional), professional, corrections, fire and police.
BOARD. The Tularosa Labor Management Relations Board.
CERTIFICATION. The designation, by the Board, of labor organization as the exclusive representative for all employees in an appropriate bargaining unit.
Personnel 15
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. The act of negotiating between the employer and an exclusive representative for the purpose of entering into a written agreement regarding wages, hours and conditions of employment.
CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE. A person who assists and acts in a confidential capacity with respect to a management employee.
EMPLOYEE. A regular full-time non-probationary employee of the village.
EMPLOYER. The Village of Tularosa, New Mexico.
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE. A labor organization that, as a result of certification by the Board, represents all employees in an appropriate bargaining unit for the purposes of collective bargaining.
GOVERNING BODY. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Tularosa.
GRIEVANCE. A written complaint by a bargaining unit employee regarding an action taken by management resulting in a disciplinary action that does not involve an application or interpretation of a collective bargaining agreement in effect between the exclusive representative and the employer.
IMPASSE. Failure of the employer and an exclusive representative, after good-faith bargaining to reach agreement in the course of negotiating a collective bargaining agreement.
LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any employee organization which represents employees in collective bargaining.
LOCKOUT. An act by the employer to prevent its employees from going to work for the purpose of resisting demands of the employees= exclusive representative or for the purpose of gaining a concession from the exclusive representative.
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE. An employee who is engaged primarily in executive and management functions and is charged with the responsibility of developing, administering or officiating management policies.
MEDIATION. Assistance by an impartial third party to resolve an impasse between an employer and an exclusive representative regarding employment relations through interpretation, suggestion and advice.
16 Tularosa - Administration
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE. An employee whose work is predominantly intellectual and varied in character and whose work involves the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment in its performance and requires knowledge of an advanced nature in a field of learning customarily requiring specialized study at an institution of higher education or its equivalent. The work of a PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE is of the character that the output or result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given period of time.
STRIKE. An employee's refusal, in concerted action with other employees, to report for duty or his or her willful absence in whole or in part from the full, faithful and proper performance of the duties of employment. The definition of STRIKE includes, but is not limited to such actions as the blue flu, sick outs, slow downs, traffic ticket writing campaigns, mass resignations and sympathy strikes.
SUPERVISOR. An employee who devotes a substantial amount of work time in supervisory duties, who customarily directs the work of two or more other employees and who has the authority in the interest of the employer to effectively recommend the retention, promotion or discipline of other employees.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.04 EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.
Employees, other than management employees, supervisors and confidential employees, may form, join or assist any labor organization for the purpose of collective bargaining through representatives chosen by employees through representation elections without interference, restraint or coercion. The employees also have the right to refuse to form, join or assist any labor organization. Employees may not be required to pay fair-share contributions.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.05 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS.
Unless limited by the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement or other statutory provision, the exclusive prerogatives, functions and rights of the employer shall include, but are not limited to the following:
(A) To direct and supervise all operations, functions and the work of the employees;
(B) To determine the place to report for work, to determine methods, processes and manner of performing work;
(C) To hire, lay off, promote, demote, assign, transfer, discipline, discharge or terminate employees;
Personnel 17
(D) To determine what and by whom services will be rendered to the citizens;
(E) To determine staffing requirements, create and abolish positions or to eliminate or reorganize work units;
(F) To determine and revise schedules of work;
(G) To establish, revise and implement standards for hiring and promoting employees;
(H) To assign shifts, work days, hours of work and work locations;
(I) To designate, assign and reassign all work duties;
(J) To determine the need for and the qualifications of new employees and to determine the qualifications for and qualifications of employees considered for transfer and promotion;
(K) To take actions as necessary to carry out the mission of the employer in emergencies; and
(L) To retain all rights not specifically limited by a collective bargaining agreement or this chapter.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
EMPLOYER/EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
' 32.15 APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNITS.
(A) The Board shall, upon receipt of a valid petition for a representation election filed by a labor organization, designate the appropriate bargaining units for collective bargaining. Occupational groups shall generally be identified as blue collar, white collar, professional, para-professional, police, fire and corrections. Bargaining units shall not be determined by craft or trade designations. The parties, by mutual agreement and approval of the Board, may further consolidate occupational groups. Essential factors in determining appropriate bargaining units shall include the principals of efficient administration of government and the history of collective bargaining within the municipality, if any, and the assurance to the employees of their rights guaranteed by ' 32.04.
(B) Within 30 days of the filing of a show of interest petition, the Board shall hold a hearing concerning the composition of the bargaining unit.
(C) The Board shall not include, in any appropriate bargaining unit, supervisors, managers or confidential employees.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
18 Tularosa - Administration
' 32.16 ELECTIONS.
(A) Whenever, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Board, a petition is filed by a labor organization containing the valid signatures of at least 30% of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit, the Board shall conduct a secret ballot representation election.
(B) (1) Once a labor organization has filed a valid petition with the Board calling for a representation election, other labor organizations may seek to be placed on the ballot.
(2) Any organization may file a petition with the Board containing the valid signatures of not less than 10% of the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit no later than ten days after the Board and the employer post a written notice that the petition containing the signatures of not less than 30% of the employees has been filed by a labor organization.
(C) Every election shall include the option for no representation.
(D) In the event of an election with two or more organizations on the ballot where neither of the choices received a majority of the votes cast, then and in such an event, a run-off election shall be held within 30 days. The choices on the run-off election shall consist of the employee organization which received the greatest number of votes in the original election and the choice of Ano representation.@
(E) Where a majority of the votes cast are in favor of representation by a labor organization and at least 60% of the members in the bargaining unit have cast a vote, the Board shall certify the labor organization as the exclusive representative for all employees in that appropriate bargaining unit. No labor organization shall be certified as an exclusive representative unless at least 60% of the members of the bargaining unit vote in the election or run-off election.
(F) No election shall be conducted if an election or runoff election has been conducted in the 12-month period immediately preceding the proposed representation election. No election shall be held during the term of an existing collective bargaining agreement, except as provided in ' 32.18.
(G) Election disputes shall be resolved by the Board.
(H) The cost of elections shall be borne equally by the parties.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.17 EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION.
(A) (1) A labor organization that has been certified by the Board as representing the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit shall be the exclusive representative of all employees in the appropriate bargaining unit.
Personnel 19
(2) The exclusive representative shall act for all employees in the appropriate bargaining unit and negotiate a collective bargaining agreement covering all employees in the appropriate bargaining unit without discrimination or regard to membership in the labor organization.
(B) (1) The existence of an exclusive bargaining representative shall not prevent employees in or out of a bargaining unit from taking their grievances or prohibited practices to their supervisor or management or filing prohibited practices with the Board based upon discrimination by the exclusive representative or the employer. The Board will adjudicate disagreements over contract interpretations only when the disagreement is between the employer and the exclusive representative.
(2) Any settlement of a grievance or relief given on a prohibited practice brought by an individual shall not be inconsistent with or in violation of the collective bargaining agreement then in effect between the employer and the exclusive representative or inconsistent with or in violation of good faith resolution made between the employer and the exclusive representative in the day-to-day administration of the collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.18 DECERTIFICATION.
(A) Any member of a bargaining unit or a labor organization may initiate decertification of a labor organization as the exclusive representative if 30% of the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit make a written request to the Board for a decertification election. Decertification elections shall be held in a manner prescribed by rules of the Board.
(B) When there is a collective bargaining agreement in effect, a request for a decertification election shall be made to the Board no earlier than 90 days and no later than 60 days before the expiration of the collective bargaining agreement; provided, however, that a request for an election may be filed at any time after the expiration of the third year of a collective bargaining agreement with a term of more than three years.
(C) When, within the time period prescribed in division (B) above, a competing labor organization files a petition containing signatures of at least 30% of the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit, a representation election rather than a decertification election shall be conducted.
(D) When an exclusive representative has been certified, but no collective bargaining agreement is in effect, the Board shall not accept a request for a decertification election earlier than 12 months subsequent to a labor organization's certification as the exclusive representative.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
20 Tularosa - Administration
' 32.19 SCOPE OF BARGAINING.
(A) Except for retirement programs provided under the Public Employees Retirement Act or other municipal retirement plans, employers and exclusive representatives shall bargain in good faith on wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. However, neither the employer, nor the exclusive representative, shall be required to agree to a proposal or to make a concession. All collective bargaining agreements between the parties shall be reduced to writing.
(B) (1) The obligation to bargain collectively imposed hereby shall not be construed as authorizing employers and exclusive representatives to enter into any agreement that is in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the municipality, state statute or federal statute. The employer and the exclusive representative may not negotiate agreements that would be in conflict with ordinances of the municipality, state statutes or federal statutes.
(2) In the event of conflict between the provisions of any statute of this state or federal government and any agreement entered into by the employer and the exclusive representative in collective bargaining, the former shall prevail.
(C) Payroll deduction of the exclusive representative's membership dues is a negotiable item by either party. The amount of dues, if the provision is agreed to by the parties, shall be certified in writing by an official of the labor organization and shall not include special assessments, penalties or fines of any type levied by the exclusive representative. During the time that a Board certification is in effect for a particular appropriate bargaining unit, the employer shall not deduct dues for any other labor organization from members of the same bargaining unit.
(D) Any agreement provision by the employer and an exclusive representative that requires the expenditure of funds shall be contingent upon the specific appropriation of funds by the Governing Body and the availability of funds.
(E) The parties have a requirement that grievance procedures culminating with binding arbitration be negotiated. This applies only to grievances and does not apply to negotiations impasse.
(F) The following meetings shall be closed, as defined by the Open Meetings Acts:
(1) Meetings for the discussion of bargaining strategy for collective bargaining negotiations between the employer and the exclusive representative;
(2) Collective bargaining sessions; and
(3) Consultations and impasse resolution procedures at which the employer and/or the exclusive representative of the appropriate bargaining unit are present.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
Personnel 21
' 32.20 NEGOTIATIONS; IMPASSE RESOLUTION.
(A) The following negotiation procedures shall apply to the employer and exclusive representatives.
(1) Negotiations shall be opened upon written notice by either party to the other requesting that negotiating sessions be scheduled. The request shall be post marked no earlier than 120 days nor later than 60 days prior to the contract ending date. The parties may open negotiations at any time by mutual agreement.
(2) Negotiating teams will consist of a maximum of five persons designated by the exclusive representative and a maximum of five persons designated by the Mayor.
(3) All negotiations will be conducted in closed sessions. Negotiations will be held at the facilities and at a time mutually agreed upon by the negotiating teams. Negotiations will begin with the party that requested the negotiations presenting their complete proposal and changes, section by section.
(4) Following the complete presentation of both proposals, the parties will identify the economic and non-economic issues. All non-economic issues must be resolved prior to negotiating economic issues.
(5) Recesses and study sessions may be called by either team. Prior to these recesses or study sessions, the reconvening time will be agreed upon. A caucus may be taken as needed.
(6) Employees who are members of the exclusive representatives negotiating team will be released from their normal duties without pay to participate in negotiations.
(7) Tentative agreements reached during negotiations will be reduced to writing, dated and initialed by each team spokesperson. The tentative agreements are conditional and may be withdrawn should later discussion change either team's understanding of the language as it relates to another part of the agreement.
(8) Agreement on contract negotiations is accomplished when the Union President and the Mayor sign the agreement. Provisions in multi-year agreements providing for economic increases in subsequent years shall be contingent upon the Governing Body appropriating the funds necessary to fund the increase for subsequent years. Should the Governing Body not appropriate sufficient funds to fund the agreed upon increase for a subsequent year, either party may reopen negotiations.
(B) The following impasse procedure shall be followed by the employer and exclusive representatives.
(1) If an impasse occurs, either party may request, from the Board, that a mediator be assigned to the negotiations unless the parties can agree on a mediator. A mediator from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service will be assigned by the Board to assist negotiations.
22 Tularosa - Administration
(2) If the impasse continues after a 30-day mediation period, either party may request from the Board that a fact-finder be assigned to the negotiations. A fact-finder will be selected by the parties from a list of individuals requested from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
(3) The fact-finder shall conduct hearings and submit written findings and recommendations to the parties and the Board. The fact-finder shall select either the exclusive representative's total and complete last best offer or he or she may select the employer's total and complete last best offer. The fact-finder may not create his or her own settlement. If the parties have not reached agreement within 15 days after receipt of the fact-finder's report, the Board shall publish the fact-finder's recommendation.
(4) The Governing Body may accept, reject or modify the fact-finder=s recommendation. The decision of the Governing Body is final and binding on both parties and shall be incorporated into the agreement along with those items that had been tentatively agreed to by the parties.
(5) The cost of any impasse proceeding that requires a third party shall be borne equally by the parties to the impasse.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.21 PROHIBITED PRACTICES; EMPLOYERS.
(A) No employer or his or her representative shall:
(1) Discriminate against an employee with regard to terms and conditions of employment because of the employee's membership in a labor organization;
(2) Restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of any right guaranteed hereunder;
(3) Dominate or coerce employees in the formation, existence or administration of any labor organization;
(4) Discriminate in regard to hiring, tenure or any term or condition of employment in order to encourage or discourage membership in a labor organization;
(5) Discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee because he or she has signed or filed an affidavit, petition, grievance or complaint or given any information or testimony under the provisions hereof or because an employee is forming, joining or choosing to be represented by a labor organization;
(6) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the exclusive representative;
(7) Refuse or fail to comply with any provision hereof or Board regulation; or
Personnel 23
(8) Refuse or fail to comply with any collective bargaining agreement.
(B) During the negotiating process, including the impasse procedure, elected village officials are prohibited from discussing any issue, which is subject of negotiations, with employees of the bargaining unit involved in negotiations and employees of the exclusive representative.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 32.22 PROHIBITED PRACTICES; EMPLOYEES, LABOR ORGANIZATION OR
REPRESENTATIVE.
An employee, labor organization or its representative shall not:
(A) Discriminate against an employee with regard to labor organization membership because of race, color, religion, creed, age, sex or national origin;
(B) Solicit membership for an employee or labor organization during the employee's duty hours;
(C) Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of any right guaranteed by the provisions hereof;
(D) Interfere with, restrain or coerce any elected official, employee or representative of the employer in the conduct of his or her duties;
(E) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the employer;
(F) Refuse or fail to comply with any collective bargaining or other agreement with the employer;
(G) Refuse or fail to comply with any provision hereof;
(H) Picket homes or private businesses of elected officials or employees;
(I) Interfere with or coerce the employer in the selection of its agent for bargaining;
(J) Interfere with the normal process of negotiations between the duly authorized negotiating teams of the employer and the exclusive representative; or
(K) During the negotiating process, including the impasse procedure, discuss any issue with village elected officials which is a subject of negotiations.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
24 Tularosa - Administration
' 32.23 STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS.
(A) No employee or labor organization shall engage in a strike. No employee labor organization shall cause, instigate, encourage or support a strike. No employer shall cause, instigate or engage in any employee lockout.
(B) (1) In the case of an action by bargaining unit employees where the employer alleges a strike has occurred, the Labor Management Relations Board shall meet in emergency session, within 24 hours of the filing of the charge by the employer, and determine whether a strike has indeed occurred.
(2) In case the Board must meet in accordance with this emergency during the absence of a Board member, the Mayor shall appoint an interim member with due regard to the representative character of the Board.
(C) (1) Should it be determined by the Board that bargaining unit employees participated in, caused, instigated, encouraged or supported a public employee strike, walkout or slow-down, the exclusive representative for that bargaining unit shall be automatically decertified by the Labor Management Relations Board.
(2) In such case, the collective bargaining agreement shall be null and void, the exclusive representative for that appropriate bargaining unit may not collect dues, negotiate or represent employees in any fashion, and shall be barred from serving as the exclusive representative of any bargaining unit of village employees for a period of not less than one year.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.24 VALID AGREEMENTS.
All collective bargaining agreements and other agreements between employers and exclusive representatives are valid and enforceable according to their terms when entered into in accordance with the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.25 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT; STANDARD OF REVIEW.
(A) The Board may request the District Court to enforce any order issued pursuant hereto, including those for appropriate temporary relief and restraining orders. The Court shall consider the request for enforcement on the record made before the Board. It shall uphold the action of the Board and take appropriate action to enforce it unless it concludes that the order is:
(1) Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion;
Personnel 25
(2) Not supported by substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole; or
(3) Otherwise not in accordance with law.
(B) (1) Any person or party, including any labor organization affected by a final regulation, order or decision of the Board may appeal to District Court for further relief.
(2) All appeals shall be based upon the record made at the Board hearing. All appeals to District Court shall be taken within 30 days of final regulation, order or decision of the Board.
(3) Actions taken by the Board shall be affirmed unless the Court concludes that the action is:
(a) Arbitrary, capricious or abuse of discretion;
(b) Not supported by substantial evidence on the record taken as a whole; or
(c) Otherwise not in accordance with law.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
LABOR MANAGEMENT RELATIONS BOARD
' 32.35 CREATION AND TERMS.
(A) The Labor Management Relations Board is hereby created. The Board shall consist of three members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Governing Body. The Mayor shall appoint one member recommended by organized labor representatives actively involved in representing employees, one member recommended by management and one member jointly recommended by the two other appointees.
(B) Board members shall serve for a period of one year with terms commencing April 1 of each year. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment and the appointments shall only be made for the remainder of the unexpired term. A Board member may serve an unlimited number of terms.
(C) During the term for which he or she is appointed, no Board member shall hold or seek any other political office or public employment, be an individual representing the employer in collective bargaining or be an employee of the labor organization representing the village employees.
(D) Each Board member shall be paid statutory mileage and per diem for hearings required under this chapter.
26 Tularosa - Administration
(E) The cost of any hearing will be borne equally by the parties to the hearings.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.36 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Board shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to accomplish and perform its functions and duties, as established herein, including the establishment or procedures for:
(1) The designation of appropriate bargaining units;
(2) The selection, certification and decertification of exclusive representatives; and
(3) The filing of, hearing on and determination of complaints of prohibited practices.
(B) The Board shall:
(1) Hold hearings and make inquiries necessary to carry out its functions and duties;
(2) Request from employers and labor organizations the information and data necessary to carry out the Board's functions and responsibilities; and
(3) Hire personnel or contract with third parties as the Governing Body deems necessary to assist the Board in carrying out its functions.
(C) The Board may issue subpoenas requiring, upon reasonable notice, the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence, including books, records, correspondence or documents relating to any matter in question. The Board may prescribe the form of subpoena, but it shall adhere insofar as practicable to the form used in civil actions in the District Court. The Board may administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence.
(D) The Board shall decide all issues by majority vote and shall issue its decisions in the form of written orders and opinions. The decisions of the Board on interpretation and applications of the ordinance and collective bargaining agreements are final and binding on the parties subject to the appeal provisions in ' 32.25.
(E) The Board has the power to enforce provisions hereof and labor management agreements through the imposition of appropriate administrative remedies.
(F) The Board shall have no power to promulgate policy other than to accomplish and perform its functions and duties.
Personnel 27
(G) No rule or regulation promulgated by the Board shall require, directly or indirectly, as a condition of continuous employment, any employee covered hereby to pay money to any labor organization that is certified as an exclusive representative.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
' 32.37 HEARING PROCEDURES.
(A) The Board may hold hearings for the purposes of:
(1) Information gathering and inquiry;
(2) Adopting rules and regulations; and
(3) Adjudicating disputes and enforcing the provisions hereof and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to that act.
(B) The Board shall adopt regulations setting forth procedures to be followed during hearings of the Board. The regulations shall meet minimal due process requirements of the State and Federal Constitutions.
(C) (1) Charges of prohibited labor practices that are filed within 60 days of the time the complainant knew or with reasonable diligence should have known of the commission or omission of the act that generated the charges shall be heard by the Board. The charges must identify the specific violation and relief requested.
(2) Proceedings against the party alleged to have committed a prohibited practice shall be commenced by service upon it and the Board of a written notice together with a copy of the charges and relief requested.
(D) All adopted rules and regulations shall be filed in accordance with applicable local ordinances.
(E) A verbatim record made by electronic or other suitable means shall be made of every rule-making and adjudicatory hearing. The record shall not be transcribed unless required for judicial review or unless ordered by the Board. Payment for the transcription shall be made by the party requesting the review.
(F) Each party to a prohibited labor practice shall bear the cost of producing its own witnesses for hearings.
28 Tularosa - Administration
(G) No regulation proposed to be adopted by the Board that affects any person or governmental entity outside of the Board and its staff shall be adopted, amended or repealed without public hearing and comment on the proposed action before the Board. The public hearing shall be held after reasonable notice of the subject matter of the regulation, the action proposed to be taken, the time and place of the hearing, the manner in which interested persons may present their views and the method by which copies of the proposed regulation, proposed amendment or repeal of an existing regulation may be obtained. All meetings shall be held in the village. Notice shall be published once at least 30 days prior to the hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and notice shall be mailed at least 30 days prior to the hearing date to persons who have made written request to the appropriate village official for advance notice of hearings related to this chapter.
(Ord. 151, passed 3-16-1993)
CHAPTER 33: CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
Section
33.01 Creation
' 33.01 CREATION.
There is hereby created the Civil Defense Organization for the village, as an agency of the government to be composed of the Mayor and other persons that he or she may appoint from time to time. The Mayor shall appoint a director and a staff to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor or until repeal of this chapter.
(`75 Code, ' 1-3-1)
29
30 Tularosa - Administration
CHAPTER 34: ELECTIONS
Section
34.01 Election proceedings
' 34.01 ELECTION PROCEEDINGS.
All election proceedings for the village shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the laws and statutes of the state in force and as the same may from time to time be amended.
(`75 Code, ' 1-4-1)
31
32 Tularosa - Administration
CHAPTER 35: PUBLIC LIBRARY
Section
35.01 Established
35.02 Director
35.03 Board
35.04 Unlawful acts
35.05 Property acquisition and disposal
' 35.01 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a library in the village, a free public library to be known as the Tularosa Public Library. Such library is a proper and legitimate object of expenditure and operation of the village. The library is a department of and shall be administered by the village.
(Ord. 207, passed 1-20-04)
' 35.02 DIRECTOR.
Pursuant to NMSA ' 3-11-6, the Mayor shall appoint a Library Director over any staff for the public library system who shall be the administrative officer of the library, or may be a non-compensated volunteer. The Mayor shall consult with the Library Board on selection of the Library Director.
(Ord. 207, passed 1-20-04)
' 35.03 BOARD.
(A) Created; duties. The Library Board is created as an advisory board to the village. The Library Board shall advise and assist the Board of Trustees to ensure the efficient and economical management and operation of the Tularosa Public Library.
(B) Purposes. The Library Board is created as a liaison between the community and the Board of Trustees for the following purposes:
(1) To keep itself informed of library needs and to serve as a forum for discussion;
33
2004 S-2
34 Tularosa - Administration
(2) To recommend to the Board of Trustees policies for overall development, including plans for additional library facilities and programs;
(3) To encourage the greatest use of library facilities and programs;
(4) To recommend to the Board of Trustees in a timely manner the fiscal year operating budget and to recommend budget adjustments if needed.
(C) Composition. The Library Board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the governing body of the village. The members shall include, as far as possible, representatives of various geographic, ethnic, socioeconomic, professional and business interests of the community.
(D) Terms of office.
(1) The members of the Library Board shall hold terms of office as follows: appointments for terms commencing January 1, 2004, and thereafter, shall be for a term of two years, ending on December 31 at the end of term of office. Appointments to unexpired terms will be for the remainder of the term.
(2) Terms of office shall be staggered so that terms of office of three members expire in odd numbered years and two members expire on even numbered years.
(3) At initial activation of the Library Board, three members shall be appointed to serve a two year term of office and two members shall be appointed to serve a one-year term of office. Thereafter, all appointments to the Library Board shall be for two years.
(E) Nomination, appointment, removal procedures for members.
(1) At least two months before a term of a Library Board member expires, the Mayor shall notify the members of the Board of Trustees of the pending vacancy and the name of the incumbent Board member. The Mayor may request a Library Board recommendation for filling the vacancy. The Mayor may seek other candidates for the vacancy. Persons appointed to Board membership will be notified of their appointment in writing asking for acceptance or rejection of the position in writing. If a vacancy occurs for reasons other than expiration of a term, the same procedure will be followed.
(2) The Mayor may remove any Board member who misses three consecutive meetings in a term year. The chairman of the Library Board shall report such absences to the Mayor. The Mayor will investigate the circumstances of the absences and report thereon to the Board of Trustees at their next regularly scheduled meeting and such removal shall be subject to the approval of the governing body of the village.
(F) Members to serve without compensation. All members of the Board created by this chapter shall serve without compensation.
2004 S-2
Public Library 35
(G) Conflict of interest. Members of the Board having a private interest in matters before the Board shall disqualify themselves from discussion and voting on that matter.
(H) Officers. The Library Board shall elect a minimum of three officers; those being Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary-Treasurer. The Board may elect such other officers as the Board deems necessary. Each officer shall be elected by the members of the Board for a term of one year and shall be elected at the first meeting of each calendar year. No officers shall serve more than two consecutive terms in the same office.
(I) Meetings.
(1) A quorum of three members is required for the conduct of Board business. A motion shall carry upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the members present at any meeting. The Board shall adopt additional rules to govern its proceedings.
(2) All meetings shall be open to the public and insofar as possible shall be held at public-owned facilities. The Board shall meet at least monthly, and may hold additional meetings at its discretion. Notice of the time, place and agenda meetings must be published as prescribed by the library's public meetings resolution.
(3) The Library Director is an ex officio member of the Board without vote, being responsible for administration of library facilities.
(4) Board minutes shall be brief and include date and place of meeting, attendance, items discussed and action recommended. Minutes shall be filed with the Village Clerk/Treasurer and sufficient copies forwarded to the Mayor for distribution as prescribed.
(5) Minutes of the last monthly meeting each term year, January 1 to December 31, shall contain a summary of recommendations and record of attendance of members for the term year.
(J) Reports. The Library Board shall submit a monthly status report to the Mayor and Board of Trustees identifying timely library operations issues the Mayor and Board of Trustees should be made aware of. This report is due to the Village Clerk/Treasurer the Friday before the regular monthly meeting of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 207, passed 1-20-04)
' 35.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) Damage. Any person, carrying away without authority, misusing, cutting, writing upon, damaging, defacing, tearing, or destroying any book, periodical, map, newspaper or any property devoted to the public library shall be subject to punishment as provided in ' 35.01, and shall be ordered to replace or pay for the repair of the material destroyed.
2004 S-2
36 Tularosa - Administration
(B) Failure to pay fine; return. Any person who fails to pay fines, pay for or return any book, periodical, map, newspaper, computer equipment, software, computer programs, or any property belonging to the public library within 15 days after written notice by the Village Attorney's office shall be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 10 and shall be ordered to pay the library overdue fine and to replace the material if it has been lost or damaged.
(C) Notice defined. NOTICE, as used in division (B), is presumed to have been given when deposited as certified matter in the United States mail, addressed to the person at the address as it appears on his or her library card.
(Ord. 207, passed 1-20-04)
' 35.05 PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL.
The Board shall develop policies covering the acceptance of books, media, equipment and other property donated to the library by members of the public and the disposal of surplus library books, media, equipment and property.
(A) Donations. As a general guideline, policies on the acceptance of books, media, equipment and other property donated by members of the public, the Board shall consider library needs and requirements and providing acknowledgment of the generosity of the donators of books and media.
(B) Surplus material. On a schedule developed by the Library Director, library material (books, media, equipment and property) shall be evaluated to identify books and media that are damaged, unserviceable and are duplicates; books and media demonstrating no interest to patrons; and, unserviceable equipment and other property. Such books, media, equipment and property shall be declared candidates for disposal by the library.
(C) Disposal of surplus material. The Library Board shall approve or disapprove the list of proposed surplus library material. Surplus library material (books, media, equipment and other property) shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable village ordinances, applicable state law, and accepted standard library property disposal practices in this state. Monies derived from the sale of surplus library property shall be deposited in the Village Library Fund for library operations.
(Ord. 207, passed 1-20-04)
2004 S-2

TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
91. FAIR HOUSING
92. LITTERING
93. ABANDONED VEHICLES
94. NOISE REGULATIONS
95. ANIMALS
96. CLEAN INDOOR AIR
1
2008 S-4
2 Tularosa - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Definition
Specific Nuisances
90.15 Abandonment of dangerous containers
90.16 Conduct offensive to public well-being
90.17 Obstruction on sidewalks
90.18 Accumulation of refuse
90.19 Attachment of items to utility poles
90.20 Abandonment of shopping carts; removal
90.21 Fireworks
90.22 Open burning
90.23 Public dances
90.24 Loitering
Weed Control
90.35 Definitions
90.36 Unlawful growth or accumulation on lots
90.37 Unlawful growth or accumulation on tracts
90.38 Removal by city
Insects
90.50 Definitions
90.51 Declaration of public nuisance
90.52 Premises to be kept clean and free
90.53 Destruction of larvae
90.54 Use of insecticides
90.99 Penalty
3
4 Tularosa - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 90.01 DEFINITION.
(A) The definitions listed in ' 130.04 of this code of ordinances shall apply to this chapter.
(B) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC NUISANCE. Knowingly creating, performing or maintaining anything affecting any number of citizens without lawful authority which is either:
(a) Injurious to public health, safety, morals or welfare; or
(b) Interferes with the exercise and enjoyment of public rights, including the right to use public or private property.
(NMSA ' 30-8-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
SPECIFIC NUISANCES
' 90.15 ABANDONMENT OF DANGEROUS CONTAINERS.
Abandonment of dangerous containers consists of any person:
(A) Abandoning, discarding or keeping in any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container, cabinet or similar container which is no longer in use, without having the attached doors, hinges, lids or latches removed or without sealing the doors or other entrances so as to make it impossible for anyone to be imprisoned therein; or
(B) Who, being the owner, lessee or manager of any premises, knowingly permits any abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, freezer, airtight container, cabinet or similar container to remain upon the premises in a condition whereby anyone may be imprisoned therein.
(NMSA ' 30-8-9) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 5
' 90.16 CONDUCT OFFENSIVE TO PUBLIC WELL-BEING.
Conduct offensive to public well-being consists of any person who is the owner or tenant in possession of any premises located within the city limits permitting any privy or cesspool upon the premises owned or occupied by him or her, to become a menace to public health or constitute a condition offensive to the public.
(NMSA ' 30-8-12) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.17 OBSTRUCTION ON SIDEWALKS.
(A) All sidewalks shall be kept clean from rocks and other obstructions, including ice and snow, and in a state of good repair by the owners, occupants or agents in charge of the adjoining property. A sidewalk in good repair shall be free of cracks, floats, obstructions, depressions and any and all other defects and shall have a uniform longitudinal and transverse gradient.
(B) All areas directly over sidewalks, to a height of eight feet, shall be maintained free of vegetation or other obstruction by the owners, occupants or agents in charge of the adjoining property.
(C) The sidewalk setback area and all plantings therein shall be maintained by the owners, occupants or agents in charge of the adjoining property.
(D) No item of street furniture or other item which would obstruct pedestrians or effectively reduce the width of a sidewalk shall be placed in, on, over or under the sidewalk.
(E) When it has been determined that there is a violation of the provisions of this section, notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or his or her designee upon the owners or agents in charge of the property adjoining the sidewalk or sidewalk setback area, directing that removal of obstruction be made within a designated period of time, which shall not be more than 30 days. If the owners or agents in charge of the property fail to comply with the order within the time prescribed, the village shall cause the removal of obstructions be made at the cost and expense of the owners or agents in charge of the property in accordance with state law and the cost of the removal of obstruction shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be foreclosed in the same manner provided by law for the foreclosure of municipal liens.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
6 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 90.18 ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
REFUSE.
(a) Any article or substance:
1. Which is commonly discarded as waste; or
2. Which, if discarded on the ground, will create or contribute to an unsanitary, dangerous, offensive or unsightly condition.
(b) REFUSE includes, but is not limited to the following items or classes of items: waste food; waste paper and paper products; cans, bottles or other containers; junked household furnishings and equipment; junked parts or bodies of automobiles and other metallic junk or scrap; portions or carcasses of dead animals; and collections of ashes, dirt, yard trimmings or other rubbish.
(NMSA ' 30-8-3)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Allow any refuse to collect or accumulate on any lot or other premises within the city of which he or she is owner, tenant, lessee, manager or occupant;
(2) Throw, place, discard or conduct, in any manner, any refuse into any public thoroughfare or other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by the person, other than by placing the refuse in proper containers; or
(3) Throw, place or conduct in any manner, any refuse into any ditch within the city limits.
(C) (1) When it has been determined that there is a violation of this section, notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or his or her agent, upon the owners or agents in charge of the property directing that removal of refuse be made within a designated period of time which shall not be less than five days, nor more than 90 days.
(2) If the owners or agents in charge of the property fail to comply with the order within the time prescribed, the village shall cause the refuse to be removed at the expense of the owners of the property in accordance with state law and the cost of the removal shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be enforced by foreclosure by the Village Attorney.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 7
' 90.19 ATTACHMENT OF ITEMS TO UTILITY POLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any wireless, telephone or telegraph apparatus, wire, metal, wood or other substance to any telephone, telegraph, electric light, electric power or electric railway pole or cross-arm or its attachments belonging to any other person, firm or corporation, without the consent of the person, firm or corporation given in writing.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.20 ABANDONMENT OF SHOPPING CARTS; REMOVAL.
(A) (1) No person shall remove, from the premises of any food store, market or other mercantile establishment in the village, any shopping cart, wagon or similar device unless the person is the owner or the owner's employee or agent or unless the person was authorized to remove the cart, wagon or device by the owner thereof or his or her authorized agent or employee.
(2) Premises shall be construed to include parking lots adjacent thereto.
(B) No person shall abandon or leave any cart, wagon or similar device which has been removed from the owner's premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place or upon any private property, except that of the owner of the cart, wagon or device, not under the exclusive control of the person abandoning or leaving any cart, wagon or other similar device.
(C) The managers, operators or owners of any food store, market or other mercantile establishment in the village shall post the essential details of this code in a conspicuous place for the general information of the public leaving the premises.
(D) The managers, operators or owners of any food store, market or other mercantile establishment in the village shall stamp or affix to each shopping cart, wagon or similar device with the name and address of the food store, market or other mercantile establishment which owns the shopping cart, wagon or similar device.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.21 FIREWORKS.
Unlawful possession of fireworks consist of either selling, offering to sell, owning, possession or discharging within the village limits except within an area 300 feet south of ROW line of U.S. Highway 70 between Brittany Road and Stella Road any:
(A) Aerial device that, upon ignition, propels itself or an insert a significant distance into the air, but does not include a firework that produces a shower of sparks;
(B) Ground audible device intended to function on the ground that produces an audible effect; or
2006 S-3
8 Tularosa - General Regulations
(C) Device which is not deemed permissible under the Fireworks Licensing and Safety Act, NMSA '' 60-2C-1 to 60-2C-11, as the Act may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-18-1979; Am. Ord. 146, passed 5-5-1992; Am. Ord. 214, passed 6-14-2005) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.22 OPEN BURNING.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any material in an open fire upon his or her land or that of another within the village limits, except that:
(1) Open burning is permitted for barbecuing, for heating purposes in fireplaces, for the noncommercial cooking of food for human consumption and for warming by small wood fires at construction sites; and
(2) Open burning is permitted for the following purposes when a permit or other proper authorization is obtained from the Village Clerk-Treasurer: weed abatement; prevention of fire hazards; instruction and training of bona fide fire-fighting and fire rescue personnel; civil defense; conservation; game management; control of vegetation in irrigation ditches and canals; clearance and maintenance of watercourses and flood control channels to eliminate flood hazards; and other special circumstances, provided that no permit shall be issued to burn leaves within the village limits.
(B) A permit to burn shall not be issued if the Village Clerk-Treasurer determines that:
(1) A practical alternative to burning exits;
(2) The health or welfare of any person may be detrimentally affected; or
(3) Ambient air quality of property may be detrimentally affected.
(C) Any person seeking a permit to open burn shall do so by submitting a request to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer may require the application to be written and contain the following information:
(1) The requester's name, address and telephone number;
(2) The location where the burning is to be conducted;
(3) The type and quantity of material to be burned;
(4) The date and time when the burning is to be conducted;
(5) The methods that will be followed to ignite, maintain and control the burning;
2006 S-3
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 9
(6) Reasons why the requester believes the burning is necessary; and
(7) The alternatives to burning and the reasons why the requester believes them not to be feasible.
(Ord. 139, passed 3-5-1991) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.23 PUBLIC DANCES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, conduct, operate, sponsor or permit a dance which is open to the general public, or to which the general public is invited, whether or not a charge is made for the dance, after the hour of 1:00 a.m. and before the hour of 8:00 a.m.; provided that the Village Chief of Police shall have the authority to close down a public dance prior to 1:00 a.m. in the event of any violation of law during the conduct of the dance.
(B) Any person, planning to sponsor or conduct a public dance shall notify the Chief of Police thereof at least one week prior to the dance, and shall, at his, her or their own expense, retain the services of at least two peace officers, approved by the Chief of Police, to police and maintain order at the dance at all times.
(C) The peace officer shall be under the control and supervision, at all times, of the person sponsoring or conducting the dance. The person sponsoring or conducting the dance shall agree, in writing, to hold the village harmless from any and all liability of the village as a result of the conduct of the peace officers in maintaining peace and order at the dance.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-18-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.24 LOITERING.
The following shall be public nuisances:
(A) Loiter or remain in a public place for the purpose of begging;
(B) Loiter or remain in a public place for the purpose of committing, attempting to commit or soliciting another person to commit, a lewd or sexual act;
(C) Loiter or remain in or about a school building or grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil or any other specific or legitimate reason for being there, and not having written permission for a school administrator; and
10 Tularosa - General Regulations
(D) Loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not used for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself of any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a peace officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this section afford the actor the opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at a trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer, did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at a trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
(`75 Code, ' 3-1-31) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 90, passed 9-18-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
WEED CONTROL
' 90.35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LOT. Any occupied or unoccupied piece of land of one-half acre or less which is located within one-quarter mile, 1,320 feet, of an occupied structure.
TRACT. Any piece of occupied or unoccupied land with an area of more than one-half acre.
WEEDS.
(1) All rank, noxious, poisonous, harmful, unhealthful vegetation or any growth whatsoever of an offensive or unsightly nature, or which is deleterious to health, and shall include, but is not limited to the following named plants: Pigusweed (Amaranthus retroflexus) Russian Thistle (Salsola pestifer) Ragweeds (Ambrosia ssp.) Lambsquarter (Kenopodium spp.) Kochia.
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 11
(2) The Police Chief is hereby authorized and delegated the authority and duty to determine if any other plant, due to their unhealthy or unsightly attributes or consequences, should be placed on the list of WEEDS, as defined herein, and shall put the plants on the list if it appears that the plants do come within the meaning of the term WEEDS, as herein defined.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 90.36 UNLAWFUL GROWTH OR ACCUMULATION ON LOTS.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any owner, lessee or occupant having charge or control of any lot within the village to permit or maintain on any lot, including the area located between the property line and the middle of the alley adjacent to the property, and the area located between the property line and the curb, and the area located ten feet outside the property line where there is no curb, any growth of weeds to a greater height than six inches, or any other accumulation of weeds. It shall also be unlawful for a person having charge or control of any tract within the village to allow any growth of weeds to a greater height than four inches on curbs and sidewalks located on their property as well as the area adjacent to and five feet back of the curbs, sidewalks and streets.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.37 UNLAWFUL GROWTH OR ACCUMULATION ON TRACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any owner, lessee or occupant having charge or control of any tract within the village to permit or maintain on any tract, including the area located between the property line and the middle of the alley adjacent to, the property line and curb and the area located ten feet outside the property line where there is no curb, any accumulation of weeds, which in the opinion of the Police Chief constitute a fire hazard. It shall also be unlawful for a person having charge or control of any tract within the village to allow any growth of weeds to a greater height than four inches on curbs and sidewalks located on their property as well as the area adjacent to and five feet back of the curbs, sidewalks and streets.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 90.99
12 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 90.38 REMOVAL BY CITY.
When it has been determined that there is a violation of this section, notice shall be served by certified mail addressed to the owner's or agent's last known address by the Chief of Police, directing that the cutting of weeds and removal of cuttings be made within five days. If the owners or agents in charge of the property fail to comply with the order within the time prescribed, the village shall cause the cutting of weeds and removal of cuttings at the expense of the owners or agents in charge and the cost of the removal shall constitute a lien against the property, which shall be enforced by foreclosure by the Village Attorney, as provided by state law.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
INSECTS
' 90.50 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LESSEE or TENANT. If the land is leased or rented, then the person having the right to possession of the land.
OWNER. The person having the right to possession of the land.
PERSON HAVING THE RIGHT OF POSSESSION. If the property is unoccupied, any agent having authority to lease, rent, sell, manage or take care of the land.
PROHIBITED SPECIES. The cocoon (otherwise called bags) of all members of the genus Thyridopteryx (commonly known as bagworms), and the webs (otherwise called nests) of all members of the genus Malacosoma of the family Lasiocampadiae (commonly called tent caterpillars) and of all members of the genus Hyphantria of the family Arctiidae (commonly called webworms) and all members of the genus Pyrrhalta Luteola (Mailer) (commonly called Elm Leaf Beetle).
(`75 Code, ' 4-3-1)
' 90.51 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
The bagworm nests, Elm Leaf Beetles and other tree pests, described in ' 90.50 hereof, are hereby declared to be nuisances and are prohibited within the village.
(`75 Code, ' 4-3-2) Penalty, see ' 90.99
Health and Sanitation; Nuisances 13
' 90.52 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND FREE.
The person having the right to possession of any land within the village shall keep the property free of the cocoons, bags, webs and nests prohibited in ' 90.50, and shall destroy cocoons, bags, webs and nests, all larvae therein and all insects.
(`75 Code, ' 4-3-3) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.53 DESTRUCTION OF LARVAE.
Every person who removes any cocoon, bag, web or nest prohibited herein, or who removes or cuts down any tree, branch or any other plant to which any larvae are therein, shall not in any manner dispose of the cocoon, bag, web, nest, tree or plant until all larvae have been destroyed.
(`75 Code, ' 4-3-4) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.54 USE OF INSECTICIDES.
Any person or official required by this subchapter to destroy cocoons, bags, webs, nests and such insects may, at his or her option, in lieu thereof destroy the bagworms, tent caterpillars, webworms and insects by spraying with insecticide generally recognized as suitable for the purpose, and if the destruction is successfully accomplished, it shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this subchapter.
(`75 Code, ' 4-3-5) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to ' 130.99.
(B) Any person who shall fail and neglect to cut the weeds and remove the cuttings or any accumulation of weeds, as provided in '' 90.35 through 90.38, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of any section of '' 90.35 through 90.38 or of any notice herein provided for, or who shall violate any of the provisions of '' 90.35 through 90.38 whatsoever or who shall resist or obstruct the Chief of Police or his or her authorized representatives in the cutting of weeds or the removal of cuttings or the removal of the accumulation of the weeds shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $300 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
14 Tularosa - General Regulations
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
91.01 Policy
91.02 Definitions
91.03 Unlawful practice
91.04 Discrimination in sales or rentals
91.05 Discrimination in financing or housing
91.06 Discrimination in brokerage services
91.07 Exemption
91.08 Administration
91.09 Education and conciliation
91.10 Enforcement
91.11 Interference, coercion or intimidation
91.99 Penalty
' 91.01 POLICY.
It is the policy of the village to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the village.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
' 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under '' 91.03 through 91.05.
DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any building, structure or portion thereof.
15
16 Tularosa - General Regulations
FAMILY. A single individual.
PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
TO RENT. To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
' 91.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
(A) Subject to the provisions of division (A)(2) below and ' 91.07, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in this section shall apply to:
(1) All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) below; or
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to:
(a) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that the private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of the sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this section shall apply only with respect to one sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that the bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this title only if the house is sold or rented without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person and without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of ' 91.03, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
(b) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as his or her own residence.
Fair Housing 17
(B) For the purposes of division (A)(2) above, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
(1) He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(2) He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN SALES OR RENTALS.
As made applicable by ' 91.03 and except as exempted by '' 91.03(A)(2) and 91.07, it shall be unlawful:
(A) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status;
(B) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status;
(C) To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitations or discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any preference, limitations or discrimination;
(D) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is, in fact, so available; or
(E) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion or national origin.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996) Penalty, see ' 91.99
18 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN FINANCING OR HOUSING.
It shall be unlawful for any person whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of the loan or other financial assistance, because of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status of the person or of any person associated with him or her in connection with the loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of the loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective dwellings in relation to which the loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in ' 91.03(A)(2).
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.06 DISCRIMINATION IN BROKERAGE SERVICES.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions of the access, membership or participation, because of race, color religion, national origin, handicap or familial status.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.07 EXEMPTION.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to the persons unless membership in the religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
Fair Housing 19
' 91.08 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The authority and responsibility for administering this Act shall be in the Mayor of the village.
(B) The Mayor may delegate any of these functions, duties and powers to employees of the village or to boards of the employees, including functions, duties and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this chapter. The Mayor shall, by rule, prescribe the rights of appeal from the decisions of his or her hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the village, to boards of officers or to himself or herself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
(C) All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to Housing and Urban Development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the Mayor to further such purposes.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
' 91.09 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the Mayor shall commence the educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
' 91.10 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) (1) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur thereafter (person aggrieved) may file a complaint with the Mayor.
(2) Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the Mayor requires.
(3) Upon receipt of a complaint, the Mayor shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or is about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receipt of a complaint or within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under division (C) below, the Mayor shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to resolve it.
20 Tularosa - General Regulations
(4) If the Mayor decides to resolve the complaints, he or she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of the informal endeavors may be made public or need as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the persons concerned.
(B) If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the Mayor, the Mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a complaint with the New Mexico Human Rights Commission at Santa Fe, New Mexico. The Mayor will assist in this filing. A copy of the complaint shall, at the same time, be forwarded to the Equal Opportunity Division of the Regional Office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in Dallas, Texas, and the New Mexico Human Rights Commission.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
' 91.11 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by '' 91.03 through 91.06.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.99 PENALTY.
Whoever is determined to be in violation of this chapter may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(Ord. 167, passed 4-16-1996)
CHAPTER 92: LITTERING
Section
92.01 Definitions
92.02 Unlawful behavior
92.03 Condition of violation; suspension
' 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LITTERING. Consists of discarding refuse:
(1) On public property in any manner other than placing the refuse in a receptacle provided for that purpose by the responsible governmental authorities or otherwise in accordance with lawful direction; or
(2) On private property not owned or lawfully occupied or controlled by the person, except with the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof.
REFUSE.
(1) Any article or substance:
(a) Which is commonly discarded as waste; or
(b) Which, if discarded on the ground will create or contribute to an unsanitary offensive or unsightly condition.
(2) REFUSE includes, but is not limited to the following items or classes of items: waste food; paper and paper products; cans, bottles or other containers; junk household furnishings or equipment; junk parts or bodies of automobiles or other metallic junk, scrap or tires; portions of carcass of dead animals; the collection of ashes, dirt, yard trimmings or other rubbish.
(Ord. 192, passed 8-17-1999; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
21
2003 S-1
22 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 92.02 UNLAWFUL BEHAVIOR.
It is hereby declared unlawful to commit the offense of littering and the use of uniform traffic or non-traffic citations is authorized for the enforcement of this section.
(Ord. 192, passed 8-17-1999) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.03 CONDITION OF VIOLATION; SUSPENSION.
The Court may, to the extent permitted by law, as a condition to suspension of any penalty provided by law, require a person who commits littering to pick up and remove from any public place or any private property, with prior permission of legal owner, any litter deposited thereon.
(Ord. 192, passed 8-17-1999)
CHAPTER 93: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
93.01 Violation
93.02 Definitions
93.03 Prohibited acts
93.04 Exceptions
93.05 Permit
93.06 Removal of vehicles
' 93.01 VIOLATION.
The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable vehicle or motor vehicle or parts thereof on any street, occupied or unoccupied land within the village limits in violation of the terms of this section is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which some part or parts which are ordinarily a component thereof have been removed or are missing.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, which by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause, is incapable of being propelled by its own power and/or any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, motorhomes, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
23
2003 S-1
24 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 93.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store on, or permit to be stored or placed on or allowed to remain on any public or private property or street or highway within the village limits a dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle unless the vehicle is in an enclosed building or on property which is enclosed with a fence or wall and the vehicle is not visible from adjoining or surrounding property or from the street or streets or public ways. This section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicles on the premises of a duly licensed business in zones where the activity is within the contemplated purposes of the duly licensed business under the provisions of the zoning code of the village.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.04 EXCEPTIONS.
An owner or tenant may store, permit to be stored or allow to remain upon his or her premises any dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof for a period not to exceed 15 days if the motor vehicle is registered in his or her name; provided further, that any owner or tenant may, in the event of hardship, secure a permit from the Clerk-Treasurer to extend the period of 15 days for an additional period not to exceed 45 days.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 93.05 PERMIT.
Upon application by the registered owner of a motor vehicle covered by this section, and upon the proof of hardship, the Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to issue the permit provided hereby and shall require the payment of $1 for each permit issued.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 93.06 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
The Department of Public Safety is hereby authorized to tow or have towed away, at the owner's expense, any vehicle left under circumstances which are in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
CHAPTER 94: NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
94.01 General provisions
94.02 Excessive noise prohibited
94.03 Excessive noises enumerated
' 94.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
It is found and declared that:
(A) The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within the limits of the village is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of the noises is increasing;
(B) The making, creation or maintenance of the loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the village; and
(C) The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the village and its inhabitants.
(`75 Code, ' 3-2-1)
' 94.02 EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the village.
(`75 Code, ' 3-2-2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
25
26 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 94.03 EXCESSIVE NOISES ENUMERATED.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(A) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on any street or public place of the village, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, and the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
(B) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity;
(C) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
(D) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
(E) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital;
(F) The playing of any radio, tape player, compact disc player, television, phonograph, musical instrument or other sound producing machine in a manner or with an unreasonable volume so as to disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, motel, hotel, hospital or sanatorium;
(G) The playing of any radio, tape player, compact disc player, television, phonograph, musical instrument or other sound producing machine while operating a motor vehicle within the village in a manner or with an unreasonable volume so as to disturb, distract or otherwise annoy any person in or out of a motor vehicle or in such a manner so as to prevent the operator of a motor vehicle from hearing outside sounds normally conducive to the safe operation of a motor vehicle; and/or
(H) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, air compressor equipment, dynamic braking device, Jake brake, motor vehicle or other power device, which is not equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any unnecessary noise, and no muffler or exhaust system shall be modified or used with a cutoff, bypass or similar device.
(`75 Code, ' 3-2-3) (Am. Ord. 158, passed 8-16-1994) Penalty, see ' 10.99
CHAPTER 95: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
95.01 Definitions
95.02 Licensing dogs; tags and collars
95.03 Guide dogs
95.04 Restraint
95.05 Disposition of dead animals
Prohibited Activity
95.15 Animals at large
95.16 Cruelty; poisoning
95.17 Public nuisances
95.18 Riding or driving animals on sidewalks
Administration and Enforcement
95.30 Enforcement
95.31 Impoundment
95.32 Rabies; procedure
95.33 Investigation
95.34 Interference with police officer
95.35 Records
95.36 Animal shelter
Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
95.50 Short title
95.51 Findings and intent
95.52 Definitions
95.53 Exceptions
95.54 Seizure of dog; petition to District Court
95.55 Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs; registration required
95.56 Prohibited acts
95.99 Penalty
27
2009 S-5
28 Tularosa - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EXPOSED TO RABIES. An animal has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this chapter if it has been bitten by any other animal or if it has been in contact with any animal known or reasonably suspected to be infected with rabies.
LIVESTOCK. Any horse, donkey, cow, sheep, goat, pig, except for Vietnamese miniature potbelly pigs and pygmy goats weighing 50 pounds or less or any similar animal.
OWNER. Any person, owning, keeping or harboring an animal.
POULTRY. Any chicken, duck, goose, turkey or similar bird.
SPAYED FEMALE DOGS. A female dog certified by a licensed veterinarian to have been spayed.
VACCINATION. An injection of vaccine approved by the State Veterinarian and administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing an animal against rabies.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-1) (Am. Ord. 191, passed 8-17-1999)
' 95.02 LICENSING DOGS; TAGS AND COLLARS.
(A) (1) No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog within the village unless the dog is licensed, as herein provided. Written application for the license shall be made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color and sex of the dog. The license fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of making the application. The license shall be issued by the Village Clerk-Treasurer upon the owners furnishing a current certificate evidencing the vaccination of the dog and shall state the owner's name and address and the amount paid and shall describe the dog.
(2) The yearly license fee shall be $10 for each dog, male or female.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-3)
(B) (1) With the license, there shall be delivered to the owner a metallic tag stamped with the number of the license and the year for which issued. The shape of the tags shall be changed each year.
2003 S-1
Animals 29
(2) The owner shall see that the dog wears, at all times, a collar or harness to which the tag shall be attached.
(3) If the tag is lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain a duplicate upon the presentation of the license and payment of a fee of $2 for the duplicate tag.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-4) (Am. Ord. 137, passed 1-3-1991; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.03 GUIDE DOGS.
The provisions of ' 95.02 shall not apply with respect to guide dogs trained to lead a blind person.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-5)
' 95.04 RESTRAINT.
(A) (1) The owner shall keep his or her dog under restraint at all times and shall not permit the dog to run at large off the premises or property of the owner.
(2) Failure to keep a dog under restraint, as defined above, is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow his or her dog to bark excessively during the night hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and thereby disturb the peace of others. Any person whose rest and peace has been disturbed by the uninhibited barking of any dog shall have the right to file a complaint against the owner of the dog.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.05 DISPOSITION OF DEAD ANIMALS.
(A) The carcass of any animal that shall die within the village shall, within 24 hours, be removed at least two miles beyond the village limits by the owner of the animal and the owner shall bury the animal in some place outside of the limits of the village at a depth of not less than six feet.
(B) In no case shall any carcass be buried within the village limits, nor shall the owner permit the carcass to remain in the open air in the village until it becomes offensive in smell.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-24) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2003 S-1
30 Tularosa - General Regulations
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY
' 95.15 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
It shall be unlawful for any livestock, poultry, cattle, horses, mules, burros, goats, sheep, swine or any other animal to run at large within village limits, except under the terms and conditions set forth herein.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-7) (Am. Ord. 191, passed 8-17-1999) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.16 CRUELTY; POISONING.
No person shall torture, cruelly beat, mutilate, cruelly kill, poison, override or overdrive any animal, or unnecessarily fail to provide the same with proper food or drink or cruelly drive or work the same when unfit for labor.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-7) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(A) (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep upon his or her premises any livestock, poultry, horse, cow, burro or other animal which shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood. Any person having knowledge of any nuisance, as set forth above, may file a complaint in the Municipal Court against the person maintaining the nuisance, provided that neither a warrant of arrest shall issue nor the person be arrested unless the person shall fail to cause the nuisance to cease within 24 hours after filing of the complaint and notice thereof.
(2) No owner or person having control of any animal shall allow that animal to defecate upon public property or upon any private property other than the property of the owner of the animal without thoroughly and immediately removing and disposing of the feces.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-9) (Am. Ord. 191, passed 8-17-1999)
(B) (1) The Police Department and the custodian of the animal shelter, upon complaint made or on view, shall investigate any alleged or suspected violation of this chapter, and, if in the opinion of the investigating officer, the violation or nuisance exists, it shall be the duty of any officer to take up and deliver to the shelter any animal found in violation. If the violation constitutes a nuisance, the officer shall, if the owner or keeper refuses to abate the nuisance, take the offending animals to the animal shelter; provided, however, that if the nuisance shall consist of dangerous, fierce or vicious dogs or animals which it shall be impossible to take into custody without serious danger of personal injury, then and, in that event, the animal may immediately be killed.
Animals 31
(2) All animals taken into custody under the provisions of this section shall be held in the animal shelter under the terms of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent or impair the right of the owner of the animal to a hearing in any proper court by any proper means upon the question whether in fact the nuisance exists or not; provided further, that nothing herein contained shall prevent or impair the right of any person aggrieved by the nuisance to any other remedy, in court or otherwise, allowed him or her by law.
(3) In the event that, in any proceeding referred to in this section, it shall be held by any proper court that the nuisance complained of does not in fact exist, then and in that event the animals shall be released and the owner thereof shall not be required to pay any of the charges referred to in this chapter.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-11) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.18 RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any team, horse or other animal upon or along any of the sidewalks of the village.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-11) Penalty, see ' 10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
' 95.30 ENFORCEMENT.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Chief of Police.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-2)
' 95.31 IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) Animals not licensed or vaccinated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be seized and impounded. Any person who may find any animals running at large within the village contrary to the provisions of this chapter may take the animal to the animal shelter. All animals shall be received and held at the shelter, as herein provided. Within 48 hours after any animal shall be received at the animal shelter, its owner or keeper, if the person can be identified by tags or other identifications on the animal, shall be notified. If the owner or keeper cannot be found or the animal not claimed within 72 hours from the time the animal was received at the animal shelter, the custodian of the animal shelter shall kill the animal in a humane manner. A notice describing the animal, stating the time and place when and
32 Tularosa - General Regulations
where it will be killed and informing the owner that he or she may reclaim possession of the animal before the time fixed by paying to the custodian of the animal shelter all costs and fees in connection with the impounding of the animal shall be posted at the Village Police Station at least 24 hours prior to the custodian of the animal shelter killing the animal.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-12)
(B) If the owner or keeper of any animal detained at the animal shelter wishes to redeem the animal prior to the sale or disposal thereof, as provided herein, the owner or keeper shall be entitled to redeem the animal by securing rabies shots and license tags and paying to the custodian of the animal shelter the sum of $15, plus $2 per day for each day, or fraction thereof, that the animal has been so confined to the animal shelter. All redemption fees so collected by the custodian of the animal shelter shall be immediately reported and paid over to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Any person who shall turnover an animal to the custodian of the animal shelter and request that the animal be destroyed shall pay a fee of $10 for the first animal and $1 for each additional animal which is turned over at the same time as the first.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-13)
(C) In the event that an animal shall be neither reclaimed by its owner in accordance with provisions in this chapter or reclaimed by some other person by payment of the redemption fees, then 72 hours from the time the animal was received by the animal shelter, the custodian of the animal shelter shall kill and dispose of the animal in a humane manner.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-14)
(Am. Ord. 129, passed 8-15-1998)
' 95.32 RABIES; PROCEDURE.
(A) Any person who owns or keeps, within the village, any dog or cat over the age of three months shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies with a vaccine approved by the Director of the Health and Social Services Department. All anti-rabies vaccine shall be administered by or under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-15)
(B) The owner shall confine, within a building or enclosure, every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog and every female dog in heat. The confinement shall be in such manner that the dog cannot come in contact with any person or animal, except for breeding purposes.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-16)
(C) (1) Every dog, cat or other animal exposed to rabies shall be immediately confined by the owner, who shall then promptly notify the Police Department. The Police Department shall immediately notify the County Health Officer of the place of confinement and the reason therefore. The owner shall not permit the dog or animal to come into contact with any person or animal and shall surrender
Animals 33
possession of the dog or animal to the Police Department, upon demand, for the purpose of supervision and quarantine. The owner shall pay any cost of the quarantine or the owner may, at his or her option and expense, have the animal quarantined at the hospital of a licensed veterinarian. The dog or animal shall not be released from quarantine without written authorization of the Police Department, nor until it has been certified by a licensed veterinarian to be free of rabies.
(2) No person shall kill a rabid dog or other animal or dog or other animal exposed to rabies, nor remove same from the village without permission of the Police Department, except when it is necessary to kill the dog or animal to prevent it from escaping or biting any person or animal.
(3) The Police shall oversee the disposition of any dog or animal found to be afflicted with rabies.
(4) The carcass of any dead dog or animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered to the Police Department upon demand.
(5) No person shall fail or refuse to surrender a dog or animal for quarantine or destruction, as required herein, when demand therefor is made by the Police Department.
(6) This section shall be administered pursuant to any applicable laws of the state.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-17)
(D) When any person is bitten by any animal, it should be the duty of the person or his or her parent or guardian and the owner or keeper of the animal to immediately notify the Police Department thereof. Immediately, the owner or keeper of the animal shall confine it securely for ten days at a place designated by the Chief of Police, the confinement to be at the expense of the owner or keeper of the animal. Every physician shall, within 24 hours after his or her first professional attendance upon a person bitten by any animal having or suspected of having rabies, report to the Police Department the name, age, sex and address of the person bitten as well as the name and address of the owner or keeper of the animal if known to the physician.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-18)
(E) (1) Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except the duty to report rabies cases and to comply with the provisions specifically naming duties and responsibilities of licensed veterinarians in relations to animal regulation and rabies control.
(2) The licensing and vaccination requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any animal belonging to a non-resident of the village and kept within the village for not longer than 30 days, provided all animals shall, at all times while in the village, be confined within a building, enclosure or vehicle or be under restraint by the owner.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-19)
34 Tularosa - General Regulations
' 95.33 INVESTIGATION.
For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provision, any police officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or harbored during the daylight hours, and to demand the exhibition, by the owner of the animal, of the license or vaccination certificate for the animal, and further to investigate and file a complaint against the owner of any animal for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that in the event any dog, cat or other animal has been exposed to rabies, or when any person has been bitten by any dog, cat or other animal, any police officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises upon which the dog, cat or other animal is kept or harbored, during the daylight hours, for the purpose of investigating and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-20)
' 95.34 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICER.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any police officer in the performance of any duty required by this chapter.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-21) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.35 RECORDS.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of the vaccination, licensing and impoundment of dogs.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him or her and of his or her investigation of the same. Should the report of a bite involve a rabid dog or animal it shall be immediately transmitted to the county health officers.
(C) The aforesaid records shall be audited annually in the same manner as other village records are audited and shall be open to inspection as public records at all reasonable times.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-22)
' 95.36 ANIMAL SHELTER.
The village shall establish and maintain an adequate animal shelter which shall be under the control and management of the Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agent or custodian. The agent or custodian so designated by the Chief of Police shall have full charge of the management and conduct of the shelter and shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter relative to animals
Animals 35
at large and the impounding of animals. He or she shall pick up and impound all stray animals running at large in the village contrary to the provisions of this chapter and, upon complaint made, shall investigate any nuisance, as hereinbefore defined, and shall also investigate all violations of this chapter. He or she shall have the duty to take charge of all animals involved in the violation of this chapter or who shall constitute a nuisance, as heretofore defined, and shall confine the animals violating this chapter to the animal shelter for disposition in accordance with the provisions hereof.
(`75 Code, ' 4-1-23)
DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
' 95.50 SHORT TITLE.
This subchapter may be known and shall be cited as the dangerous dog ordinance.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
' 95.51 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
(A) Every year innocent people, predominantly children, are injured and sometimes killed as a result of the actions of dangerous dogs.
(B) No person has an absolute right to keep or harbor a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within the village.
(C) The ordinance codified in this subchapter will protect the inhabitants of the village from the actions of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs.
(D) The ordinance codified in this subchapter will provide for the proper registration and tracking of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs within the village.
(E) The ordinance codified in this subchapter will assist in providing control over dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
' 95.52 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
2009 S-5
36 Tularosa - General Regulations
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. The law enforcement officers of the village that are charged with addressing animal control issues within the village who shall carry out the duties of the animal control authority under the dangerous dog ordinance.
DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that caused a serious injury to a person or domestic animal.
OWNER. A person who possesses, harbors, keeps or has control or custody of a dog or, if that person is under the age of 18, that person's parent or guardian.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that may reasonably be assumed to pose a threat to public safety as demonstrated by the following behaviors:
(1) Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal that is less severe than a serious injury;
(2) Chasing or menacing a person or domestic animal in an aggressive manner and without provocation; or
(3) Acting in a highly aggressively manner within a fenced yard or enclosure and appearing able to jump out of the yard or enclosure.
PROPER ENCLOSURE. Secure confinement indoors or outdoors, such as in a fenced yard, locked pen or other structure, that is designed to prevent the animal from escaping the confined area and young children from entering the confined area but does not include chaining, restraining or otherwise affixing the animal to a stationary object.
SERIOUS INJURY. A physical injury that results in broken bones, multiple bites or disfiguring lacerations requiring sutures or reconstructive surgery.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
' 95.53 EXCEPTIONS.
A dog shall not be declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if:
(A) The dog was used by a law enforcement official for legitimate law enforcement purposes;
(B) The threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person or domestic animal that was:
(1) Trespassing upon premises occupied by the owner or the dog;
(2) Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog;
2009 S-5
Animals 36A
(3) Committing or attempting to commit a crime; or
(C) The dog was:
(1) Responding to pain or injury;
(2) Protecting itself or its offspring; or
(3) Protecting or defending a human being or domestic animal from attack or assault.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
' 95.54 SEIZURE OF DOG; PETITION TO DISTRICT COURT.
(A) If an animal control authority has probable cause to believe that a dog is a dangerous dog and poses an imminent threat to public safety, the animal control authority may apply to the district in the county where the animal is located for a warrant to seize the animal.
(B) If an animal control authority has probable cause to believe that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog and poses a threat to public safety, the animal control authority may apply to the district court in the county where the animal is located for a warrant to seize the animal.
(C) After seizure, the animal control authority shall impound the dog pending disposition of the case or until the owner has fulfilled the requirements for a certificate of registration pursuant to the provisions of ' 95.55.
(D) After seizure:
(1) The owner may admit that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous and comply with the requirements for a certificate of registration pursuant to ' 95.55; or
(2) The animal control authority may, within 14 days after seizure of the dog, bring a petition in the district court seeking a determination of whether the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous. If the court finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog is dangerous and poses an imminent
threat to public safety or potentially dangerous and poses a threat to public safety, the court shall order the owner to comply with the registration and handling requirements for the dog and obtain a certificate of registration within 30 days or have the dog humanely destroyed. If the court does not make the required findings pursuant to this division, the court shall immediately order the release of the dog to its owner.
(E) If the owner does not admit that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous and the animal control authority does not bring a petition in court within 14 days of seizure of the dog, the court shall immediately order the release of the dog to its owner.
2009 S-5
36B Tularosa - General Regulations
(F) If the owner admits that the dog is dangerous and transfers ownership of the dog to the animal control authority, the animal control authority may humanely destroy the dog.
(G) A determination that a dog is not dangerous or potentially dangerous shall not prevent an animal control authority from making a subsequent application for seizure based on the dog's subsequent behavior.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
' 95.55 DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
(A) Upon application, an animal control authority shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if the owner establishes that:
(1) The owner is able to keep the dog under control at all times;
(2) A license, if applicable, has been issued pursuant to the requirements of the village;
(3) The dog has a current rabies vaccination;
(4) The owner has a proper enclosure for the dog;
(5) The owner has paid an annual fee of $100 to register a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog;
(6) The dog has been spayed or neutered;
(7) The dog has been implanted with a microchip containing owner identification information that is also provided to the animal control authority; and
(8) The owner has entered the dog in a socialization and behavior program approved or offered by the animal control authority.
(B) If a dog previously determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous has not exhibited any of the behaviors specified in ' 95.52(D) for 36 consecutive months, the owner may request the animal control authority in the village to lift the requirements for registration pursuant to this section. If the animal control authority has no reasonable basis to believe that the dog has exhibited the behaviors specified, it shall relieve the owner of the requirements of this section.
(C) An animal control authority shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner, in addition to the requirements of division (A) of this section, establishes that:
2009 S-5
Animals 36C
(1) The owner has paid an annual fee of $100, as established by the animal control authority to register a dangerous dog;
(2) The owner has written permission of the property owner or homeowner's association where the dangerous dog will be kept, if applicable;
(3) The dangerous dog will be maintained exclusively on the owner's property except for medical treatment or examination;
(4) When the dangerous dog is removed from the owner's property, the dog shall be caged or muzzled and restrained with a lead no longer than four feet, and the dog shall be under complete control at all times;
(5) The dangerous dog will not be transported in a vehicle that might allow the dog to escape or gain access to any person or animal outside the vehicle; and
(6) A clearly visible warning sign with a conspicuous warning symbol indicating there is a dangerous dog on the premises is posted where the dog is kept and is visible from a public roadway or from 50 feet, whichever is less.
(D) An animal control authority may order the immediate impoundment or humane destruction of a dog previously determined to be a dangerous dog if the owner fails to comply with the conditions for registration confinement or handling set forth in this section.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
' 95.56 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(A) It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to:
(1) Keep the dog without a valid certificate of registration;
(2) Violate the registration and handling requirements for the dog;
(3) Fail to notify the animal control authority immediately upon:
(a) The escape of the dog;
(b) An attack by the dog upon a human being or a domestic animal;
(4) Fail to notify the animal control authority of the dog's death within five business days;
2009 S-5
36D Tularosa - General Regulations
(5) Fail to notify the animal control authority within 24 hours if the dog has been sold or given away and to provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog;
(6) Fail to surrender the dog to an animal control authority for safe confinement pending a determination of the case where there is reason to believe that the dog poses an imminent threat to public safety; or
(7) Fail to comply with special handling or care requirements for the dog that a court has ordered.
(B) Whoever violates a provision of division (A) of this section shall be charged in the Magistrate Court in the county where the animal is located with a violation of the State Dangerous Dog Act, and upon conviction shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of ' 31-19-1 NMSA 1978, and the State Dangerous Dog Act.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see ' 95.99
' 95.99 PENALTY.
(A) No homeowner shall be allowed to own three dogs that have been deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous in accordance with '' 95.50 through 95.56.
(B) Once a dog is deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous by the courts in accordance with '' 95.50 through 95.56, owners will be required to carry a $100,000 liability insurance or be able to secure the dog with a bond.
(C) The courts may impose a fine of up to $500, a jail term of up to 90 days, and/or require spaying or neutering of any dog deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous.
(D) The court may impose a fine of up to $500 and/or a jail term of up to 90 days if any dog is deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous that is at large without a muzzle or a leash.
(Ord. 228, passed 4-15-2008)
2009 S-5
CHAPTER 96: CLEAN INDOOR AIR
Section
96.01 Short title
96.02 Purpose
96.03 Definitions
96.04 Smoking prohibited
96.05 Smoking-permitted areas
96.06 Prohibition of smoking near entrances, windows and ventilation systems
96.07 Responsibilities of employers
96.08 Posted smoke-free and smoking-permitted areas
' 96.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the Clean Indoor Air Chapter.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.02 PURPOSE.
Whereas one of the duties of government is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, the Tularosa governing body recognizes environmental tobacco smoke as detrimental to the public health and declares as the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health and safety by prohibiting smoking in indoor public places and indoor workplaces.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets.
CIGAR BAR. An establishment that:
(1) Is a bar as defined above in this section; and
37
2008 S-4
38 Tularosa - General Regulations
(2) Is engaged in the business of selling cigars for consumption by patrons on the premises and generates 10% or more of its total annual gross revenue or at least $10,000 in annual sales from the sale of cigars, not including any sales from vending machines. A cigar bar that fails to generate at least 10% of its total annual sales from the sale of cigars in the calendar year after December 31, 2006, not including sales from vending machines, shall not be defined as a CIGAR BAR and shall not thereafter be known as such regardless of sales figures. A CIGAR BAR shall agree to provide adequate information to demonstrate to the village=s satisfaction compliance with this definition.
DEPARTMENT. The Department of Health.
DESIGNATED OUTDOOR SMOKING AREA. An area where smoking may be permitted, designated by an employer or manager, outside an indoor workplace or indoor public place, provided that the following conditions are maintained:
(1) Smoking shall not be permitted near any building entrance, including a door, window or ventilation system of any facility where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter, so as to prevent secondhand smoke from entering the indoor workplace or indoor public place; and
(2) Employees or members of the general public are not required to walk through the smoking area to gain entrance to the indoor workplace or indoor public place.
EMPLOYER. An individual, a partnership, a corporation or the state that employs the services of one or more individuals and includes the Village of Tularosa.
ENCLOSED. Any interior space predominantly or totally bounded on all sides and above by physical barriers, regardless of whether such barriers consist of or include uncovered openings, screened or otherwise partially covered openings or open or closed windows.
INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE. The enclosed area within any governmental or nongovernmental place to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted regardless of whether work or public business meetings or hearings occur at any given time.
INDOOR WORKPLACE. Any enclosed place where one or more persons engage in work, including lobbies, reception areas, offices, conference and meeting rooms, employee cafeterias and lunchrooms, break rooms and employee lounges, classrooms, auditoriums, hallways, stairways, waiting areas, elevators and restrooms and includes all indoor workplaces and enclosed parts regardless of whether work occurs at any given time.
PRIVATE CLUB. An organization, whether incorporated or not, that is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for the organization=s purposes at all times, that is operated solely for recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purposes, but not for pecuniary gain, and that only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The organization shall have bylaws or a constitution to govern its activities and shall have been granted an exemption as a club under the provisions of ' 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
2008 S-4
Clean Indoor Air 39
RESTAURANT. A coffee shop, cafeteria, private or public school cafeteria or eating establishment and any other eating establishment that gives or offers for sale food to the public, patrons or employees, including kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere or a bar area within or attached to the premises.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, including smoke shops, cigar shops or hookah lounges, and does not include establishments that offer for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises.
SECONDHAND SMOKE. Smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering or burning tobacco when the smoker is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff-drawing and smoke exhaled by the smoker.
SMOKE-FREE AREA. Any building or other enclosed space where smoking is prohibited.
SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying or holding any lighted tobacco product, including all types of cigarettes, cigars and pipes and any other lighted tobacco product.
SMOKING-PERMITTED AREA. Any building or other enclosed space where smoking may be permitted, provided that secondhand smoke does not infiltrate any area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.04 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for a person to smoke in any indoor workplace or indoor public place or in buses, taxicabs or other means of public transit not specifically exempted pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.05 SMOKING-PERMITTED AREAS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking-permitted areas include the following:
(A) A private residence, except during hours of business operation while it is being used commercially to provide child care, adult care or health care or any combination of those activities;
(B) A retail tobacco store;
(C) A cigar bar;
2008 S-4
40 Tularosa - General Regulations
(D) The facilities of a tobacco manufacturing company licensed by the United States to manufacture tobacco products that are operated by the company in its own name and that are used exclusively by the company in its business of manufacturing or marketing; or
(E) A theatrical stage or a motion picture or television production set when it is necessary for performers to smoke as part of the production.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.06 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING NEAR ENTRANCES, WINDOWS AND VENTILATION SYSTEMS.
Smoking is prohibited near entrances, windows and ventilation systems of all workplaces and public places where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. An individual who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the provisions of this chapter shall establish a smoke-free area that extends a reasonable distance from any entrances, windows and ventilation systems to any enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. The reasonable distance shall be a distance sufficient to ensure that persons entering or leaving the building or facility shall not be subjected to breathing tobacco smoke and to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the building or facility through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or any other means.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.07 RESPONSIBILITIES OF EMPLOYERS.
(A) Employers shall provide that their places of employment meet the requirements of this chapter.
(B) An employer shall adopt, implement, post and maintain a written smoking policy pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
' 96.08 POSTED SMOKE-FREE AND SMOKING-PERMITTED AREAS.
(A) To advise persons of the existence of smoke-free areas or smoking-permitted areas, signs shall be posted as follows:
(1) For each indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter, a NO SMOKING sign shall be posted where it is clear, conspicuous and easily legible at each public entrance. Posting of NO SMOKING signs is the responsibility of the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of the indoor workplace or indoor public place; and
(2) For each indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is permitted pursuant to this chapter, a SMOKING PERMITTED sign shall be posted where it is clear, conspicuous and easily
2008 S-4
Clean Indoor Air 41
legible at each public entrance, unless an owner, operator or manager chooses to prohibit smoking in all or part of an indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is otherwise permitted.
(B) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to require the posting of signs at a residence, except during the hours of business operation while it is being used commercially to provide child care, adult care or health care or any combination of those.
(Ord. 224, passed 8-21-2007)
2008 S-4
42 Tularosa - General Regulations

TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. SOLID WASTE
51. GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
52. WATER
53. INDUSTRIAL WASTE
1
2 Tularosa - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
50.01 Definitions
50.02 Fees
50.03 Enforcement procedures
Collection Requirements; Receptacles
50.15 Compulsory solid waste collection
50.16 Fee schedule
50.17 Failure to deposit refuse in proper receptacles; authority to remove
50.18 Failure to pay fees
50.19 Placement, construction and maintenance of receptacles
50.20 Disturbing receptacles
50.21 Collection, transport and disposal
50.22 Unauthorized dump sites
Prohibited Activity
50.35 Burning or burying solid waste
50.36 Scattering or disposal of solid waste
50.37 Removal of dead animals
50.38 Infectious waste, flammable, explosive or combustible material
Franchise Agreement Regulations
50.50 Type of franchise
50.51 Collector=s duties
50.52 Term and renewal
50.53 Right to use rights-of-way
50.54 Insurance coverage
50.55 Service to government
50.56 Performance bond
50.57 Certification of state approval
3
4 Tularosa - Public Works
50.58 Collection arrangements
50.59 Indemnification
50.60 Fees
50.61 Vehicular equipment
50.62 Assignment, sale, sublease or subcontract
50.63 Termination
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. All structures, other than residences, together with the surrounding premises, on which any person produces or generates solid waste.
DESIGNATED LANDFILL. The Otero/Lincoln County sanitary landfill or such other landfill, as designated from time to time by the Governing Body, as the site at which residents of the village may dispose of solid waste.
FRANCHISED COLLECTOR. Any person or entity to whom the village has granted a non-exclusive franchise to collect solid waste within the village.
RESIDENCE. A home, trailer, mobile home or other freestanding structure used or capable of use as a human habitation, together with the surrounding premises, on which any person produces or generates solid waste; a SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE may include a guest home and other outbuildings on the same premises which are not continuously inhabited.
SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial mining and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include those items excluded as SOLID WASTE by the Solid Waste Management Regulations, adopted by the Environmental Improvement Board of the state.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
Solid Waste 5
' 50.02 FEES.
All fees assessed as provided in ' 50.16 shall be remitted to the village in a timely manner as provided in the utility billing system used by the village from time to time with interest and penalties as provided in conjunction with the billing of water and sewer charges.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993; Am. Ord. 235, passed 5-20-2009; Am. Ord. 238, passed 10-21-2009) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.03 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
(A) The village, at its discretion, may place an assessment against property in question to enforce the refuse collection fee by preparing an assessment roll per the terms of NMSA ' 3-48-4. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall conform to all the hearing and notice requirements set forth in NMSA ' 3-48-5. The Governing Body shall conduct a protest hearing per the terms of NMSA '' 3-48-4 and 3-48-5. The village shall enforce any assessments by filing and enforcing a lien per the terms of NMSA ' 3-48-7.
(B) Upon receipt of any money to discharge the assessment and/or lien, the village shall deduct from the amount received any statutory interest, penalties or other penalties and retain such an amount to offset the costs of imposing the assessment and/or lien. From this remaining amount, the village shall deduct the franchise fee due it and then pay the balance to the franchised collector.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS; RECEPTACLES
' 50.15 COMPULSORY SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
Every person owning or controlling an occupied residence or commercial establishment within the village is required to pay for a solid waste collection service provided by a franchised collector and to pay the solid waste collection fee established by the Governing Body. All fees shall be billed by the village and paid to a franchised collector in accordance with each franchise agreement.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.16 FEE SCHEDULE.
(A) (1) RESIDENCES are single-family dwellings, each apartment unit of an apartment complex and each mobile home occupied as a place of residence, whether located within or without a so called
2010 S-7
6 Tularosa - Public Works
trailer park or mobile home park. Effective in July 2013, each such residence shall pay the amount for the assessment for one 96-gallon receptacle per customer, picked up once each week, as follows:
Inside village limits .......................................................................................... $15.26 per month
Inside village senior citizen .............................................................................. $13.14 per month
Outside village limits ....................................................................................... $21.93 per month
Outside village senior citizen ........................................................................... $20.02 per month
(2) For the purpose of this division (A), the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SENIOR CITIZEN. Any resident within the village who has attained the age of 60 years; provided that, the village shall require of the SENIOR CITIZEN satisfactory proof of age.
(B) For irregular service and special pickups, the fee shall be agreed upon in advance by the customer and the company, but shall not be less than the amount necessary to recover the cost of providing the service or pickup.
(C) All commercial customers within the village limits shall have service by the village, and shall pay amounts for the assessment based upon the service requested by the commercial customer on a pick-up and container size schedule, which must be sufficient for the commercial establishment to handle the commercial establishment's solid refuse collection needs with such assessments to be as follows effective in July 2013:
(1) One pick-up per week:
96-gallon cart inside village ............................................................................. $28.47 per month
96-gallon cart outside village ........................................................................... $31.61 per month
300-gallon container inside village .................................................................. $52.70 per month
300-gallon container outside village ................................................................ $68.50 per month
450-gallon container inside village .................................................................. $63.23 per month
450-gallon container outside village ................................................................ $79.04 per month
(2) Two pick-ups per week:
96-gallon cart inside village ............................................................................. $41.10 per month
96-gallon cart outside village ........................................................................... $47.43 per month
300-gallon container inside village .................................................................. $79.04 per month
300-gallon container outside village .............................................................. $108.80 per month
450-gallon container inside village .................................................................. $94.85 per month
450-gallon container outside village .............................................................. $131.74 per month
2014 S-10
Solid Waste 7
(D) The village shall be the exclusive hauler for all solid waste generated by residential and commercial customers, except as provided by this code limiting the improper disposal hazardous or otherwise specially defined solid waste such as provided in '' 50.37 and 50.38, within the village limits and any provisions referring herein to a franchised collector or hauler are considered surplusage except as to a franchised collector authorized to collect and haul such hazardous solid waste described in this code.
(E) The rates for all solid waste collection, residential and commercial, shall be adjusted annually on August 1st of each year beginning in 2010 by 100% of the increase annually for all items indexed in the Consumer Price Index, as published by the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, New Mexico, which is last dated prior to July 1st of each year beginning in 2010.
(F) When any regular pickup falls on a village holiday, the pickup shall be made on the following village business day.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993; Am. Ord. 189, passed 5-18-1999; Am. Ord. 201, passed 9-17-2002; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 235, passed 5-20-2009; Am. Ord. 238, passed 10-21-2009; Am. Ord. 239, passed 3-24-2010; Am. Ord. 240, passed 5-22-2010; Am. Ord. 247, passed 4-17-2013) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.17 FAILURE TO DEPOSIT REFUSE IN PROPER RECEPTACLES; AUTHORITY TO
REMOVE.
If any person shall permit any solid waste to be thrown, left or deposited in or upon real property owned or controlled by the person, other than in proper solid waste receptacles, as provided in ' 50.19, and fails to remove the solid waste or to place it in proper solid waste receptacles within 48 hours after the solid waste is deposited, the Village Mayor or the Village Clerk-Treasurer may cause removal of the solid waste from the real property and to bill the person owning or controlling the property from which the solid waste is removed the actual cost of the removal or a reasonable fee per one-half hour, whichever is greater. A separate assessment shall be made for each removal.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993; Am. Ord. 235, passed 5-20-2009; Am. Ord. 238, passed 10-21-2009) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.18 FAILURE TO PAY FEES.
(A) The failure or refusal of any person owning or controlling real property to pay the fees chargeable to such person for solid waste collection service, as provided in ' 50.16, or to pay fees provided for the removal of solid waste, as provided in ' 50.17, is a misdemeanor.
(B) If any person owning or controlling real property fails or refuses to pay the fees chargeable to the person for solid waste collection service, as provided in ' 50.16, or for solid waste removal services,
2014 S-10
8 Tularosa - Public Works
as provided in ' 50.17, the amount of the unpaid fees may be made an assessment against the real property from which the solid waste is collected or removed.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993; Am. Ord. 235, passed 5-20-2009; Am. Ord. 238, passed 10-21-2009) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.19 PLACEMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECEPTACLES.
(A) Unless solid waste receptacles are otherwise provided by the village as exclusive solid waste hauler, it shall be the responsibility of every person owning or controlling any residence or commercial establishment to provide and maintain in reasonably good repair one or more solid waste receptacles which conform to those provided by the village.
(B) (1) Solid waste receptacles shall be closed, sufficiently sturdy to prevent ripping and spillage in the collection process and adequate to prevent scavenging by animals or dispersal of contents by natural elements.
(2) Containers composed of materials other than rigid plastic or metal shall be considered disposable and may be removed by the franchised collector.
(3) Solid waste receptacles used at a residence shall not exceed 96 gallons in capacity and must be capable of being mechanically handled by the village solid waste collection equipment.
(4) Every solid waste receptacle shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by its owner or user.
(C) (1) Every person owning or controlling a residence shall place all solid waste receptacles under his or her control for collection at the nearest point of driving surface of the road on the collection day designated by the franchised collector and shall remove them from the side of the thoroughfare within 12 hours after pickup.
(2) All solid waste receptacles used at a residence shall be stored behind a fence or within an enclosure or otherwise out of sight from any public way, except on collection day.
(D) (1) The Village Mayor or the Village Clerk-Treasurer may designate where solid waste receptacles used at commercial establishments shall be placed.
(2) The village shall not authorize any placement of any commercial containers in a residential area.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993; Am. Ord. 235, passed 5-20-2009; Am. Ord. 238, passed 10-21-2009) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2010 S-7
Solid Waste 9
' 50.20 DISTURBING RECEPTACLES.
It is unlawful to disturb or scatter solid waste or the contents of a solid waste receptacle.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.21 COLLECTION, TRANSPORT AND DISPOSAL.
Solid waste shall be collected and disposed of only by the village, except that:
(A) Construction debris, rubbish and waste may be collected and hauled from the premises involved by those engaged in construction, remodeling or demolition;
(B) Tree and yard trimmings accumulated by persons engaged in the business of gardening or landscaping may be collected and hauled from the premises where the trimmings have accumulated;
(C) Owners, occupants or persons in control of property may haul and properly dispose of their own tree and yard trimmings;
(D) Owners, occupants or persons in control of a residence may haul and properly dispose of occasional, one-time loads of excess solid waste;
(E) Clean sawdust, rotted manure for fertilizer or farm debris may be collected and hauled by any person; and
(F) Materials which are to be recycled may be removed by the owner or person occupying or controlling real property or any person under contract to remove the material for reuse under a recycling program.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993; Am. Ord. 235, passed 5-20-2009; Am. Ord. 238, passed 10-21-2009) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.22 UNAUTHORIZED DUMP SITES.
It is unlawful to dump refuse, at any place, except at the designated landfill operated by the Otero/Lincoln County solid waste authority unless specifically approved in writing by the village.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2010 S-7
10 Tularosa - Public Works
PROHIBITED ACTIVITY
' 50.35 BURNING OR BURYING SOLID WASTE.
It is unlawful for any person to burn or bury any solid waste, except nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit:
(A) The disposal of solid waste by the normal or usual use of a garbage disposal unit or sanitary sewer facilities;
(B) The normal use of home fireplaces;
(C) Composting; or
(D) Open burning authorized by a permit from the State Environmental Improvement Division.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.36 SCATTERING OR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
It is unlawful to throw, place or deposit waste in or upon any street, public thoroughfare, driveway or any occupied or unoccupied premises within the village, except in those places and in the manner specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.37 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
(A) (1) Any person in possession, charge or control of any carrion or dead animal or who owns, controls or occupies any premises, upon which the same may be located, shall cause the same to be removed and disposed of.
(2) No dead animal shall be placed in a solid waste receptacle.
(B) (1) The owner of a dead animal or carrion, or any other person responsible for the removal of the carrion or dead animal, may, upon request, have the assistance of the village in removing the carrion or dead animal.
(2) The owner of the carrion or dead animal, or any person who owns, controls or occupies the
premises upon which the same may be located, shall be required to pay the cost of removal.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2010 S-7
Solid Waste 10A
' 50.38 INFECTIOUS WASTE, FLAMMABLE, EXPLOSIVE OR COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.
(A) Infectious waste. No generator of solid waste shall place, in any container for regular collection, any infectious waste or an item that has come in contact with infectious waste.
(B) Flammable or explosive materials. Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in residential or commercial containers. The producers of the solid waste shall provide a disposal plan for approval by the village.
(C) Hot ashes and other combustible material. No person shall deposit hot ashes, cinders, smoldering coals or greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition into any combustible receptacle or place the same within ten feet of any combustible materials, except in metal or noncombustible receptacles. For at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled time of collection, ashes or cinders shall be cooled and shall be placed at the collection point in disposable containers.
2010 S-7
10B Tularosa - Public Works
Solid Waste 11
(D) Special and hazardous waste. It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed, in any container for collection, any special or hazardous waste of any kind. Any special or hazardous waste will be removed from the village at the owner's or producer's expense to an approved site.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT REGULATIONS
' 50.50 TYPE OF FRANCHISE.
(A) The franchises granted by the village are non-exclusive. At any time, the village may enter into franchise agreements with additional qualified franchised collectors for refuse collection and disposal.
(B) In addition, the village may, per the terms hereof, elect to operate its own refuse collection and disposal service in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.51 COLLECTOR'S DUTIES.
(A) Each franchised collector shall collect refuse from the customers it is contracted to serve at the times and not in excess of the rates, as set forth herein and per other set terms and conditions.
(B) The franchised collector shall dispose of solid waste at the Otero/Lincoln County landfill.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.52 TERM AND RENEWAL.
The franchise with each franchised collector shall be for a term of four years, beginning upon the effective date of each franchise.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.53 RIGHT TO USE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
Each franchised collector shall have the right to use any and all streets, alleys, bridges and public ways within the village for the purposes of refuse collection and disposal, subject to all other ordinances of the village not in conflict herewith.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
12 Tularosa - Public Works
' 50.54 INSURANCE COVERAGE.
(A) Each franchised collector shall obtain liability insurance in an amount no less than $1,000,000 for liability per person and $1,000,000 to cover property damage or higher limits as may be permitted under the State Tort Claims Act, in effect in the state, from time to time. Each liability insurance policy shall provide that the village is a named insured. Each franchised collector shall each obtain worker's compensation insurance in an amount and type, as required by state law.
(B) All liability insurance policies and worker's compensation policies shall be with carriers approved by the village, but the village shall not unreasonably withhold its consent.
(C) Each franchised collector shall furnish the Village Clerk-Treasurer with copies of the insurance policies required under this section. If the franchised collector's insurance coverage changes or if the franchised collector changes its carrier, it shall furnish the Village Clerk-Treasurer with a copy of the new policy within 30 days of the change. The village shall have 30 days to reject the insurance policy upon just and reasonable grounds. If the village fails to act within the 30-day period, the insurance policy will be deemed to be accepted and approved by the village.
(D) Failure to obtain approved insurance coverage, failure to timely submit insurance policies for village review or failure to obtain insurance coverage at all shall each be proper grounds for immediate termination of the franchise by the village.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.55 SERVICE TO GOVERNMENT.
(A) Each franchised collector shall provide refuse collection and disposal to the village government free of charge, including the removal of dead animals, as requested by the village.
(B) Such tasks shall include, but not be limited to emptying refuse receptacles placed by the village throughout the corporate area of the village and other service to the village government, as required by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.56 PERFORMANCE BOND.
Each franchised collector shall comply with all applicable state laws and regulations including, but not limited to the State of New Mexico Environmental Improvement Division Solid Waste Management Regulations and shall provide a performance bond to the village in the amount of $100,000.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
Solid Waste 13
' 50.57 CERTIFICATION OF STATE APPROVAL.
Each franchised collector shall provide proof of their ability to perform as a competent solid waste collector as follows:
(A) Performance bond, as set forth in ' 50.56;
(B) Liability insurance on all vehicles to be used by the franchised collector, as set forth in ' 50.54, with the filing of a certificate of the liability insurance as to each vehicle to be used as proof of insurance with the village; and
(C) Proof that each driver of a vehicle holds an appropriate commercial license from the New Mexico Department of Motor Vehicles.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.58 COLLECTION ARRANGEMENTS.
Each franchised collector may arrange with any person for the collection and disposal of that person's commercial refuse. No less than monthly, each franchised collector shall provide to the Village Clerk-Treasurer the names of any new customers it has obtained and the names of any customers to whom it no longer provides service.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.59 INDEMNIFICATION.
Each franchised collector shall indemnify and completely hold harmless the village for any liability the village may incur as a result of the actions or omissions of the franchised collector, pursuant to the exercise of the franchise.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.60 FEES.
(A) In consideration of the village granting a franchised collector its franchise, allowing a franchised collector to use the village's rights-of-way, and in exchange for all other consideration granted to a franchise collector, each franchise collector shall pay to the village 5% of the gross receipts it receives under the terms of its franchise. This franchise fee shall not be in lieu of any city, state or federal fees, charges or taxes including, but not limited to business registration fees, gross receipts taxes and ad valorem property taxes.
14 Tularosa - Public Works
(B) The franchise fee shall be due and payable to the village by each franchised collector no later than the twenty-fifth day following the end of each calendar month. Each franchised collector shall pay to the village, by such time, 5% of the gross receipts it has received during the prior month. Upon 15-days' written notice from the village, any authorized village official, including, but not limited to the Mayor, the Village Clerk-Treasurer or any other designee of the village, with Governing Body authorization, may inspect the books of a franchised collector to verify the gross receipts of the franchised collector.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.61 VEHICULAR EQUIPMENT.
Each franchised collector shall collect and dispose of refuse in vehicles that are at least of the minimum quality and design acceptable in the industry, which conform to any applicable state or federal environmental regulations, which do not leak and which will prevent solid waste from blowing, spilling or otherwise leaking out of the equipment. All vehicular equipment shall be cleaned at the times and in the manner to prevent offensive odors and unsightliness.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
' 50.62 ASSIGNMENT, SALE, SUBLEASE OR SUBCONTRACT.
No franchised collector may assign, sell, sublease or subcontract any of its rights or obligations under its franchise without the express written consent of the village. The consent by the village may not be unreasonably withheld. However, it shall be grounds for the village to refuse consent if the franchised collector's successor in interest, assignee, buyer, sublessee or subcontractor fails to sign a written document in which it agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise ordinance and this chapter.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 50.63 TERMINATION.
(A) The village may terminate the franchise of any franchised collector who does not perform the obligations of the franchise in a timely and proper manner.
(B) Any substantial breach of the terms of a franchise ordinance, this chapter or any other applicable village ordinance shall be grounds for termination. Prior to terminating any franchise, the village shall send written notice of the complaints it has to the franchised collector by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. The franchised collector shall have 15 days from the date of receipt to cure the complaints. If the franchised collector does not cure the complaints, then the Governing Body shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of terminating the franchise.
Solid Waste 15
(C) The franchised collector shall be given at least two-weeks' notice of the hearing by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. The franchise may be terminated by a majority vote of the entire Governing Body.
(Ord. 156, passed 11-16-1993)
16 Tularosa - Public Works
CHAPTER 51: GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
51.01 Service charges
51.02 Liability for payment
51.03 Application for service; deposit; approval
51.04 Connection required; fee
51.05 Meters
51.06 Tampering with system
51.07 Inspection
51.08 Repairs
51.09 Storage of water
51.10 Liens
51.11 Special considerations
51.12 Water wells
51.13 Extension policy
Water Utilities; Specifications
51.25 Pipes
51.26 Fittings
51.27 Hydrants
51.28 Mains
51.29 Lines; flushing requirements
51.30 Village duties; connections, lines and installation
Sewer Utilities; Specifications
51.40 Pipes
51.41 Manholes
51.42 Minimum size
51.43 Joints
51.44 Installations
17
18 Tularosa - Public Works
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 51.01 SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) The monthly charges and fees for water and sewer services shall be as follows:
Usage
Water
Sewer
Single residence and any other use not specifically set forth in a category herein: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99
Residential residence on one meter: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 per unit
Grocery stores: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Cafes, bars, food and drink: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Medical: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
2014 S-10
General Water and Sewer Provisions 19
Usage
Water
Sewer
Drug stores: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Offices: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Motel: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum, plus $.57 per unit during May, June, July, and August
Trailer parks and recreational vehicle parks: 7,000-gallon minimum
One meter - trailer park
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof over the minimum water for the meter
One meter - recreational
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum water for the meter
2014 S-10
20 Tularosa - Public Works
Usage
Water
Sewer
Each metered space, trailer park, or recreational vehicle park
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99
Requests to change to a metered space or from a metered space shall result in payment of appropriate fees as set forth herein for installation or removal of a meter.
Dry goods, variety, appliance, tire, automobile, and department stores: 7,000 gallon-minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Banks and financial institutions: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Barber shops and beauty shops: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
Florist shops, retail and wholesale: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
2014 S-10
General Water and Sewer Provisions 21
Usage
Water
Sewer
Schools, public and parochial: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 per water meter, plus $4.26 per building during September through May
Churches: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 per building
Apartments: 7,000-gallon minimum
One meter
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 per water meter, plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof over the minimum water for the meter
Each unit metered
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 per unit
Service station: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum
2014 S-10
22 Tularosa - Public Works
Usage
Water
Sewer
Car wash: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum to 29,000 gallons, then $.34 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 29,000 gallons to 59,000 gallons, then $.44 per 1,000 gallon or fraction over 59,000 gallons to 89,000 gallons, then$.57 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 119,000 gallons, then $.68 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 119,000 gallons
Laundromats and industrial: 7,000-gallon minimum
$30.45 plus $1.15 per 1,000 7,001 to 10,000 gallons; plus $1.37 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 30,000 gallons; plus $2.30 per 1,000 gallons 30,001 to 50,000; plus $2.87 per 1,000 gallons 50,001 to 100,000 gallons; plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons 100,001 and over
$12.99 plus $.23 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over minimum to 29,000 gallons, then $.34 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 29,000 gallons to 59,000 gallons, then $.44 per 1,000 gallon or fraction over 59,000 gallons to 89,000 gallons, then .$.57 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 119,000 gallons, then $.68 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 119,000 gallons
Standpipe water
$13.16 per 1,000 gallons, then $.51 per 100 gallons thereafter .06 gallon measured as nearly as possible to the precise gallon each period
Users outside village limits: 7,000-gallon minimum
$49.96 plus $1.15 per 1,000 gallons 7,001 to 10,000 gallons: plus $4.60 per 1,000 gallons or fraction over 10,000 gallons
2014 S-10
General Water and Sewer Provisions 22A
(B) Charges and fees for occupied trailer spaces and apartment units shall be calculated and charged each month based upon the assumption that each trailer space or apartment unit is occupied. The owner of the property billed or agent designated in writing shall be responsible monthly to report in writing on forms provided to the Village Clerk-Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of each month if a trailer space or apartment unit is not occupied, and thus not subject to the monthly fee or charge.
(C) All dollar amounts commercial/residential service charges for water and sewer service shall be increased annually on November 1 of each year by 100% of the increase annually for all items indexed in the Consumer Price Index, as published by the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, which is last dated prior to November 1 of each year.
(D) (1) Payment of the monthly utility bill for water, sewer and refuse collection is due and payable on the next tenth day of the month immediately following the billing date and is considered delinquent if not paid by the twenty-first day of that same month. A final cutoff notice will be mailed on the twenty-first stating that water services will be disconnected in five days if the bill is not paid in full.
2014 S-10
22B Tularosa - Public Works
General Water and Sewer Provisions 23
A delinquency fee of $20 shall be assessed if the full payment is not made by the twenty-first day of the month.
(2) If the service is disconnected, a $50 reconnect fee will be charged upon request provided that all other water/sewer charges, including penalty and interest, are current. The Mayor, and in the Mayor's absence, the Village Clerk-Treasurer, may agree to allow an extension for payments of the delinquency fee and arrearage; provided that, only two such extensions may be allowed on any person's account.
(3) The Mayor, and in the Mayor's absence, the Village Clerk-Treasurer, may waive the delinquency fee if the person responsible for the bill was hospitalized or otherwise incapacitated at the time the bill became delinquent. To apply for the waiver, the Mayor or Village Clerk-Treasurer must be provided with acceptable proof of the hospitalization or incapacitation.
(E) Any person who has a delinquent account may be refused service at another service address until the delinquency account is paid.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-1) (Am. Ord. 179, passed 2-17-1998; Am. Ord. 188, passed 9-15-1998; Am. Ord. 197, passed 1-16-2001; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 220, passed 2-22-2007; Am. Ord. 225, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. passed 12 - - 2008; Am. Ord. 247, passed 4-17-2013)
' 51.02 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
The charges established by this chapter shall be payable by the owner of the premises served unless the owner notifies the village in writing prior to the initiation of the debt that utility charges incurred by a renter will not be the responsibility of the owner. The notification shall include the location of the rental property.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-3)
' 51.03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT; APPROVAL.
(A) (1) Connection with the mains of the village shall be made by written application of the owner of the premises to be supplied with water, or his or her duly authorized agent, on blanks provided by the village.
(2) The application shall state the name of the owner of the premises, the character and extent of the service desired, a description of the premises, including the name of street and house number, if any, and other information as may reasonably be required by the village to enable it to give the desired service.
(3) A deposit of $100 shall be made by the applicant for water and sewer service at the time of application. The deposit shall be kept by the Clerk-Treasurer and refunded to the applicant within
2014 S-10
24 Tularosa - Public Works
60 days of termination of the applicant=s use of services minus any deductions from the deposit for any unpaid balance due for services rendered.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-4) (Am. Ord. 197, passed 1-16-2001)
(B) A new application must be made and approved by the village on any change of ownership of the property and the village shall have the right to discontinue the water supply until a new application is made and approved; provided that, all charges herein mentioned, which shall be due and owing on the premises, shall be paid in full before the new application is approved.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-5)
' 51.04 CONNECTION REQUIRED; FEE.
(A) At the time of making application for connection with the mains of the village, the applicant must pay to the Clerk-Treasurer of the village a connection fee as follows:
(1) For a 3/4-inch waterline connection: $750;
(2) For a 1-inch waterline connection: $850;
(3) For a 2-inch waterline connection: $1,000;
(4) For a 3-inch waterline connection: $1,100;
(5) For a 4-inch waterline connection: $1,250;
(6) For a 5-inch waterline connection: $1,500.
(7) For any connection in excess of a 5-inch waterline connection, an additional compensation, in addition to the $1,500, as may be necessary to pay for the labor and materials, as may be determined by the Board of Trustees at the time of the application for the connection in excess of five inches. If the application is for a reconnection after disconnection for default in payment of charges, the applicant shall pay the sum of $30, together with all delinquent charges and penalties thereon.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-6)
(8) Upon request of the applicant, the connection fee may be paid by installments in accordance with the terms of an agreement executed by the applicant and the village provided that in the event that the applicant fails to make timely payments of installments due, after notice of default pursuant to the agreement and failure to cure the default, the service may be disconnected.
(9) All single-residence property owners within 150 feet of the village limits will be authorized to connect to village water. All property owners are responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service line connecting a single property to the water system. A property owner is also responsible for any damage to public property resulting from the failure of service lines, the failure including but not limited to leaks or collapse. All
property owners who have access to a water line within this distance will
2008 S-4
General Water and Sewer Provisions 25
have to provide their own infrastructure according to code. Outside village water rates will apply. The village at its election may discontinue the furnishing of water to property not conforming to this requirement.
(B) (1) All property owners in the village shall be required to connect, at their own expense, their properties with the village sewer system and cease and desist the use of all other methods of sewerage disposal, if sewer services are available within 150 feet or less of the property line, and if, in the judgment of the village there is an adequate grade from the existing sewer main or line to the property line to which the sewer service is to be connected so as to render village sewer service practicable. A property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service line connecting a single property to the sewage collection system including taps, saddles and wyes. A property owner is also responsible for any damage to public property resulting from the failure of the service lines, the failure
including, but not limited to leaks or collapses. The village, at its election, may discontinue the furnishing of water to property not conforming to this requirement or upon failure of a property owner to comply with the provisions hereof, written notice by the Building Inspector shall be given demanding that maintenance or repair be made within 30 days from the date of the notice. Upon failure to comply with the notice, then and in that event, the village shall have the power and the authority to maintain or repair, the cost and expense of which shall be a lien against the property served.
(2) At the time of making application for water service, if a sewer connection is required as set forth above, the applicant shall pay a sewer connect fee as follows:
(a) Residential single-family: $800;
(b) All others: $1,250.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-14) (Am. Ord. 153, passed 7-20-1993; Am. Ord. 199, passed 5-15-2001; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 208, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005; Am. Ord. 220, passed 2-22-2007)
' 51.05 METERS.
(A) (1) No more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line and each water service line shall be connected to the village mainline through a village meter; provided, however, that more than one building may be connected to a service line if fees are paid and application for service is made to the village and approved and fees charged under ' 51.01; provided, however, that accessory buildings not designed for habitation may be served through a single residential service meter which also serves a residence.
(2) All meters shall be furnished by the village and shall remain its property and be accessible to and subject to its control. They shall be conveniently located upon approval by the village so as to control the entire supply to the premises. When located on the premises of a consumer, a proper place of protection thereof shall be provided by the consumer.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-7) (Am. Ord. 174, passed 7-15-1997)
2008 S-4
26 Tularosa - Public Works
(B) Meters will be maintained by the village so far as ordinary wear and tear are concerned. The damage, due to any fault on the part of the consumer, shall be paid by him or her and he or she shall notify the village of any injury to or the non-working of the meter as soon as it comes to his or her knowledge.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-8)
(C) The owner of each new structure, unless it shall be an addition to an existing structure, shall apply for, obtain and have installed a water meter for each new structure.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.06 TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM.
(A) No plumber, owner or other unauthorized person shall turn the water on or off at any corporate stop, curb stop or meter can, if any, or disconnect or remove the meter without village consent.
(B) All service lines on the consumer's side of the meter shall contain a stop and waste cock where the water may be turned off on the water user's side of the curb meter can.
(C) (1) In the event that the stop and waste cock has not been installed at the time of conversion by the village to an electronic water meter, then the stop and waste cock shall be installed by the village, at the water service customer=s or property owner's expense, whichever the case may be with respect to the present service, which shall be billed to the water service customer or owner as the case may be based on the current service.
(2) All services will be determined on a case-by-case basis upon actual cost to the village of labor and materials.
(D) New connections shall be required to have the stop and waste cock valve, as set forth above, at the time of the installation of the electronic meter and the main connection fee shall be as set forth elsewhere in this code, together with the schedule of charges set forth in this section depending upon the size of the service line, as set forth herein, if the stop and waste cock valve has not already been installed on the property.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-9) (Am. Ord. 166, passed 2-20-1996; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.07 INSPECTION.
All pipes, meters and fixtures shall, at all reasonable hours, be subject to inspection by duly authorized employees of the village.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2008 S-4
General Water and Sewer Provisions 27
' 51.08 REPAIRS.
All leaks in any pipe or fixture on the premises of the consumer shall be immediately repaired by the consumer and, on failure to repair any leak, service may be discontinued until repairs are made.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-11) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.09 STORAGE OF WATER.
(A) The village may reserve a sufficient supply of water, at all times, in its reservoirs or storage tanks to provide for fires and other emergencies, and at such time as there may be a shortage of water or a danger thereof, the Board of Trustees, by resolution, may limit the amount of water to be furnished to the minimum required for health and sanitary purposes and place other restrictions on the use of water as may be necessary to preserve the village water supply; provided that, nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to require the village to furnish water to consumers outside the corporate limits to the detriment of its inhabitants.
(B) At such time as there may be a shortage of water or danger thereof, the Mayor, by declaration, may declare an emergency and, by the declaration, place restrictions of the use of water as may be necessary to protect the water supply of the village. The declaration shall be in effect until the next regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-13) (Am. Ord. 86, passed 8-1-1978)
' 51.10 LIENS.
The village has a lien on each property served with the water and sewer system for charges imposed for all services rendered by the system and notices of the liens shall be filed and enforced, as provided by law.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-15)
' 51.11 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS.
(A) Due to existing sewers and water mains and ground terrain, special consideration will be given where requested and approved by the proper village authorities.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-18)
(B) (1) All plans and specifications for water and sewer shall bear the approval of the New Mexico Environmental Improvement Agency, in addition to the approval of the proper authorities of the village.
(2) A minimum of 30 days will be required by the village for approval of plans and specifications.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-19)
2008 S-4
28 Tularosa - Public Works
(C) (1) The following water conservation measures shall be in effect at all times in the village and no person, firm or corporation shall use any water from the municipal water system, except as follows.
(a) Use of water through a sprinkler system or use of water through a hose to water any grass, trees, plants or other vegetation shall be allowed as follows.
1. Users with odd numbered addresses shall be permitted to use water in the above manner on each Wednesday, Friday and Sunday.
2. Users with even numbered addresses shall be permitted to use water in the above manner on each Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
3. Watering in the above manner shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(b) These restrictions shall apply to all residences and to all businesses and institutions having lawns, gardens, trees or shrubs, and shall be followed at all parks and public buildings which are watered with treated water. Areas watered with effluent, grey well water or water from the Tularosa Community Ditch are exempted from these restrictions. These restrictions shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of growing or selling plants of any kind.
(c) Newly seeded or sodded lawns or newly planted trees or shrubs shall be exempted from the restrictions of this section for the time needed to establish the lawn, tree or shrub, and the time needed to establish the lawn, tree or shrub does not exceed 60 days.
(2) No person shall be convicted of violating this section unless the person in fact turned on water, directed the turning on of water or kept water turned on after learning it was turned on in violation of this section, or failed to turn off automatic devices capable of turning on water in violation of this section.
(3) It will not be necessary, however, to present a witness who saw the accused turning on the water, if circumstances indicate the accused did turn on the water.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-20) (Am. Ord. 172, passed 7-15-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.12 WATER WELLS.
No new water well or existing water well shall be connected in any way to the village=s water system.
(Ord. 194, passed 5-16-2000) Penalty, see ' 10.99
General Water and Sewer Provisions 29
' 51.13 EXTENSION POLICY.
(A) All water and sewer main installed as a replacement of or an extension to the existing water and sewer systems within the village, including subdivisions and individual line extensions, shall conform to the requirements of this section and all other specifications set forth herein.
(B) Minimum pipe size shall be as follows.
(1) The minimum size of water main shall be six inches in diameter.
(2) The minimum size of sewer main shall be eight inches in diameter.
(3) Pipe sizes shall conform to any formally adopted water master plan or sewer master plan which is in effect at the time the proposed water or sewer line is to be constructed.
(C) Plans for water and sewer replacement or extension shall be prepared by a New Mexico Registered Professional Engineer.
(D) Specifications for water and sewer replacement or extension shall conform to New Mexico Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, current edition, as published by the New Mexico Chapter, American Public Works Association, supplemented if necessary by the design engineer and approved by the village.
(E) Plans for water and sewer replacement or extension shall have been approved by the village, prior to construction.
(F) All water and sewer installations shall be inspected by the village. Construction work that has not been inspected by the village will not be accepted by the village.
(G) Upon completion of the construction work, reproducible record drawings conforming to the information furnished by construction contractors in detail shall be furnished to the village by the owner of the extension project.
(H) All water or sewer lines shall have a tape or wire buried two feet above such lines, which is capable of being located with a metal or other detecting device used to locate underground utility lines.
(Ord. 143, passed 9-3-1991; Am. Ord. 234, passed 3-17-2009)
2009 S-6
30 Tularosa - Public Works
WATER UTILITIES; SPECIFICATIONS
' 51.25 PIPES.
Pipe shall conform to New Mexico Plumbing Code as adopted from time to time.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-16) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.26 FITTINGS.
Fittings shall conform to New Mexico Plumbing Code as adopted from time to time.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-16) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.27 HYDRANTS.
Hydrants shall comply and be installed to conform to the New Mexico Plumbing Code as adopted from time to time.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-16) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.28 MAINS.
All mains and fire hydrants installed shall conform to the New Mexico Plumbing Code as adopted from time to time.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-16) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.29 LINES; FLUSHING REQUIREMENTS.
All lines shall be thoroughly flushed and sterilized in accordance with requirements of the New Mexico State Department of Public Health.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-16)
' 51.30 VILLAGE DUTIES; CONNECTIONS, LINES AND INSTALLATION.
(A) The village will make connections to the main and install corporation cocks, service lines and meters.
(B) All lines shall be tested for a period of one hour at a pressure not less than the natural operating pressure of the existing mains in the village.
2003 S-1
General Water and Sewer Provisions 31
(C) All water installations shall be inspected by the proper authorities of the village before being covered.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-16)
SEWER UTILITIES; SPECIFICATIONS
' 51.40 PIPES.
Pipe for all sewer mains shall be Class I vitrified clay. Service lines, where installed in streets or roadways, shall be Class I vitrified clay.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-17)
' 51.41 MANHOLES.
Manholes shall be brick. Covers shall be provided with not more than four vent holes and shall weigh not less than 300 pounds.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-17)
' 51.42 MINIMUM SIZE.
The minimum size of sewers shall be not less than eight inches. The minimum velocity shall be not less than two feet per second. Coefficient of roughness for design shall be 0.013. Flow per person per day shall be 100 gallons. Maximum flow per person per day shall be 150 gallons. Sewers shall be designed to carry the average flow when flowing one-half full. The inserts of all laterals into the main are to be placed above the end of the pipe in the main. Each manhole shall provide a drop of one-tenth of a foot, in addition to the normal gradient. Manholes shall be spaced not greater than 400 feet. Where sewer services are tapped into the main, a tee saddle shall be used.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-17)
' 51.43 JOINTS.
All joints will be made with an asphalt base mastic or compound.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-17)
2003 S-1
32 Tularosa - Public Works
' 51.44 INSTALLATIONS.
All sewer installations, whether mains or service lines attached to mains, must be inspected by the proper authorities of the village before being covered.
(`75 Code, ' 6-5-17)
2003 S-1
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
Maintenance and Protection of Supply
52.01 Application
52.02 Enforcement
52.03 Picnicking
52.04 Swimming
52.05 Pollution
52.06 Soil erosion
52.07 Watering of livestock
52.08 Declaration of nuisance
52.09 Well and liquid waste disposal setback
52.10 Running and irrigation of water
52.99 Penalty
MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION OF SUPPLY
' 52.01 APPLICATION.
All the provisions of this code of ordinances or rules and regulations adopted by the village are hereby applicable to the village=s water supply known as Rio Tularosa, including all village-owned property immediately adjacent thereto and within a five-mile area above the village water intake on the Rio Tularosa.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978)
' 52.02 ENFORCEMENT.
All peace officers employed by the village, state health officers, State Fish and Game officials and any other village employee whose duties include the enforcement of the ordinances of the village are hereby authorized and empowered to exercise jurisdiction over the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978)
33
34 Tularosa - Public Works
' 52.03 PICNICKING.
Picnicking, eating or drinking on or littering of the streambed within the banks of the Rio Tularosa is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.04 SWIMMING.
No washing, wading, swimming, bathing or polluting of the waters of the Rio Tularosa in any manner whatsoever shall be permitted.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.05 POLLUTION.
The construction or keeping of any barn, corral, poultry or turkey yard, pasture or pig sty on any place or premises of whatsoever kind, the drainage from which is capable of polluting, contaminating or rendering the water impure or unwholesome, is hereby prohibited on the Rio Tularosa or its tributaries, and upon or adjacent to the banks thereof, from the points of intake of the village water supply and service lines to the distance of five miles above and upstream on the Rio Tularosa.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.06 SOIL EROSION.
(A) It is prohibited to operate a motor vehicle of any kind within the banks or waters of the Rio Tularosa.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled or is pulled or pushed by a self-propelled vehicle.
(C) It is prohibited for any person to alter or otherwise disturb the natural contours of the banks of the Rio Tularosa without having first obtained the written consent of the Governing Body of the village. The consent may be obtained by application to the Governing Body of the village. The application shall include complete engineering plans prepared by a licensed engineer of the state for the alteration of the contours of the banks of the Rio Tularosa and such consent may be given only after adequate assurance is provided that the alteration shall not cause the water to be polluted or increase the possibility of the water being polluted or the turbidity of the water of Rio Tularosa to be increased.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978) Penalty, see ' 52.99
Water 35
' 52.07 WATERING OF LIVESTOCK.
It shall be prohibited to water livestock directly from the waters of Rio Tularosa. Livestock may be watered only after removal of the water from the Rio Tularosa and placement in a separate container located outside the banks of Rio Tularosa.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.08 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
The keeping, establishing or maintaining of any place or premises or the doing of any act prohibited by this subchapter is hereby declared a nuisance and the nuisance may be abated by the village in accordance with the law.
(Ord. 85, passed 7-18-1978) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.09 WELL AND LIQUID WASTE DISPOSAL SETBACK.
(A) No part of any well for the production of water or other substances or any part of any liquid waste disposal system shall be situated within 200 feet of the Rio Tularosa for a distance of five miles upstream from the intake of the public water supply to the village.
(B) The Village Board of Trustees may grant a variance from the setback requirements by application of any interested party who can prove that a proposed liquid waste disposal setback or well site will afford the same protection to the public water supply to the village, as the setbacks as herein above set forth.
(C) The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees that the proposed liquid waste disposal system or well site shall provide the same or better protection than setbacks provided for herein.
(D) The applicant shall be responsible for all engineering fees incurred by the village in evaluating the applicant's proposal. The fees shall be agreed to by the applicant and paid prior to being incurred, as the village will obtain a proposal from the engineer employed by the village to review the applicant's proposal and respond to the inquiry of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 131, passed 11-21-1989)
' 52.10 RUNNING AND IRRIGATION OF WATER.
(A) It shall be unlawful to allow irrigation water to be turned on or otherwise allowed to run out of a recognized and established ditch onto the public streets.
36 Tularosa - Public Works
(B) Any person who permits the running of irrigation water from a ditch located on their property onto the public streets or any person who is in control of an irrigation ditch who allows water to run out of the ditch onto the public streets after notice by a police officer or other law enforcement official of the village to take action as is necessary to prevent such water from running upon the streets shall violate this section and be subject to punishment.
(Ord. 103, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see ' 52.99
' 52.99 PENALTY.
Any violation of any act prohibited in '' 52.01 through 52.10 of the Tularosa Code of Ordinances is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and is punishable as set forth in ' 10.99 of the Tularosa Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 221, passed 2-22-2007)
2008 S-4
CHAPTER 53: INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Section
53.01 Title
53.02 Definitions
53.03 Discharge prohibited
53.04 Designated discharge
53.05 Liquids and wastes; prohibited discharge
53.06 Described substances
53.07 Board judgement; handling of wastes
53.08 Testing
53.09 Traps provided
53.10 Preliminary treatment; flow equalizing
53.11 Control installation
53.12 Samples
53.13 Rate schedule
53.14 Cost recovery system
53.15 Industrial charge
53.16 House connections
53.17 Sanitary sewer line and construction
' 53.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known as the Industrial Waste Chapter of the village.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-1)
' 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
C.O.D. or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of organic and inorganic matter present in wastewater as milligrams per liter (mg/l).
37
38 Tularosa - Public Works
DOMESTIC SEWAGE.
(1) Water-borne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of buildings, including apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes.
(2) NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE shall mean NORMAL sewage for the village.
GARBAGE. Solid wastes from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTES. All water borne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage. INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES shall include, but are not limited to production or refining of petroleum and petroleum products, processing of foods or beverages, the production of fertilizers, keeping of livestock and operation of dairies, manufacture of paper, production of dying of textiles, production of soap or detergents or chemicals, cleaning of tanks, tank cars or barrels, plating of metals, processing or reclamation of refuse, all kinds of manufacturing and other similar operations, the washing of equipment or spaces used in industrial operations and the disposal of waste products contained in liquids from laundries, hospitals, grocery stores, restaurants and other public establishments. Unless the sewage contains the waste substances above described, INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE shall not include wastewater resulting from the operation of hotels, motels, schools or other retail establishments other than those listed above, nor shall INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE include wastewater from the operation of vehicle service stations, wash racks or garages. LIQUID INDUSTRIAL WASTE shall not include any domestic sewage from industrial or retail establishments.
INTERFERENCE WITH ANY SEWAGE TREATMENT PROCESS. Any condition or combination of conditions which causes degradation of the operational efficiency of a sewage treatment process.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER or SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A public sewer which transports sewage and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
SETTLEABLE SOLIDS. Those solids which settle during a preselected period of time as expressed in milliliters per liter of sample.
Industrial Waste 39
SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE WORKS. Any facility, devices and structures used for receiving and treating sewage from the sanitary sewer system.
STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association and American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
TRAP. A device for retaining sand, silt, grit mineral material, petroleum solvent, grease or oil by gravity-differential separation from wastewater and of a design and a capacity approved by the village.
UNPOLLUTED PROCESS WATER. Any water or waste containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil, acid or alkali, phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor to receiving water; toxic substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous gases.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-2)
' 53.03 DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 53.04 DESIGNATED DISCHARGE.
(A) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Governing Body of the village.
(B) Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Governing Body of the village to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
40 Tularosa - Public Works
' 53.05 LIQUIDS AND WASTES; PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described liquids or wastes to any public sewers:
(A) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
(B) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharges to the public sewer;
(C) Any herbicides and pesticides;
(D) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
(E) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like either whole or ground by garbage grinders; and
(F) (1) Any amount of the following heavy metals:
(a) Antimony;
(b) Arsenic;
(c) Barium;
(d) Beryllium;
(e) Bismuth;
(f) Boron;
(g) Cadmium;
(h) Chromium (Tri);
Industrial Waste 41
(i) Chromium (Hexes);
(j) Cobalt;
(k) Copper;
(l) Iron;
(m) Lead;
(n) Manganese;
(o) Mercury;
(p) Molybdenum;
(q) Nickel;
(r) Rhenium;
(s) Selenium;
(t) Silver;
(u) Strontium;
(v) Tellurium;
(w) Tin;
(x) Uranyl ion; and
(y) Zinc.
(2) Dilution of toxic materials and heavy metals in lieu of removal is not acceptable.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
42 Tularosa - Public Works
' 53.06 DESCRIBED SUBSTANCES.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Governing Body of the village, that the wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse affect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
(B) In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Governing Body of the village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
(C) The substances which must be considered are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150?F or 65?C;
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, grease, wax or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32?F and 150?F and 0?C and 65?C;
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; (The installation and operation of any garbage grinder larger than those normally manufactured and sold for residential and noncommercial use will not be installed without specific review and approval by the Governing Body of the village.)
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions can not be discharged to the sewerage system unless completely neutralized and approved by the Governing Body of the village for discharge;
(5) Any waters or wastes containing reducing substances of an organic or inorganic nature, toxic or nontoxic, which exert an immediate chlorine demand if the discharge of such agents will prevent the achievement of an adequate chlorine residual in the effluent of the wastewater treatment facility;
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits established by the Governing Body of the village, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Governing Body of the village in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
Industrial Waste 43
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
(c) Unusual chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; and
(d) Slugs or shocks constituting an unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes which will disturb the normal functioning of either the sewage treatment plant and/or collection system.
(10) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent can not meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-6)
' 53.07 BOARD JUDGMENT; HANDLING OF WASTES.
(A) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in ' 53.06, and which in the judgment of the Governing Body of the village may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Governing Body of the village may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; or
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(B) If the Governing Body of the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Governing Body of the village and state regulations and shall be subjected to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-7)
44 Tularosa - Public Works
' 53.08 TESTING.
Testing of an industrial waste will be performed by the Governing Body of the village. If either the Governing Body of the village or the industry requires more frequent tests, then those tests will be paid by the party requesting the analyses.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-8)
' 53.09 TRAPS PROVIDED.
Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Governing Body of the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that the traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Governing Body of the village and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil traps shall be installed in all new filling stations, garages, restaurants and other new facilities wherein heavy discharge of grease and oil is to be expected.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-9)
' 53.10 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; FLOW EQUALIZING.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-10)
' 53.11 CONTROL INSTALLATION.
When required by the Governing Body of the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying liquid industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, constructed in a manner as to prevent infiltration of ground and surface waters, and should be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Governing Body of the village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-11)
Industrial Waste 45
' 53.12 SAMPLES.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. The control manhole shall be located so that sampling of the industrial waste will be performed before discharge into the public sewerage system. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will be determined whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, C.O.D. and settleable solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.)
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-12)
' 53.13 RATE SCHEDULE.
The Governing Body of the village shall take necessary steps to establish a rate schedule for sewer service that assures an equitable system of cost recovery. The purpose hereof is that the industrial users shall pay for the costs incurred by the Governing Body of the village in the construction, operation and maintenance of that portion of the wastewater treatment facilities related to industrial wastes.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-13)
' 53.14 COST RECOVERY SYSTEM.
The cost recovery system shall satisfy the following conditions.
(A) The apportionment of costs must take into consideration the individual industrial user's contribution as related to the total waste load taking into account the volume and strength of all discharges.
(B) The costs to be considered should include:
(1) Amortization of the applicant's indebtedness for the cost of the treatment facilities (plant and interceptors);
(2) Operation and maintenance of the treatment facilities; and
(3) Any additional costs which are necessary to assure adequate treatment on a continuous basis.
46 Tularosa - Public Works
(C) Substantial pre-payment of the capital investment or other financial commitments will be required from each industry that contributes 30% or more of the total volume or strength of the waste load to be treated by the project.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-14)
' 53.15 INDUSTRIAL CHARGE.
(A) (1) The industrial charge will be calculated with the following formula:
IC = A + (K)(V) 1 + a (SS-5) + b(COD-400)
5 400
(2) Where:
(a) IC = Industrial charge, dollars per year.
(b) V = Volume discharge, gallons per year.
(c) SS = Settleable solids of a given industrial waste, ml/l.
(d) a = 0.6 = That fraction of the total cost which is attributable to settleable solids removal.
(e) b = 0.4 = That fraction of the total cost which is attributable to chemical oxygen demand removal.
(f) A = Basic annual charge levied for being connected; whether or not sewage or other wastewaters are being discharged to the system, dollars per year.
(g) K = Annual charge per unit volume of waste, dollars per million gallons.
(h) COD = Chemical oxygen demand of a waste, mg/l.
(B) (1) If settleable solids concentration is less than five ml/l and chemical oxygen demand is less than 400 mg/l, the following formula shall apply:
IC = A + (K)(V)
(2) Where the terms are defined as in division (A)(2) above.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-15)
Industrial Waste 47
' 53.16 HOUSE CONNECTIONS.
All house connections shall be regulated by and conform to the latest edition of the Plumbing Code of the state.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-16)
' 53.17 SANITARY SEWER LINE AND CONSTRUCTION.
All new sanitary sewer line design and construction shall conform to the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction Projects, 1970 Interim Edition, and applicable provisions of ASTM C.443. Should a conflict exist, the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction Projects shall prevail.
(`75 Code, ' 6-6-17)
48 Tularosa - Public Works

TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
2 Tularosa - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
70.01 Code adopted by reference
70.02 Penalty assessment program
70.03 Penalty assessment misdemeanors; option; effect
70.04 Traffic control devices
70.05 Additional parking restrictions
70.06 Ordinance available for inspection
70.07 Copies of ordinances
' 70.01 CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) Except as otherwise provided herein, the 2010 compilation of the New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance, being a traffic code, is adopted by reference pursuant to NMSA ' 3-17-6.
(B) The following sections of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance are amended or adopted to read as follows:
(1) Section 12-6-6.1 A. is amended by adding a new subpart (17) as follows:
12-6-6.1 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES.
A. (17) at any place which obstructs entrance into the garage doors of the Fire Station.
(2) Section 12-1-76 is amended to read as follows:
12-1-76 STREET OR HIGHWAY.
"Street or Highway" means any way or place generally open to the use of the public as a matter of right and every way, place or parking lot, regardless of ownership, used for the purpose of vehicular travel, even though it may be temporarily closed or restricted for the purpose of construction, maintenance, repair or reconstruction.
(3) Section 12-6-1.2 A. (2) is amended to read as follows:
(2) 20 mph in any business or residential district, or
2013 S-9 3
4 Tularosa - Traffic Code
(4) Section 12-12-1.1 is amended to read as follows:
12-12-1.1 MAXIMUM PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance or as otherwise provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(5) Section 12-6-15 is hereby amended to read as follows:
12-6-15 PREFERENCE TO VEHICLES UPON STREETS.
A. The provisions of Article VI of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance relating to the operation of vehicles, refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon the streets or highways, except where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section.
B. The provisions of Article IV of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance, Section 12-6-12.1 thru 12-6-12.3, Section 12-6-4, Section 12-6-5.7, Section 12-6-12.4, Section 12-6-12.9, Section 12-6-13.8, Section 12-9-9 and Section 12-6-12.7 of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance shall apply upon the streets and highways and in privately owned parking lots throughout this municipality which are open to the public as a matter of course as business invitees.
(6) Section 12-1-2.1 is amended to read as follows:
12-1-2.1 ACCESS AISLE.
Access Aisle means a space designed to allow a person with a significant mobility limitation to safely exit and enter a motor vehicle that is immediately adjacent to a designated parking space for persons with significant mobility limitations and that may be common to two such parking spaces of at least 60 inches in width or, if the parking space is designed for van accessibility, 96 inches in width and clearly marked and maintained with blue striping, and after January 1, 2011, the words NO PARKING in capital letters, each of which shall be at least one foot high and at least two inches wide, placed at the rear of the access aisle so as to be close to where an adjacent vehicle=s rear tires would be placed (NMSA ' 66-1-4.1)
2013 S-9
General Provisions 4A
(7) Section 12-8-5 is amended to read as follows:
12-8-5 RIDING ON STREETS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as near to the right side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. (NMSA ' 66-3-705) It shall not be considered practicable to ride as near to the right side of the street under the following circumstances:
(1) when overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction;
(2) when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or roadway;
(3) when reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge. For purposes of this section, a substandard width lane is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane;
(4) when operating a bicycle or a moped upon a one-way highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable.(*)
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. (NMSA ' 66-3-705)
(8) Section 12-6-12.6 is amended to read as follows:
12-6-12.6 UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE; DRIVING WHEN PRIVILEGE TO DO SO HAS BEEN SUSPENDED OR REVOKED.
A. No person shall:
(1) Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his or her possession any cancelled, revoked, or suspended driver=s license or permit;
(2) Lend his or her driver's license or permit to any other person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another;
(3) Display or represent as one's own any driver's license or permit not issued to him or her;
2014 S-10
4B Tularosa - Traffic Code
(4) Fail or refuse to surrender to the court upon its lawful demand any driver's license or permit which has been suspended, revoked or cancelled;
(5) Permit any unlawful use of driver's license or permit issued to him or her; (NMSA ? 66-5-37)
(6) Drive a motor vehicle on any public street or highway at a time when his or her privilege to do so is suspended and who knows or should have known that his or her license was suspended. Upon conviction, the person shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than four days nor more than 90 days or participation for an equivalent period of time in a certified alternative sentencing program, and there may be imposed, in addition, a fine of not more than $500. When a person pays any or all of the cost of participating in a certified alternative sentencing program, the court may apply that payment as a deduction to any fine imposed by the court; (NMSA ? 66-5-39)
(7) Drive a motor vehicle on a highway of this state at a time when the person's privilege to do so is revoked and who knows or should have known that the person's license was revoked is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be charged with a violation of this section. Upon conviction, the person shall be punished, notwithstanding the provisions of NMSA ? 31-18-13, by imprisonment for not less than four days or more than 90 days or by participation for an equivalent period of time in a certified alternative sentencing program, and there may be imposed, in addition, a fine of not more than $500. When a person pays any or all of the cost of participating in a certified alternative sentencing program, the court may apply that payment as a deduction to any fine imposed by the court; and
(8) Notwithstanding any other provision of law for suspension or deferment of execution of a sentence, if the person's privilege to drive was revoked for driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs or a violation of the Implied Consent Act, upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than seven consecutive days and shall be fined not less than $300 and not more than $500 and the fine and imprisonment shall not be suspended, deferred or taken under advisement. No other disposition by plea of guilty to any other charge in satisfaction of a charge under this section shall be authorized if the person's privilege to drive was revoked for driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs or a violation of the Implied Consent Act. (NMSA ? 66-5-39.1)
B. In addition to any other penalties imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section, when a person is convicted pursuant to the provisions of this section, the motor vehicle the person was driving shall be immobilized by an immobilization device for 30 days, unless immobilization of the motor vehicle poses an imminent danger to the
2014 S-10
General Provisions 4C
health, safety or employment of the convicted person's immediate family or the family of the owner of the motor vehicle. The convicted person shall bear the cost of immobilizing the motor vehicle. (NMSA ? 66-5-39.1)
(9) Section 12-12-3 is amended to read as follows:
12-12-3 CONDUCT OF ARRESTING OFFICER - NOTICES BY CITATION.
A. Except as provided in Section 12-12-5, unless a penalty assessment or warning notice is given, whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this section or other law relating to motor vehicles punishable as a misdemeanor, the arresting officer, using the uniform traffic citation in paper or electronic form, shall complete the information section and prepare a notice to appear in court, specifying the time and place to appear, have the arrested person sign the agreement to appear as specified, give a copy of the citation to the arrested person and release him or her from custody.
B. Whenever a person is arrested for violation of a penalty assessment misdemeanor and elects to pay the penalty assessment, the arresting officer, using the uniform traffic citation in paper or electronic form, shall complete the information section and prepare the penalty assessment notice indicating the amount of the penalty assessment, have the arrested person sign the agreement to pay the amount prescribed, give a copy of the citation along with a business reply envelope addressed to the municipal court with jurisdiction and release him or her from custody. No officer shall accept custody or payment of any penalty assessment. If the arrested person declines to accept a penalty assessment notice, the officer shall issue a notice to appear. [NMSA ? 66-8-123(B)]
C. The arresting officer may issue a warning notice, but shall fill in the information section of the uniform traffic citation in paper or electronic form and give a copy to the arrested person after requiring his or her signature on the warning notice as an acknowledgment of receipt. No warning notice issued under this section shall be used as evidence of conviction for purposes of suspension or revocation of license under NMSA ? 66-5-30.
D. In order to secure his or her release, the arrested person must give his or her written promise to appear in court, or to pay the penalty assessment prescribed or acknowledge receipt of a warning notice.
E. Any officer violating this section is guilty of misconduct in office and is subject to removal. (NMSA ? 66-8-123)
F. An electronic traffic citation, prescribed by Section 12-12-3.1, is an electronic version of the uniform traffic citation. For the purposes of this section, an electronic citation may be completed instead of a uniform traffic citation, provided, however, that where this section requires a copy of a citation to be given to an arrested person, a physical
2014 S-10
4D Tularosa - Traffic Code
copy of the citation shall be provided whether a uniform traffic citation or an electronic form of the uniform traffic citation was used. An electronic form of the uniform traffic citation may be signed electronically.
(10)A new Section 12-12-3.1 is adopted to read as follows:
12-12-3.1 ELECTRONIC UNIFORM TRAFFIC CITATION.
An electronic version of a uniform traffic citation shall include the same information required to be included in a uniform traffic citation. An electronic version of a uniform traffic citation may be signed electronically and a law enforcement officer may submit or file with a court an electronic version of a uniform traffic citation if prior permission of the department has been secured. Where the law requires a law enforcement officer to provide a copy of a citation to a person cited or arrested, a physical copy of the citation shall be provided regardless of whether a paper uniform traffic citation or an electronic version of a uniform traffic citation was used. (NMSA ? 66-8-128)
(11)A new Section 12-12-11 is adopted to read as follows:
12-12-11 ABSTRACT OF TRAFFIC CASES - REPORT ON CONVICTIONS.
A. Every municipal judge shall keep a record of every traffic complaint, uniform traffic citation and other form of traffic charge filed in the judge's court or its traffic violations bureau and every official action and disposition of the charge by that court. The court shall notify the department if a defendant fails to appear on a charge of violating the Motor Vehicle Code or other law or ordinance relating to motor vehicles.
B. Within ten days of the later of entry of a final disposition on a conviction for violation of this section or other law or ordinance relating to motor vehicles or the final decision of any higher court that reviews the matter and from which no appeal or review is successfully taken, every municipal judge, including children's court judges, or the clerk of the court in which the entry of the final disposition occurred shall prepare and forward to the department an abstract of the record containing the name and address of the defendant, the specific section number and common name of the provision of the local law, ordinance or regulation under which the defendant was tried, the plea, finding of the court and disposition of the charge, including fine or jail sentence or both, total costs assessed to the defendant, the date of the hearing, the court's name and address, whether defendant was a first or subsequent offender, and whether the defendant was represented by counsel or waived his or her right to counsel and, if represented, the name and address of counsel.
C. The abstract of record prepared and forwarded under division B of this section shall be
certified as correct by the person required to prepare it. With the prior approval of the department, the information required in division B of this section may be
2014 S-10
General Provisions 4E
transmitted electronically to the department. Report need not be made of any disposition of a charge of illegal parking or standing of a vehicle except when the uniform traffic citation is used.
D. When the uniform traffic citation is used, the court shall provide the information required in division B of this Section in the manner prescribed by the director. A copy of each penalty assessment processed shall be forwarded to the division within ten days of completion of local processing for posting to the driver's record. With the prior approval of the director, the required information may be submitted to the division by electronic means in lieu of forwarding copies of the penalty assessments.
E. The willful failure or refusal of any judicial officer to comply with this section is misconduct in office and grounds for removal. (NMSA ? 66-8-135)
(Ord. 183, passed 5-19-1998; Am. Ord. 187, passed 9-15-1998; Am. Ord. 202, passed 10-15-2002; Am. Ord. 211, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010; Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-15-2012; Am. Ord. 249, passed 11-20-2013)
' 70.02 PENALTY ASSESSMENT PROGRAM.
Pursuant to Section 12-12-1.2 of the 2010 New Mexico Traffic Ordinance, a penalty assessment program is adopted as follows:
(A) As used in the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by the Village of Tularosa, New Mexico, the term PENALTY ASSESSMENT MISDEMEANOR means violation of the following listed sections of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance, for which the listed penalty assessment is established:
Common Name of Offense
Section Violated
Penalty Assessment
Flashing signals
12-5-8
$60
Speeding regulations
12-6-1
(1) Up to and including 10 mph over speed limit
$70
(2) From 11 up to and including 15 mph over speed limit
$85
(3) From 16 up to and including 20 mph
$120
Common Name of Offense
Section Violated
Penalty Assessment
over speed limit
(4) From 21 up to and including 25 mph over speed limit
$155
2014 S-10
4F Tularosa - Traffic Code
Common Name of Offense
Section Violated
Penalty Assessment
(5) From 26 up to and including 30 mph over speed limit
$180
(6) From 31 up to and including 35 mph over speed limit
$205
(7) More than 35 mph over the speed limit
$255
(8) Double division (1) above up to 10 mph
$95
(9) Double division (2) above from 11 to and including 15 mph
$115
(10)Double division (3) above from 16 to and including 20 mph
$185
2014 S-10
General Provisions 5
Common Name of Offense
Section Violated
Penalty Assessment
(11)Double division (4) above from 21 to and including 25 mph
$255
(12)Double division (5) above from 26 to and including 30 mph
$305
(13)Double division (6) above from 31 to and including 35 mph
$355
(14)Double division (7) above 36 mph
$444
(15) Penalty assessment for speeding in a marked construction zone pursuant to 12-6-1.3(G) through (K) shall be as set forth above in divisions (8) to (14) above
Minimum speed regulations
12-6-1.5
$65
Overtaking vehicle on left
12-6-2.3
$65
Limitations on overtaking vehicle on the left
12-6-2.4
$65
No passing zones and restrictions on passing
12-6-2.7
$65
No passing in school zone
12-6-2.7(D)
$130
No passing in marked construction zone
12-6-2.7(A)
$130
Following too closely
12-6-2.13
$61
Driving on divided street
12-6-2.14
$61
Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
12-6-4.1
$61
Vehicle turning left at intersection
12-6-4.2
$61
Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
12-6-4.3
$61
Limitations on turning around
12-6-5.5
$61
Starting parked vehicle
12-6-5.7
$65
2014 S-10
6 Tularosa - Traffic Code
Common Name of Offense
Section Violated
Penalty Assessment
Turning and stopping movements and required signals
12-6-5.8
$65
Stopping, standing and parking
12-6-6
$60
Special stops required
12-6-7
$60
Stopping for school bus
12-6-7.3
$154
Railroad-highway grade crossing violation
12-6-7.6
$150
Failure to stop at railroad-highway grade crossing
12-6-7.7
$150
Operators and chauffeurs must be licensed
12-6-12.5
$65
Limitations on backing
12-6-12.9
$61
Child not in restraint device or safety belt
12-6-13.12
$73
Mandatory use of seat belts
12-6-13.13
$76
Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in open containers - first offense
12-6-13.14
$80
Destructive or injurious material on roadway
12-6-13.5
$301
Littering
12-6-13.15
$300
Pedestrian violation
12-6-14
$60
Drivers to exercise due care
12-6-14.8
$60
When lighted lamps are required
12-10-1.3
$60
Headlamps on vehicles
12-10-1.5
$60
Dimming of lights
12-10-1.6
$65
Tail lamps
12-10-1.7
$60
Mufflers, prevention of noise
12-10-1.10
$60
Lamp or flag on projecting load
12-10-1.11
$60
Display of current valid registration plate
12-10-4
$112
Evidence of registration to be signed and exhibited on demand
12-10-5
$65
2014 S-10
General Provisions 7
(B) The term PENALTY ASSESSMENT MISDEMEANOR does not include any violation which has caused or contributed to the cause of an accident resulting in injury or death to any person.
(C) When an alleged violator of a penalty assessment misdemeanor elects to accept a notice to appear in lieu of a notice of penalty assessment, no fine imposed upon later conviction shall exceed the penalty assessment established for the particular penalty assessment misdemeanor and no probation imposed upon a suspended or deferred sentence shall exceed 90 days.
(D) The penalty assessment for speeding in violation of Section 12-6-1.2(4) of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance is twice the penalty assessment established in division (A) of this section for the equivalent miles per hour over the speed limit.
(E) In addition to the penalty assessment established for each penalty assessment misdemeanor pursuant to this section, there shall be assessed the fees provided for in ' 10.99(B).
(Am. Ord. 202, passed 10-15-2002; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 211, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 219, passed 8-15-2006; Am. Ord. 236; passed 8-19-2009; Am. Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010; Am. Ord. 246, passed 2-13-2013)
' 70.03 PENALTY ASSESSMENT MISDEMEANORS; OPTION; EFFECT.
(A) Unless a warning notice is given at the time of making an arrest for any penalty assessment misdemeanor, the arresting officer shall offer the alleged violator the option of accepting a penalty assessment. The violator's signature on the penalty assessment notice constitutes an acknowledgment of guilt of the offense stated in the notice, and payment of the prescribed penalty assessment is a complete satisfaction of the violation.
(B) Payment of any penalty assessment must be made by mail to the Municipal Court, Village of Tularosa, New Mexico, within 30 days from the date of arrest. Payments of penalty assessments are timely if postmarked within the time limits set from the date of the arrest. The Court Clerk shall issue a receipt when a penalty assessment is paid by currency, but checks tendered by the violator upon which payment is received are sufficient receipt.
(C) No record of any penalty assessment payment is admissible as evidence in any court in any civil action.
(D) If a penalty assessment is not paid within 30 days from date of arrest, the violator may be prosecuted for the violation charged on the penalty assessment notice in a manner as if a penalty assessment notice had not been issued. Upon conviction in such prosecution, the court may impose penalties as provided by the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance (Section 12-12-1.1) or other law relating to motor vehicles for the particular offense charged, and the schedule of penalty assessments may not apply.
2014 S-10
8 Tularosa - Traffic Code
(E) In addition to the prosecution provided for in division (D), it is a misdemeanor for any person who has elected to pay a penalty assessment to fail to do so within 30 days from the date of arrest.
(F) The office of the Municipal Court shall notify the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Mexico when a person fails to pay a penalty assessment within the required period of time. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall report the notice upon the driver's record and shall not renew the person's license to drive until the office of the Municipal Court notifies the Department of Motor Vehicles that the penalty assessment, or its equivalent, as well as any additional penalties imposed are properly disposed of.
(Am. Ord. 202, passed 10-15-2002; Am. Ord. 211, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010)
' 70.04 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
(A) Permitted traffic control devices.
(1) Private parties and commercial entities constructing streets, alleys, and rights-of-way within the village shall place and maintain traffic control devices necessary to regulate, warn, and guide traffic on those streets, alleys, and rights-of-way. The traffic control devices shall conform to standards and conventions provided by Article V of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance. The village shall have jurisdiction to approve all traffic control devices placed and maintained by those private parties, contractors, or developers. When such streets, alleys, and rights-of-way are ceded to the village and accepted by the village as public rights-of-way for public use, the village assumes responsibility for the placement and maintenance of necessary traffic control devices.
(2) Construction contractors and public utilities are permitted to erect temporary traffic control devices to protect the public, workers, and equipment during short term projects. The devices shall conform to the provisions of Article V of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance, and the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to the initiation of planned projects and the location of such projects. In the event of an emergency project, the Police Department shall be notified as soon as possible concerning the project location. A short-term project for the purpose of this section is a project that may be completed in less than eight hours but shall not take more than five consecutive days to complete.
(3) Parties or entities required to place and maintain traffic control devices in their construction areas or on their projects shall review the current edition of the AManual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices@ on file at the village office or consult the New Mexico State Highway and Transportation Department to obtain in guidance on standards and conventions provided by Article V of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance.
2011 S-8
General Provisions 9
(B) Prohibited signage.
(1) No traffic control device or its support shall bear any advertising or commercial message, or any other message that is not essential to traffic control. Traffic control devices erected and placed by a private party or commercial entity shall not identify the party or entity placing the device.
(2) No sign bearing a commercial or advertising message shall contain a traffic control device as a component of that sign.
(3) Any unauthorized traffic control device placed on a village right-of-way by a private individual or organization, or commercial entity shall constitute a public nuisance and such unofficial and nonessential devices shall be removed upon instruction by the Chief of Police.
(4) It shall be unlawful to maintain any such prohibited signage.
(C) Administrative designation.
(1) Responsibility. The Chief of Police is responsible for the administration of this Article and reasonable rules and regulations may be prescribed by the Chief of Police to carry out the intent and purpose of this Article.
(2) Investigation. The Chief of Police or his or her designated representative shall have the authority to investigate any complaint concerning violations of this chapter.
(3) Enforcement. The Chief of Police or his or her designated representative shall have the authority to issue citations for violation of this chapter and to perform such other duties as are prescribed herein.
(4) Traffic control devices and signage authority. The Chief of Police is responsible for identifying, selecting and approving locations and types of all traffic control devices located on all streets, alleys, and rights-of-way. The Chief of Police is responsible for approving or disapproving requests for the placements and types of traffic control devices by private parties, commercial entities, contractors, or developers under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 211, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010)
' 70.05 ADDITIONAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
(A) No person shall park a truck-tractor, road tractor, or combination of any such tractor and trailer or semitrailer on a street in a residential district except when necessary for loading or unloading of property. In any event, parking of any such vehicle shall not obstruct traffic to any greater degree than is strictly necessary.
2011 S-8
10 Tularosa - Traffic Code
(B) No person shall park a truck-tractor, road tractor, or combination of any such tractor and trailer or semitrailer anywhere within a residential district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010)
' 70.06 ORDINANCE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION.
A copy of the 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance is available for inspection during the Village Clerk's/Treasurer's normal and regular business hours at the Village Offices, 703 St. Francis Drive, Tularosa, New Mexico.
(Ord. 211, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010)
' 70.07 COPIES OF ORDINANCES.
A copy of the Tularosa 2010 New Mexico Uniform Traffic Ordinance may be purchased from the Village Clerk/Treasurer at the cost of publication.
(Ord. 211, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 241, passed 8-18-2010)
2011 S-8

TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
PROVISIONS
111. COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS
112. PAWNBROKERS; SECOND-HAND DEALERS
113. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
1
2 Tularosa - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING AND REGISTRATION PROVISIONS
Section
Licensing Provisions; Fees
110.01 Policy
110.02 Fee schedule
110.03 License refusal; revocation
110.04 Administration; records
110.05 Fee assessment; issuance of license
110.06 Exhibition of license
110.07 Remedies
110.08 Prior ordinances; application
110.09 License regulations
Registration Provisions; Fees
110.20 Imposition of fee
110.21 Exemption
110.22 Application procedure
110.23 Renewal; application
Municipal Gross Receipts Tax
110.35 Imposition of tax
110.36 General provisions
110.37 Specific exceptions
110.38 Dedication
110.39 Effective date
LICENSING PROVISIONS; FEES
' 110.01 POLICY.
(A) The Governing Body hereby declares that the licensing or regulation of businesses not otherwise exempt by law is conducive to the promotion of the health and general welfare of the village and hereby imposes a license fee and a separate license on each place of business conducted by the same person.
2009 S-6 3
4 Tularosa - Business Regulations
(B) The Governing Body hereby finds the fees enumerated in ' 110.02 reasonably related to the expenses of regulating the businesses therein described and issuing licenses.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-1)
' 110.02 FEE SCHEDULE.
(A) Any person engaged in any business hereinafter listed shall, before commencing business and, if appropriate, annually thereafter, as provided in ' 110.05 secure a license from the Clerk-Treasurer therefore, and shall pay a license fee according to the following schedule and rates:
(1) Masseurs: $35 per annum.
(2) Itinerant peddlers, vendors, hawkers, photographers and persons other than itinerant vendors who shall temporarily bring into the village stock or samples of goods, wares or merchandise and offer the same for sale at public auction or private sale, either present or future; provided that nothing herein shall apply to any resident of the state selling wood, fruits, farm or garden produce of their own raising or fresh meat butchered from animals of their own raining; provided further, that these fresh meats meet all sanitation and inspection requirements of state law: $35 for two consecutive days.
(3) Traveling shows, sparring exhibits, wrestling exhibits, which shall furnish a certificate of liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000/$300,000 per incident: $35 per annum.
(4) Circuses and carnivals; such persons shall furnish a certificate of liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000/$300,000; the Governing Body has authority to exempt circuses and carnivals sponsored by civic clubs or non-profit organizations: $35 for two consecutive days.
(5) Amusements and amusement parks, excluding dances: $35 for two consecutive days.
(6) Fortune tellers, clairvoyants, palmists and similar occupations: $35 per annum.
(7) Auctioneers; this division (A)(7) shall not apply to any auction or judicial sale held pursuant to state law: $35 per annum.
(8) Automatic selling machines or devices, slot weighing machines and other coin-operated devices: $35 per annum (each).
(9) Tree cutting or trimming; such persons shall furnish a certificate of liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000/$300,000 and $50,000 property damage: $35 per annum.
(10) Fairs, festivals and fiestas sponsored and conducted by charitable fund raising organizations at special events not to exceed two days per event involving one or more separate booths and/or vendors approved by the organization: $25 per function.
2009 S-6
General Licensing and Registration Provisions 4A
(11) Tatoo parlor: $35 per annum.
(B) A separate license is hereby imposed on each place of business conducted or maintained by the same person.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-2) (Am. Ord. 165, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 168, passed 3-19-1995; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
2009 S-6
4B Tularosa - Business Regulations
General Licensing and Registration Provisions 5
' 110.03 LICENSE REFUSAL; REVOCATION.
(A) For the purpose of regulation, the Governing Body may refuse to grant a license or revoke a license.
(B) No license application shall be refused until after a public hearing conducted in accordance with the Battershell Guidelines at which the applicant or licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(C) At a public hearing concerning the refusal or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee and representative of the village shall be allowed to present evidence, either orally or in writing, relevant to the effect of the business on the health, safety or welfare of citizens of the village. The license shall be refused or revoked if a majority of the members of the Governing Body:
(1) Find that the business of the applicant or licensee is substantially detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the village;
(2) The applicant or licensee is guilty of violating an ordinance of the village relating to the granting of a license; or
(3) The applicant or licensee is guilty of violating any ordinance of the village relative to the business.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-3) (Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 110.04 ADMINISTRATION; RECORDS.
(A) The Village Clerk or Deputy shall prepare all licenses authorized by this code and countersign the same under the seal of the village.
(B) The Village Clerk or Deputy shall keep a full and complete record of all licenses issued with the names of the parties in whose favor they are drawn, including dates, amounts, numbers and purposes for which given.
(C) Licenses shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, if any, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in the peddling.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-4) (Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
2006 S-3
6 Tularosa - Business Regulations
' 110.05 FEE ASSESSMENT; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
(A) (1) On or before the annual renewal date for each license issued, every person engaging in a business, described in ' 110.02, shall apply for a business license for the following year.
(2) Every person filing an application for a business license shall include in the application the amount of gross receipts of the business done during the previous calendar year within the village. No business license shall be issued to any person who has not furnished to the village the information required in this section.
(3) (a) All applications for a new business shall contain a detailed description including:
1. Nature of business and both the physical address and mailing address of the business;
2. Hours of operation;
3. Site plan if new construction or modification of existing structures is required;
4. Site plan and size of sign complying with Chapters 151 and 153;
5. Current New Mexico combined reporting system number or copy of application for such identification number.
(b) This shall be reviewed to assure conformance with current zoning, use, health and sanitation, and noise regulations.
(B) Upon receipt of the application, the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause the investigation of the applicant to be made as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public good and to the Fire Chief and Planning and Zoning Commission all of whom shall note their concurrence or non-concurrence provided that if non-concurrence is noted, the reason shall be stated.
(C) If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Planning and Zoning Commission shall endorse on the application the reasons for the same and return the application to the Village Clerk or Deputy, who shall notify the applicant that no permit can be issued without the approval of the Governing Body, after a hearing held pursuant to ' 110.03. The Village Clerk or Deputy shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing before the Governing Body.
(D) If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Planning and Zoning Commission shall endorse on the application approval and the Village Clerk or Deputy shall execute a permit, addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, upon payment of the prescribed license fee. The license shall be signed by the Village Clerk or Deputy and the Mayor and a list of such licenses shall be made part of the consent agenda of the next regular meeting of the Governing Body.
2006 S-3
General Licensing and Registration Provisions 7
(E) (1) As soon as convenient, on or before the annual renewal date each year, the Governing Body shall give notice of the business license fee to each business and not less than five days' notice of a hearing when protest may be made as to the fee assessment.
(2) If the Governing Body determines at the hearing that the business license fee is reasonably related to the expense to the village of regulating of and issuing of the license, the business license fee shall be assessed upon the business.
(3) Upon payment of its business license fee, the Village Clerk or Deputy shall issue a business license to the business.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-5) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 110.06 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
The license issued to each person hereunder shall, at all times, be exhibited in a prominent place in the particular place of business or office.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-6)
' 110.07 REMEDIES.
All remedies provided herein and by state law are of equal application hereto and the village may use any of them in collecting license fees.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-7)
' 110.08 PRIOR ORDINANCES; APPLICATION.
This chapter does not apply to taxes or fees liability for payment of which was incurred prior to its effective date, or to any act done prior thereto. The payment, collection or enforcement of taxes is to be accomplished according to the provisions of appropriate ordinances previously in force and in every manner as though this code of ordinances had not been enacted.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-8)
' 110.09 LICENSE REGULATIONS.
The Board of Trustees has the power to adopt additional rules and regulations with respect to all licenses and licensing actions, as specified herein, if the Board determines the regulations are in the public interest.
(`75 Code, ' 5-3-9)
2006 S-3
8 Tularosa - Business Regulations
REGISTRATION PROVISIONS; FEES
' 110.20 IMPOSITION OF FEE.
There is imposed on each place of business conducted in this municipality a business registration fee of $35. The fee is imposed pursuant to NMSA ' 3-38-3, as it now exists or is amended and shall be known as the business registration fee. The business registration fee may not be prorated for businesses conducted for a portion of the year.
(Ord. 124A, passed 8-16-1988)
' 110.21 EXEMPTION.
No business registration fee shall be imposed on any business which is licensed under '' 110.01 through 110.09 above, pursuant to NMSA ' 3-38-1.
(Ord. 124A, passed 8-16-1988)
' 110.22 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
Any person proposing to engage in business within the municipal limits of the village shall apply for and pay a business registration fee for each outlet, branch or location within the municipal limits of the village prior to engaging in business unless the person is required to obtain a business license fee under '' 110.01 through 110.09 above.
(Ord. 124A, passed 8-16-1988)
' 110.23 RENEWAL; APPLICATION.
(A) On or before the first anniversary date of the issuance of the Business Registration Certificate any person with a place of business in the village and subject to this subchapter shall apply for renewal of business registration with the Clerk-Treasurer. Any person who fails to pay the registration fee by the anniversary date shall pay a late fee of $10 per year.
(B) Any person filing an application for issuance or renewal of any business registration shall include in the application his or her current revenue division taxpayer identification number or evidence of application for a current revenue division taxpayer identification number.
(Ord. 124A, passed 8-16-1988; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03)
2004 S-2
General Licensing and Registration Provisions 8A
MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
' 110.35 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal to one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts Tax Act, and this subchapter is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipt Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended, and shall be known as the Amunicipal gross receipts tax.@
(Ord. 227, passed 12-18-2007)
' 110.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensation Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended.
(Ord. 227, passed 12-18-2007)
' 110.37 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
No municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts arising from:
(A) Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle, air transportation or any other means from one point in the municipality to another point outside the municipality.
(B) A business located outside the boundaries of the municipality on land owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is made pursuant to NMSA' 7-1-6.4C.
(Ord. 227, passed 12-18-2007)
' 110.38 DEDICATION.
Revenue will be undedicated.
(Ord. 227, passed 12-18-2007)
' 110.39 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The effective date of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three months from the date Ordinance 227 is adopted, unless an
2009 S-6
8B Tularosa - Business Regulations
election is held on the question of approving this ordinance, in which case the effective date shall be either January 1 or July 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three months from the date when the results of the election are certified to be in favor of its adoption and the adopted ordinance has been delivered or mailed to the Taxation and Revenue Department.
(Ord. 227, passed 12-18-2007)
2009 S-6
CHAPTER 111: COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS
Section
111.01 Definitions
111.02 License required
111.03 Exemptions
111.04 Application
111.05 Fees and duration
111.06 Licenses and identification
111.07 Regulations generally
111.08 Suspension or revocation of license
111.09 Appeals
111.10 Renewals
' 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS. Those persons engaged in the practices enumerated herein and shall include all persons engaged in solicitation activities within the village who are required to obtain business licenses or registrations under other provisions of this title.
SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES. The practices of solicitors as listed in divisions (1) and (2) under SOLICITOR.
SOLICITOR. Any person, whether a resident of the village or not, including an employee or agent of another, traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or other type of conveyance, who engages in the practice of going door-to-door, house-to-house-to-house or along any streets within the village:
(1) Selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, merchandise, wares or other items of value for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future for commercial purposes; or
9
10 Tularosa - Business Regulations
(2) Requesting contribution of funds, property or anything of value or of the pledge of any type of future donation or selling or offering for sale any type of property, including, but not limited to goods, tickets, books and pamphlets, for political, charitable, religious or other noncommercial purposes.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995)
' 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any commercial solicitor to engage in solicitation activities in the village without first obtaining a license from the village.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.03 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) Minors under the age of 18 who participate in solicitation activities are exempt from the licensing requirements of this section, except when they are acting as agents of adults covered by this section.
(B) Persons, organizations and other entities who are not otherwise required by the provisions of this code of ordinances to obtain business registrations and/or licenses shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this section.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995)
' 111.04 APPLICATION.
The application for a commercial solicitor's license shall contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued, including, but not limited to:
(A) Proof of the identity and residence address of the applicant;
(B) A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the goods, merchandise or services to be sold, if any;
(C) If a solicitor is employed or acting on behalf of another, the name, business address and telephone number of such person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation; and
(D) Tax identification number.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-95)
Commercial Solicitors 11
' 111.05 FEES AND DURATION.
(A) Each applicant for a commercial solicitation license under this section shall pay an annual license fee of $35 per solicitor.
(B) A commercial solicitation license shall be valid from the date of issuance until the next December 31. No credit or refunds shall be given for partial years.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995)
' 111.06 LICENSES AND IDENTIFICATION.
(A) The license issued to a commercial solicitor shall be carried with the solicitor while he or she is engaged in the business of soliciting.
(B) While performing solicitations, each solicitor, whether or not commercial and whether or not exempt from the licensing requirements of this section, shall wear an identification badge which shall be worn in a way that the badge may be easily read and which shall indicate the name and organization of the solicitor.
(C) Commercial licenses and identification badges shall be used only by the person to whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995)
' 111.07 REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
The following regulations apply to solicitors engaged in solicitation activities in the village.
(A) Solicitors shall be allowed to conduct solicitation activities only during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset.
(B) No solicitor shall engage in solicitation activities regulated under this section on village owned or controlled property without first procuring special authorization from the Board of Trustees.
(C) No person shall engage in solicitation activities in defiance of any notice exhibited by a resident or business indicating that solicitors are not welcome or not invited.
(D) No person shall engage in solicitation activities in defiance of a clear indication by occupants of a residence or operators or owners of a business that solicitors are not welcome or are not invited. As used in this section, clear indication shall include, but not be limited to posting of a notice on the property, verbal notice or, in the case of commercial solicitation activities, registration with the village
12 Tularosa - Business Regulations
on a roster kept by the village for the purpose of indicating those places where commercial solicitors are neither invited nor welcome. It shall be the duty of each commercial solicitor to be currently informed of all persons and/or addresses on the no solicitors roster.
(E) Every solicitor, whether required to be licensed or not, shall immediately furnish his or her name, organization and address to any person who requests or demands that information while the solicitor is conducting solicitation activities.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.08 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for license;
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation activities;
(3) Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the license; and
(4) Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
(B) Upon suspension or revocation, the village shall deliver written notice to the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting the action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's place of business or mailed to the license holder's last-known address.
(C) No person who is required to be licensed by this section and whose license has been suspended or revoked shall engage in commercial solicitation activities until the required license has been reinstated or reissued.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.09 APPEALS.
Persons whose licenses have been suspended or revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the village within ten days after receipt of the notice of suspension or revocation. The Board of Trustees shall hear and determine the appeal in accordance with the Battershell Guidelines, and its decision shall be final.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995)
2006 S-3
Commercial Solicitors 13
' 111.10 RENEWALS.
Licenses may be renewed provided that an application for renewal and the appropriate license fees are received by the village no later than the expiration date of the current license. Applications received after the date shall be processed as new applications. The village shall review each renewal application to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this section. If the village finds that the application meets the requirements, the village shall issue a new license.
(Ord. 164, passed 10-17-1995)
14 Tularosa - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS; SECOND-HAND DEALERS
Section
112.01 License required
112.02 Bond
112.03 Records
112.04 Reports
112.05 Transactions with juveniles and the like
112.06 Evidence of ownership; prerequisite to certain transactions
112.07 Compliance required
112.08 Hours of business
112.09 Definition
112.10 Records required
112.11 Inspection permitted
112.12 Garage and yard sales
' 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No pawnbroker, person, firm or corporation whose business it is to trade or receive by way of pledge or pawn, any kind of personal property as security for the repayment of money loaned or advanced, shall engage in business within the village without having paid the required license fee and having obtained the license required by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 133, passed 3-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.02 BOND.
(A) No person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker without having executed and delivered to the village a bond to be approved by the Board of Trustees in the penal sum of $10,000 with a corporate surety authorized by the laws of the state to write surety bonds therein, and conditioned for the conduct of the pawnbrokers business according to law and for the due and faithful observance of each and every provision of this chapter.
(B) The bond shall be for the benefit of the village and of each and every person damaged by a breach of any condition thereof.
(Ord. 133, passed 3-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
15
16 Tularosa - Business Regulations
' 112.03 RECORDS.
(A) It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker in the village to provide a well-bound book or ledger to be kept at his or her place of business, in which a record of all transactions had by the person shall be kept.
(B) The record shall contain an accurate and complete description of each and every article taken in as a pledge or purchased by him or her and shall list any identifying serial numbers or other identifying marks or numbers found on each article, together with an accurate and complete description of the parties from whom the goods are received or purchased, together with the name of the person or persons, his, her or their addresses, giving the house or street number of same, which book shall be open, at all times, to the inspection of any member of the Police Department, any member of the Board of Trustees or any person who shall be authorized by the Mayor, and there shall also be entered in such book the amount of the loan or purchase price of all articles or things pawned or bought, the rate of interest to be paid on the loan, if the transaction is a loan; and the other information as may from time to time be required by the Chief of Police.
(C) The book and record above required to be kept shall be written in the English language in a clear and legible manner.
(Ord. 133, passed 3-20-1990)
' 112.04 REPORTS.
(A) It shall be the duty of every person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker to furnish daily, an accurate and complete report, before 12:00 noon of each business day, to the Chief of Police, on blanks to be furnished by the director, which report shall show all property of every kind, received or purchased by him or her, together with the description of the property, including any identifying serial numbers or other identifying marks or numbers found on each article, and the description of the person's address.
(B) The report shall give the age, complexion, sex and approximate height of the person delivering the property to the pawnbroker, together with the time at which the property was received and the report shall contain any other information which, from time to time, may be required by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 133, passed 3-20-1990)
Pawnbrokers; Second-Hand Dealers 17
' 112.05 TRANSACTIONS WITH JUVENILES AND THE LIKE.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker in the village to buy or accept property as a pledge from any juvenile without the written consent of the parent or guardian of the juvenile to so deliver or dispose of the property, or to buy or accept property as a pledge from any person who is at the time intoxicated, from a habitual drunkard or from any person known by him or her to be a thief or an associate of thieves or a receiver of stolen property.
(Ord. 133, passed 3-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.06 EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP; PREREQUISITE TO CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker, to buy any property of any kind, or receive the same as a pledge, which property is distinctly and plainly marked as being the property of any person other than the party offering to sell or pledge the same unless the party offering to sell or pledge the same shall show satisfactory evidence, in writing, that he or she is the legal and lawful owner of the property.
(B) Failure to require written evidence shall be prima facie evidence of guilty knowledge on the part of such pawnbroker, his or her agents or employees, that the party offering to pledge or sell the same is not the rightful owner thereof, and shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the license of the pawnbroker by the Board of Trustees after a public hearing.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.07 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as the agent, servant or employee of any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker who does not keep a record book as required by the provision of this chapter, and who does not make reports to the Chief of Police as herein required.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.08 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker to keep such place of business, or to transact any business at such place of business, between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., on the following day, and it shall be the duty of such person so engaged in business to keep such place of business closed between the hours above mentioned.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
18 Tularosa - Business Regulations
' 112.09 DEFINITION.
Any person who shall engage in the business of purchase, sale, barter, trade, consignment or exchange of secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, whether in a fixed and established location of business or otherwise shall hereby be defined as a SECOND-HAND DEALER, provided that, transactions involving a trade-in of goods, wares or merchandise on the purchase of other goods, wares or merchandise where no cash is paid to the person making such trade-in shall not be defined as being in the business of SECOND-HAND DEALER.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.10 RECORDS REQUIRED.
Every secondhand dealer shall keep a permanent record on forms provided by the Chief of Police providing the following information:
(A) The date and hour of purchase of all second-hand goods, wares or merchandise.
(B) The name, age, address and physical description of the vendor.
(C) The amount of money paid in any such transaction.
(D) A complete and accurate description of the goods, wares or merchandise purchased.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990)
' 112.11 INSPECTION PERMITTED.
The records required by the provisions of this chapter, as well as all merchandise or articles purchased, shall at all times be open and available to inspection by the Chief of Police or any Village police officer.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990)
' 112.12 GARAGE AND YARD SALES.
(A) Applicability of chapter. Garage and yard sales, as defined below, need not be licensed or registered under the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Definition. CONDUCT OF SALES. Garage or yard sales are sales in which personal property and/or used merchandise is offered for sale, which are conducted on residential premises by one or more member of the family or families who live there, and to which the public is invited.
Pawnbrokers; Second-Hand Dealers 19
(C) Permitted. Garage and yard sales are permitted in the city provided that:
(1) Garage and yard sales shall only be held between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and shall not exceed three-consecutive days' duration. No more than three sales shall be held at a given residence in any 12-month period. No more than two garage or yard sales shall be conducted at the same location within 90 days of another such sale at such location by the same person(s).
(2) Garage and yard sales are intended for the sale of items normally accumulated by a household. No items shall be sold at a garage or yard sale which were specifically purchased for the purpose of resale.
(3) Signs may be erected no earlier than 6:00 a.m. on the first day of the sale and shall be removed by 9:00 p.m. on the last day upon which the sale is held.
(4) No garage or yard sale shall be conducted in such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard.
(D) Exemptions. These provisions shall not apply to or affect the following:
(1) Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
(Ord. 133, passed 8-20-1990)
20 Tularosa - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
113.01 Definitions
Licensing Provisions
113.15 License required
113.16 Application and fees
113.17 Tax period; date of payment
113.18 Persons prohibited from obtaining licenses
113.19 Special licenses
113.20 Revocation or suspension of licenses
Conditions for Possession and Sale
113.35 Delivery for resale
113.36 Consumption or sale in public places
113.37 Curb service
113.38 Possession in certain premises
113.39 Hours of sale
113.40 Drinking in certain places
113.41 Sale to intoxicated persons
113.42 Minors
113.43 Inspection of premises
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
All words and terms used in this chapter shall be deemed to have and carry the meaning as defined by the laws of the state and, where words and terms are not defined by the laws of the state, then they shall be deemed to have and carry their common, ordinary meaning.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-1)
21
22 Tularosa - Business Regulations
LICENSING PROVISIONS
' 113.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) The sale, possession for the purpose of sale or offering for sale, manufacture or transportation of alcoholic liquors is hereby prohibited within the village, except upon the terms and conditions specified in this chapter and upon the terms and conditions specified by state statute.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-2)
(B) No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who shall not, as a condition precedent, secure a license from the Bureau of Revenue, as provided by law.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-3)
' 113.16 APPLICATION AND FEES.
Persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors within the limits of the village shall file an application with the Village Clerk-Treasurer on or before June 15 of each year or prior to engaging in business in the case of new businesses, stating the location of the proposed place of business, the kind of license desired by the applicant and the date on which he or she intends to commence business. The application shall be accompanied by the required license fee to cover the period of time from the date of the application to June 30 following; the fee for less than one year to be determined by the provisions hereinafter set out. The application shall comply with state law.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-5) (Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 113.17 TAX PERIOD; DATE OF PAYMENT.
(A) (1) All licenses shall be issued on a yearly basis, and the license tax period shall begin July 1 of each year and end June 30 following the date of issuance; provided that the tax shall be prorated as set forth in ' 113.16.
(2) In the case of persons desiring to continue a business for the sale of alcoholic liquors, the tax herein assessed shall be paid in a lump sum on or before July 1 in each year or may, at the applicant's option, be paid one-half on or before July 1 in each year and the remaining one-half on or before January 1 following.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-8)
2003 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 23
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the village to possess, sell or transport any alcoholic liquors upon which the taxes and/or duties levied and required by the state and/or the United States of America have not been paid. The possession of alcoholic liquors in any container not bearing any stamp, inscription or symbol required by the laws of the state and/or the United States of America shall be prima facie evidence that the taxes and/or duties levied and required by the state and/or the United States of America, have not been paid on the alcoholic liquors.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.18 PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM OBTAINING LICENSES.
The following classes of persons shall be prohibited from receiving licenses under the provisions of this chapter:
(A) Persons who have been convicted of two separate violations of this chapter in any calendar year or of any felony, except those persons restored to civil rights;
(B) A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(C) A person under the age of 21 years;
(D) A corporation which is not duly qualified to do business in the state;
(E) A person who is not the real party in interest in the business to be conducted under the license for which application is made;
(F) Any person who has not procured from the Bureau of Revenue a retailer's license, a dispenser's license or a club license in conformity with the laws of the state; and
(G) Any person not qualified under the terms of this chapter.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-9)
' 113.19 SPECIAL LICENSES.
Any person holding a dispenser's license may dispense alcoholic liquors at any fair or other public celebration held within the limits of the village, upon receiving a concession from the Governing Body of the fair or celebration; provided, however, that the dispensing is allowed by the laws of the state and all requirements of the laws of the state regulating dispensing of alcoholic liquors on the occasions as complied with.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-10)
2003 S-1
24 Tularosa - Business Regulations
' 113.20 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
Revocation or suspension of any retailer's, dispenser's or club license shall not entitle the licensee to the refund of any portion of the village tax paid or relieve the licensee from the obligation of the payment of any deferred installment thereof.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-11)
CONDITIONS FOR POSSESSION AND SALE
' 113.35 DELIVERY FOR RESALE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver any alcoholic liquors for resale in the village unless the person has complied with the provisions of the laws of the state in every respect as to permits, quantity, shipper and consignee and all other provisions of law.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.36 CONSUMPTION OR SALE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
It shall be unlawful to drink or consume alcoholic liquors for any person who is the owner or proprietor to sell, serve, furnish or permit drinking or consumption of alcoholic liquors in any public dance hall, pool room, bowling alley, street or in any public place, except inside of buildings in which is conducted a business, the business being duly licensed by the village to dispense alcoholic liquors and except as may be provided by ' 113.18 or by state law.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-13) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.37 CURB SERVICE.
It shall also be unlawful for any licensee to give any kind of curb service of alcoholic liquors, except in unbroken packages, outside of the building on the premises at which the licensee's business is operated, except to customers seated at tables.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-14) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.38 POSSESSION IN CERTAIN PREMISES.
It shall be unlawful for any dispenser or retailer to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic liquors at any location or place, except the licensed premises or the location permitted under ' 113.19.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-15) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2003 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 25
' 113.39 HOURS OF SALE.
(A) Alcoholic liquors shall be served, delivered or consumed on licensed premises only during the following hours and days:
(1) On Mondays from 7:00 a.m. until midnight;
(2) On other weekdays from after midnight of the previous day until 2:00 a.m., then from 7:00 a.m. until midnight; and
(3) On Sundays only after midnight of the previous day until 2:00 a.m., except as provided in division (B) below.
(B) (1) Any holder of a dispenser's or club license may, upon payment of an additional fee of $100, obtain a permit to sell, serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquors by the drink on the licensed premises on Sundays from 12:00 noon until midnight, except as otherwise provided in division (C) below. The permit shall expire on June 30 of each year and may be renewed from year to year upon application for renewal and payment of the required fee.
(2) The permit fee shall not be prorated.
(3) Sales made pursuant to this division (B) shall be called Sunday sales.
(C) Dispenser, retail and club licensees shall close their places of business during voting hours on the days of the primary election, general election, elections for officers of the village, and any other election as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the Director of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Dispenser, retail and club licenses shall also close places of business from 2:00 a.m. on Christmas Day until 7:00 a.m. on the day after Christmas.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-16)
' 113.40 DRINKING IN CERTAIN PLACES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic liquors in any washroom or toilet of any dispenser or to drink or consume upon the premises of any dispenser any alcoholic liquors purchased therein in the unbroken package, except wine so purchased to be consumed with meals on the premises or to drink on the premises of any dispenser any alcoholic liquors obtained elsewhere.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-17) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2003 S-1
26 Tularosa - Business Regulations
' 113.41 SALE TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give or deliver alcoholic liquors to or to procure or aid in the procurement of any alcoholic liquors for any intoxicated person.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-18) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.42 MINORS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any retailer, dispenser, bartender, waiter or servant of any retailer or dispenser or any other person, except the parent or guardian of any minor or adult person into whose custody any Court has committed the minor for the time, outside of the actual, visible presence of the minor's parents, guardian or the adult person into whose custody any Court has committed the minor for the time, to do any of the following acts:
(1) To sell, serve or give any alcoholic liquor to a minor or to permit a minor to consume alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises;
(2) To buy alcoholic liquor for or to procure the sale or service of alcoholic liquor to a minor;
(3) To deliver alcoholic liquor to a minor; and/or
(4) To aid or assist a minor to buy, procure or be served with alcoholic liquor.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any person under the age of 21 years to sell or serve alcoholic liquors, including wines and beer.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a minor to buy, receive or permit himself or herself to be served with any alcoholic liquor, except when accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or adult person into whose custody he or she has been committed for the time by some Court who is actually visibly and
personally present at the time the alcoholic liquor is bought or received by him or her or served or delivered to him or her.
(D) In the event any person, except a minor, shall procure any other person to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic liquor to a minor by actual or constructive misrepresentation of any facts calculated to cause, or by the concealment of any facts the concealment of which is calculated to cause the person selling, serving or delivering the alcoholic liquors to the minor, that the minor is legally entitled to be sold, served or delivered alcoholic liquors, and actually deceiving him or her by the misrepresentation or concealment, then that person, and not the person so deceived by the misrepresentations or concealment, shall have violated this chapter.
2003 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 27
(E) In any proceedings under division (A) above, it shall not be necessary for the prosecution or any person, official or party urging or contending that the section has been violated, to allege or prove that the parent, guardian or any adult person into whose custody any minor has been committed by any Court was not actually visibly and personally present at the time of the alleged violation, but the matters are matters of defense to be established and proved by the person against whom the prosecution or proceeding is brought.
(F) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-19) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.43 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
The Police Department shall inspect all places where alcoholic liquors are sold under license from the village as often as is necessary to check for compliance with this chapter.
(`75 Code, ' 5-1-20)
2003 S-1
28 Tularosa - Business Regulations

TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL PROVISIONS
131. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
132. OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
133. OFFENSES AGAINST OR PERTAINING TO MINORS
134. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
135. OFFENSES AGAINST ANIMALS
136. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
137. WEAPONS
1
2 Tularosa - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
130.01 Short title
130.02 Limitations on actions
130.03 Jurisdiction
130.04 Definitions
130.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Health and sanitation; nuisances, see Ch. 90
' 130.01 SHORT TITLE.
This title may be cited as the Criminal Code of Tularosa.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 130.02 LIMITATIONS ON ACTIONS.
All prosecutions for the alleged violation of this title shall be commenced within one year after the alleged violation and shall be barred thereafter.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 130.03 JURISDICTION.
This title applies only to offenses committed within the village limits, as those limits may from time to time be established.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
3
4 Tularosa - General Offenses
' 130.04 DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANOTHER or OTHER. Any other human being or legal entity, whether incorporated or unincorporated, including the United States, the State of New Mexico or any subdivision thereof.
ANYTHING OF VALUE. Any conceivable thing of the slightest value, tangible or intangible, movable or immovable; corporeal or incorporeal, public or private. The term is not necessarily synonymous with the traditional legal term property.
CHIEF OF POLICE or POLICE CHIEF. The Police Chief or his or her designated representative.
CHILD. Any person under the age of 18.
COURT. The Municipal Court of the village.
HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION. Any place where prostitution or the promotion of prostitution is carried on.
LAWFUL CUSTODY OR CONFINEMENT. The holding of any person pursuant to lawful authority, including, without limitation, actual or constructive custody of prisoners temporarily outside a penal institution, reformatory, jail, prison farm or ranch.
PEACE OFFICER. Any public official or public officer vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for crime, whether that duty extends to all crimes or is limited to specific crimes.
PERSON. Includes, but is not limited to any natural person, whether over or under 18 years of age, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
POSSESS. Includes, but is not limited to any manner of custody, control or ownership, no matter how initiated.
PRIVATE PARTS OF THE BODY. The penis, scrotum or rectum of a male or the vagina, clitoris or rectum of a female, or pubic hair of a male or female.
PROSTITUTE. A person who engages in or offers to engage in the commission of a sex act for anything of value.
General Provisions 5
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE. Any person receiving remuneration for regular services rendered to the state or any of its political subdivisions.
PUBLIC OFFICER. Any elected or appointed officer of the state or any of its political subdivisions, whether or not he receives remuneration for his or her services.
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes, but is not limited to public dance halls, pool rooms, bars, saloons, bowling alleys, coffee houses, commercial establishments patronized by the public, city, county, state or federal buildings, streets, sidewalks, parks or alleys.
SEX ACT. The engaging in cunnilingus, buggery, pederastry, necrophilia, fellatio, bestiality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or the manipulation of the testicles or penis of a male or the vulva or clitoris of a woman by hand or any mechanical means.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory and not merely directory.
VILLAGE. The Village of Tularosa, New Mexico.
(B) Any other term used in this title is used in its commonly accepted meaning, except where another term has been defined elsewhere in this title.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 130.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person convicted of any violation, defined in this title, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, unless a different specific penalty is provided.
(B) Upon conviction of a second violation of any provision in this title in addition to any other penalties, the weapon or weapons used in the second offense shall be forfeited to the village.
(C) Any fireworks, gambling devices or other equipment of any kind used in gambling and any money seized in connection with any gambling or gambling equipment shall be retained by the Police Chief until the property is disposed of by order of the Court.
(D) The Court may sentence any corporation, club, organization or unincorporated association, which has been convicted of a violation of this title, to pay a fine authorized hereby.
2003 S-1
6 Tularosa - General Offenses
(E) Each day that any violation of this title shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as provided herein.
(F) It shall be unlawful to commit any act defined as a violation in this title.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
2003 S-1
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
131.01 Injuring or tampering with vehicles
131.02 Criminal damage to property
131.03 Protection of ditches
131.04 Trespassing
131.05 Wrongful entry of public facility
131.06 Preservation of the Veteran=s Memorial Park.
' 131.01 INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to individually or in association with one or more persons to:
(A) Purposely and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started, the motor of any motor vehicle;
(B) Purposely and maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which they were left by the owner or driver of said motor vehicle;
(C) Purposely scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top covering or upholstery of a motor vehicle, without permission of the owner thereof;
(D) Purposely destroy any part of a motor vehicle or purposely cut, mash, mark or in any other way destroy or damage any part, attachment, fastening or appurtenance of a motor vehicle, without the permission of the owner thereof;
(E) Purposely drain or start the drainage of any radiator or oil tank or gas tank upon a motor vehicle without the permission of the owner thereof;
(F) Purposely puts any metallic or other substance or liquid in the radiator, carburetor, oil tank, grease cup, oilers, lamps, gas tanks or machinery of the motor vehicle with the intent to injure or damage the same or impede the working of the machinery thereof;
7
2009 S-6
8 Tularosa - General Offenses
(G) Maliciously tighten or loosen any bracket, bolt, wire, nut, screw or other fastening on a motor vehicle; or
(H) Purposely release the brake upon a standing motor vehicle, with the intent to injure the machine.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 131.02 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
(A) Criminal damage to private property consists of intentionally damaging any real or personal property of another without the consent of the person lawfully in possession of the property.
(B) Criminal damage to public property consists of intentionally damaging any real or personal property of the village, county, state or United States Government, without the consent of the owner thereof.
(NMSA ' 30-15-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 131.03 PROTECTION OF DITCHES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle of any description across any of the ditches inside the village, except where they are crossed by streets, avenues or alleys, or in any manner which may injure the ditches.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 131.04 TRESPASSING.
Trespassing consists of unlawfully and with intent:
(A) Entering or remaining upon the property of another knowing that any consent to enter or remain has been denied or withdrawn by the owner or occupant; or
(B) Entering or remaining upon lands owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its political subdivisions, knowing that consent to enter or remain is denied or withdrawn by the owner or occupant thereof.
(NMSA ' 30-14-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Offenses Against Property 9
' 131.05 WRONGFUL ENTRY OF PUBLIC FACILITY.
(A) Wrongful entry of a public facility consists of knowingly entering any public facility without permission of the lawful custodian when the facility is not open to the public.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC FACILITY. Any building, structure or enclosure used for a public purpose or as a place of public gathering owned or under the control of the state or one of its political subdivisions or a religious, charitable, educational or recreational association.
(NMSA ' 30-14-4) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 131.06 PRESERVATION OF THE VETERAN'S MEMORIAL PARK.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any act which causes any damage to the Veteran's Memorial Park, including roller skating, skate boarding or defacing the memorial in any manner.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any act which would cause any interference with the lawful use of the Veteran's Memorial Park by operating any wheeled device on the memorial, provided that the use of any wheeled device protected by law such as a wheel chair shall not be prohibited.
(C) For the purpose of this section, the Veteran's Memorial Park shall include the entire area within 30 feet of the center of the memorial.
(Ord. 233, passed 2-18-2009) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2009 S-6
10 Tularosa - General Offenses
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
False Use of Property; Deception and Larceny
132.01 Credit cards
132.02 Embezzlement
132.03 Extortion
132.04 False pretenses
132.05 Falsely obtaining services or accommodations
132.06 Forgery
132.07 Fraud
132.08 Fraudulently avoiding payment of admission fees
132.09 Worthless checks
132.10 Larceny
132.11 Receiving stolen property
132.12 Shoplifting
132.13 Possession of burglary tools
132.14 Swindling
132.15 Bribery of public official or employee
Drugs and Alcohol
132.25 Drinking in public places
132.26 Selling alcohol in public places
132.27 Marijuana; unlawful possession
132.28 Drug paraphernalia
Gambling; Raffles
132.40 Definitions
132.41 Gambling and lottery prohibited
132.42 Permissive lottery
132.43 Fraudulently operating a lottery
132.44 Commercial gambling prohibited
132.45 Premises; permission to gamble prohibited
132.46 Gambling devices
11
12 Tularosa - General Offenses
Indecent Exposure
132.60 Indecent exposure
Prostitution
132.70 Prostitution generally
132.71 Patronizing prostitutes
132.72 Promoting prostitution
132.99 Penalty
FALSE USE OF PROPERTY; DECEPTION AND LARCENY
' 132.01 CREDIT CARDS.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANYTHING OF VALUE. Includes money, goods and/or services.
CARD HOLDER. The person or organization identified on the face of a credit card to whom or for whose benefit the credit card is issued by an issuer.
CREDIT CARD. Any instrument or device whether known as a credit card, credit plate, charge card or by other name issued with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the card holder in obtaining money, goods, services and/or anything of value, either on credit or in consideration of an understanding or guarantee by the issuer of the payment of a check drawn by the card holder.
EXPIRED CREDIT CARD. A credit card which shows on its face that it is outdated.
INCOMPLETE CREDIT CARD. A credit card upon which a part of the matter, other than the signature of a card holder, which an issuer requires to appear on the credit card before it can be used-by a card holder, has not been stamped, embossed, imprinted or written on.
ISSUER. The business organization or financial institution or its duly authorized agent which issues a credit card.
Offenses Against Morals 13
MERCHANT. Every person who is authorized by an issuer or a participating party to furnish money, goods, services and/or anything else of value upon presentation of a credit card by a card holder.
PARTICIPATING PARTY. A business organization or financial institution other than the issuer which acquires for value a sales slip or agreement.
REVOKED CREDIT CARD. A credit card for which the permission to use has been suspended or terminated by the issuer and notice thereof has been given to the card holder.
SALES SLIP OR AGREEMENT. Any writing evidencing a credit card transaction.
(NMSA ' 30-16-25)
(B) It shall be unlawful for a person to take a credit card from the person, possession, custody or control of another without the card holder's consent, or who, with knowledge that it has been so taken, acquires or possesses a credit card with the intent to use it or to sell it, or to transfer it to a person other than the issuer or the card holder.
(NMSA ' 30-16-26)
(C) It shall be unlawful for a person other than the issuer who receives or possesses a credit card that he or she knows or has reason to know to have been stolen, lost, mislaid or delivered by mistake as to the identity or address of the card holder, to retain possession thereof with the intent to use it or to transfer it to a person other than the issuer or the card holder.
(NMSA ' 30-16-27)
(D) It shall be unlawful for a person other than the issuer or his or her authorized agent, with intent to defraud, transfer possession of a credit card to a person other than the person whose name appears thereon, or a person who with intent to defraud, receives possession of a credit card issued in the name of a person other than himself or herself from a person other than the issuer or his or her authorized agent.
(NMSA ' 30-16-28)
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud, receive, sell or transfer to a credit card by making directly or indirectly, any false statement of a material fact, whether orally or in writing, respecting his or her identity or financial condition or that of any other person, firm or corporation.
(NMSA ' 30-16-29)
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a card holder or a person authorized by him or her, with intent to defraud, sign the name of another or the name of a fictitious person to a credit card or to a sales slip or agreement.
(NMSA ' 30-16-32)
14 Tularosa - General Offenses
(G) It shall be unlawful for a person if, with intent to defraud, he or she uses, to obtain anything of value:
(1) A credit card obtained in violation of this section;
(2) A credit card which is invalid, expired or revoked;
(3) A credit card while fraudulently representing that he or she is the card holder named on the credit card, or an authorized agent or representative of the card holder named on the credit card; or
(4) A credit card issued in the name of another without the consent of the person to whom the card has been issued.
(NMSA ' 30-16-33)
(H) (1) It shall be unlawful for any merchant or the employee of any merchant if, with intent to defraud, he or she furnishes or allows to be furnished anything of value upon presentation of a credit card obtained or retained in violation of this section, or fraudulently made or embossed, or fraudulently signed, or a credit card which he or she knows is invalid, expired or revoked, or a credit card presented by a person whom he or she knows is not the card holder named on the credit card or an authorized agent or representative of the card holder named on the credit card.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any merchant or the employee of any merchant if, with intent to defraud, he or she fails to furnish anything of value which he or she represents in writing to the issuer or to a participating party that he or she has furnished on a credit card or cards of the issuer.
(NMSA ' 30-16-34)
(I) It shall be unlawful for any person to receive money, goods or services and/or anything else of value obtained by another person through the use of a credit card possessed in violation of this section, and who knows or has reason to believe that it was so obtained.
(NMSA ' 30-16-36)
(J) For the purpose of this section, every credit card, whether valid, expired, incomplete or revoked, is presumed to have value and proof of the value is not necessary in any prosecution hereunder.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.02 EMBEZZLEMENT.
Embezzlement consists of the embezzling or converting by a person for his or her own use, anything of value with which he or she has been entrusted, with fraudulent intent to deprive the owner thereof.
(NMSA ' 30-16-8) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
Offenses Against Morals 15
' 132.03 EXTORTION.
(A) Extortion consists of the communication or transmission of any threat to another by any means whatsoever with intent thereby to wrongfully obtain anything of value or to wrongfully compel the person threatened to do or refrain from doing any act against his or her will.
(B) Any of the following acts shall be sufficient to constitute a threat under this section:
(1) A threat to do an unlawful injury to the person or property of the person threatened or of another;
(2) A threat to accuse the person threatened, or another, of any crime;
(3) A threat to expose, or impute to the person threatened or another, any deformity or disgrace;
(4) A threat to expose any secret affecting the person threatened or another; or
(5) A threat to kidnap the person threatened or another.
(NMSA ' 30-16-9) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.04 FALSE PRETENSES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any goods, chattels or other property under false pretenses or to obtain any goods, chattels or other property or other articles or things and receive the same and depart without paying or making arrangements to pay the owner thereof.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.05 FALSELY OBTAINING SERVICES OR ACCOMMODATIONS.
Falsely obtaining services or accommodations consists of any person obtaining any service, food, entertainment or accommodations without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or person supplying the service, food, entertainment or accommodations.
(NMSA ' 30-16-16) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
16 Tularosa - General Offenses
' 132.06 FORGERY.
Forgery consists of:
(A) Falsely making or altering any signature to, or any part of, any writing purporting to have any legal efficacy with intent to injure or defraud; or
(B) Knowingly issuing or transferring a forged writing with intent to injure or defraud.
(NMSA ' 30-16-10) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.07 FRAUD.
Fraud consists of the intentional misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another or the causing of another to change his or her position to any extent to his or her detriment by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations, misleading statements or misrepresentations, whether made directly or through newspapers, radios, television or circulars; provided, however, that no newspaper company, radio company or television company or any employee or agent thereof shall be deemed to have violated this section unless the company, agent or employee aided in the dissemination of the misrepresentation or misleading statement knowing it to be a misrepresentation or misleading statement.
(NMSA ' 30-16-6) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.08 FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment of the proper required admission fee, any theater, ballroom, concert, lecture or any other place where an admission fee is charged, with the exception of the free admission of police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.09 WORTHLESS CHECKS.
(A) It is unlawful for a person to issue, in exchange for anything of value, with intent to defraud, any check, draft or order for payment of money upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of the issuing that the offender has insufficient funds in or credit to the bank or depository for the payment of the check, draft or order in full upon its presentation.
Offenses Against Morals 17
(B) This section does not apply for:
(1) Any check where the payee or holder knows or has been expressly notified prior to the drawing of the check or has reason to believe that the drawer did not have on deposit or to his or her credit with the drawee sufficient funds to insure payment on its presentation; or
(2) Any post-dated check.
(C) In the prosecution of offenses under this section, the following rules of evidence shall govern:
(1) If the maker or drawer of a check, payment of which is refused by the bank or depository upon which it is drawn because of no account in the name of the maker or drawer in the bank, proof of the fact that the maker or drawer had no account in the bank or depository upon which the check is drawn shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with the bank or depository with which to pay the draft.
(2) If the maker or drawer of a check, payment of which is refused by the bank or depository upon which it is drawn because of insufficient funds or credit in the account of the maker or drawer in the bank or depository, fails, within three business days after notice to him or her that the check was not honored by the bank or depository, to pay the check in full, together with any protest fees or costs thereon, the failure shall constitute prima facie evidence of a knowledge of the insufficiency of funds in the bank or depository at the time of the making or drawing of the check and of an intent to defraud.
(D) Notice as used in this section shall consist of either notice given to the person entitled thereto in person or notice given to the person in writing. The notice in writing is presumed to have been given when deposited as certified matter in the United States mail, addressed to the person at his or her address as it appears on the check.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 106, passed 7-19-1983) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.10 LARCENY.
Larceny consists of the stealing of anything of value which belongs to another.
(NMSA ' 30-16-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.11 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
(A) Receiving stolen property means the intentional receiving, retaining or disposing of stolen property knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen, unless the property is received, retained or disposed of with intent to restore it to the owner.
18 Tularosa - General Offenses
(B) The requisite knowledge or belief that property has been stolen is presumed in the case of an individual or dealer who:
(1) Is found in possession or control of property stolen from two or more persons on separate occasions;
(2) Acquires stolen property for a consideration which the individual or dealer knows is far below the property's reasonable value; (A dealer shall be presumed to know the fair market value of the property in which he or she deals.)
(3) Is found in possession or control of five or more items of property stolen within one year prior to the time of the incident charged pursuant to this section.
(C) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEALER. A person in the business of buying or selling goods or commercial merchandise.
(NMSA ' 30-16-11) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.12 SHOPLIFTING.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MERCHANDISE. Chattels of any type or description regardless of the value offered for sale in or about a store.
MERCHANT. Any owner or proprietor of any store, or any agent, servant or employee of the owner or proprietor.
STORE. A place where merchandise is sold or offered to the public for sale at retail.
(NMSA ' 30-16-19)
(B) Shoplifting consists of any one or more of the following acts:
(1) Willfully taking possession of any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it;
(2) Willfully concealing any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it;
Offenses Against Morals 19
(3) Willfully altering any label, price tag or marking upon any merchandise with the intention of depriving the merchant of all or some part of the value of it; or
(4) Willfully transferring any merchandise from the container in or on which it is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of all or some part of the value of the merchandise.
(NMSA ' 30-16-20)
(C) (1) Any person who willfully conceals merchandise on his or her person or on the person of another or among his or her belongings or the belongings of another or on or outside the premises of the store shall be prima facie presumed to have concealed the merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it.
(2) If any merchandise is found concealed upon any person or among his or her belongings it shall be prima facie evidence of willful concealment.
(NMSA ' 30-16-22)
(D) If any law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant has probable cause for believing that a person has willfully taken possession of any merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it, or has willfully concealed merchandise, and that he or she can recover the merchandise by detaining the person or taking him or her into custody, the law enforcement officer, special officer or merchant may, for the purpose of attempting to affect a recovery of the merchandise, take the person into custody and detain him or her in a reasonable manner for a reasonable time. The taking into custody or detention shall not subject the officer or merchant to any criminal liability.
(NMSA ' 30-16-23)
(E) Any law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any person he has probable cause for believing has committed the crime of shoplifting. Any merchant who causes an arrest shall not be criminally or civilly liable if he or she has probable cause for believing the person so arrested has committed the crime of shoplifting.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.13 POSSESSION OF BURGLARY TOOLS.
Possession of burglary tools consists of having in the person's possession a device or instrumentality designed or commonly used for the commission of burglary and under circumstances evincing an intent to use the same in the commission of burglary.
(NMSA ' 30-16-5) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
20 Tularosa - General Offenses
' 132.14 SWINDLING.
Swindling consists of the deliberate cheating and defrauding or tricking to take anything of value which belongs to another.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.15 BRIBERY OF PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE.
Bribery of public officer or public employee consists of any person giving or offering to give, directly or indirectly, anything of value to any public officer or public employee, with intent to induce or influence the public officer or public employee to:
(A) Give or render any official opinion, judgment or decree;
(B) Be more favorable to one party than to the other in any cause, action, suit, election, appointment, matter or thing pending or to be brought before the person;
(C) Procure him or her to vote or withhold his or her vote on any question, matter or proceeding which is then or may thereafter be pending, and which may be law come or be brought before him or her in his or her public capacity;
(D) Execute any of the powers in him or her vested; or
(E) Perform any public duty otherwise than as required by law, or to delay in or omit to perform any public duty required of him or her by law.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL
' 132.25 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
Drinking in public places consists of drinking or consuming alcoholic liquors, as the term is defined in NMSA '' 60-3A-3 et seq., as amended, in or on any public place, private club, key club, whether operated for profit or not, or on a parking lot adjacent to an establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic liquors; provided, that this section shall not apply to drinking inside an establishment having a license to dispense alcoholic liquors.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
Offenses Against Morals 21
' 132.26 SELLING ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PLACES.
Selling of alcohol in public places consists of selling, serving, furnishing or permitting the drinking or consumption of alcoholic liquors, as the term is defined in NMSA '' 60-3A-3 et seq., as amended, in any public place or private club or key club, whether operated for profit or not, except establishments having a license to dispense alcoholic liquors by the owner, operator, lessee or proprietor thereof.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.27 MARIJUANA; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant or its seeds. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, hashish, tetrahydrocannabinols extracted or isolated from marijuana, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
(NMSA ' 30-31-2)
(B) Unlawful possession of marijuana consists of the possession of marijuana which was not obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a doctor of medicine while acting in the course of his or her professional practice, or as otherwise authorized by law.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.28 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(A) Pursuant to NMSA ' 30-31-26B, as amended, it is unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia, as defined in NMSA ' 30-31-2, as amended, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance enumerated in NMSA '' 30-31-6 through 30-31-9 Schedule I, II, III or IV, as amended, in violation of NMSA '' 30-31 et seq., as amended. The provisions of this section do not apply to a person who is in possession of hypodermic syringes or needles at the time he or she is directly and immediately engaged in a harm reduction program, as provided in the Harm Reduction Act, NMSA '' 24-2C1-1 to 24-2C-6.
22 Tularosa - General Offenses
(B) Pursuant to NMSA ' 30-31-26B, as amended, it is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with the intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, as defined, with knowledge, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of NMSA '' 30-31 et seq., as amended. The provisions of this section do not apply to Department of Health employees or their designees while they are directly and immediately engaged in activities related to the harm reduction program authorized by the Harm Reduction Act.
(Ord. 198, passed 3-20-2001) Penalty, see ' 132.99
GAMBLING; RAFFLES
' 132.40 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BET.
(1) A bargain in which the parties agree that, dependent upon chance even though accompanied by some skill, one stands to win or lose anything of value specified in the agreement.
(2) A BET shall not include:
(a) Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the law of contracts, including without limitation:
1. Contracts for the purchase or sale, at a future date, of securities or other commodities; and
2. Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of the chance, including without limitation, contracts for indemnity or guaranty and life or health and accident insurance.
(b) Offers of purses, prizes or premiums to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or endurance or to the bona fide owners of animals or vehicles entered in the contest;
(c) A lottery, as defined in this section; or
Offenses Against Morals 23
(d) Betting otherwise permitted by law.
CONSIDERATION. Anything of monetary value required to be paid to the promoter in order to participate in the enterprise.
GAMBLING DEVICE. A mechanical device which for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined by chance even though accompanied by some skill, and whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the device.
GAMBLING PLACE. Any building, tent, vehicle (whether self-propelled or not), or any room within any of them, a principal use of which is any of the following: making and settling bets; receiving, holding, recording or forwarding bets or offers to bet; conducting lotteries; or playing gambling devices.
LOTTERY. An enterprise wherein for a consideration the participants are given an opportunity to win a prize, the award of which is determined by chance even though accompanied by some skill.
(NMSA ' 30-19-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979)
' 132.41 GAMBLING AND LOTTERY PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(A) Make a bet;
(B) Enter or remain in a gambling place with intent to make a bet, to participate in a lottery or to play a gambling device;
(C) Conduct a lottery; or
(D) Possess facilities with intent to conduct a lottery.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.42 PERMISSIVE LOTTERY.
(A) Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to apply to any sale or drawing of any prize at any fair held in the state for the benefit of any church, public library or religious society situate or being in the state, or for charitable purposes when all the proceeds of the fair shall be expended in the state for the benefit of the church, public library, religious society or charitable purposes.
24 Tularosa - General Offenses
(B) A lottery shall be operated for the benefit of the organization or charitable purpose only when the entire proceeds of the lottery go to the organization or charitable purpose and no part of the proceeds to any individual member or employee thereof.
(C) Nothing in this subchapter shall be held to prohibit any bona fide motion picture theater from offering prizes of cash or merchandise for advertising purposes, in connection with the business, of for the purpose of stimulating business, whether or not any consideration other than a monetary consideration in excess of the regular price of admission is exacted for participation drawings for prizes.
(D) Nothing in this subchapter shall be held to apply to any bona fide county fair, including fairs for more than one county, which shall have been held annually at the same location for at least two years and which shall offer prizes of livestock or poultry in connection with the fair when the proceeds of the drawings shall be used for the benefit of the fair.
(NMSA ' 30-19-6) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.43 FRAUDULENTLY OPERATING A LOTTERY.
Fraudulently operating a lottery consists of operating or managing any lottery which does not provide a fair and equal chance to all participants or which lottery is conducted in a manner tending to defraud or mislead the public.
(NMSA ' 30-19-7) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.44 COMMERCIAL GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(A) Participate in the earnings of or operate a gambling place;
(B) Receive, record or forward bets or offers to bet;
(C) Possess facilities with the intent to receive, record or forward bets or offers to bet;
(D) For gain, become a custodian of anything of value, bet or offered to be bet;
(E) Conducting a lottery where both the consideration and the prize are money, or whoever with intent to conduct a lottery, possess facilities to do so; or
(F) Set up for use, for the purpose of gambling or collecting the proceeds of any gambling device.
(NMSA ' 30-19-3) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
Offenses Against Morals 25
' 132.45 PREMISES; PERMISSION TO GAMBLE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(A) Knowingly permit any property owned or occupied by the person or under his or her control to be used as a gambling place; or
(B) Knowingly permit a gambling device to be set up for use for the purpose of gambling in a place under his or her control.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.46 GAMBLING DEVICES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, transfer commercially or possess with intent to transfer commercially any of the following:
(1) Anything which he or she knows evidences, purports to evidence or is designed to evidence participation in gambling; or
(2) Any device which he or she knows is designed exclusively for gambling purposes or anything which he or she knows is designed exclusively as a subassembly or essential part of the device. This includes, without limitation, gambling devices, numbers jars, punch boards and/or roulette wheels.
(B) Proof of possession of any device designed exclusively for gambling purposes which is not in a gambling place and is not set up for use is prima facie evidence of possession with intent to transfer.
(NMSA ' 30-19-5) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
INDECENT EXPOSURE
' 132.60 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
Indecent exposure consists of a person knowingly and indecently exposing the private parts or sexual organs to the public view. Indecent exposure is unlawful.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
26 Tularosa - General Offenses
PROSTITUTION
' 132.70 PROSTITUTION GENERALLY.
Prostitution consists of knowingly engaging in or offering to engage in a sex act for hire.
(NMSA ' 30-9-2) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.71 PATRONIZING PROSTITUTES.
Patronizing prostitutes consists of:
(A) Entering or remaining in a house of prostitution with intent to engage in a sex act with a prostitute; or
(B) Knowingly hiring a prostitute to engage in a sex act.
(NMSA ' 30-9-3) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.72 PROMOTING PROSTITUTION.
Promoting prostitution consists of any person:
(A) Knowingly establishing, owning, maintaining or managing a house of prostitution or participating in the establishment, ownership, maintenance or management thereof;
(B) Knowingly permitting any place which a person partially or wholly owns or controls to be used as a house of prostitution;
(C) Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a house of prostitution;
(D) Knowingly inducing another to become a prostitute;
(E) Knowingly soliciting a patron for a prostitute or for a house of prostitution;
(F) Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a patron;
Offenses Against Morals 27
(G) Knowingly procuring transportation for, paying for the transportation of or transporting a person within this village with the intention of promoting that person's engaging in prostitution; or
(H) Knowingly being employed by a house of prostitution to perform any function which constitutes promoting prostitution.
(NMSA ' 30-9-4) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 132.99
' 132.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to ' 130.99.
(B) Whoever unlawfully possesses marijuana shall, for the first offense, be punished by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $200, and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days; for the second and subsequent offenses, be punished by a fine of not less than $300, nor more than $500, and/or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
(C) Any person who violates ' 132.28 and is found guilty, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $200, by imprisonment for a definite term of 90 days or less or both unless prohibited by the Controlled Substances Act, NMSA '' 30-31-1 et seq., in which case the penalty provided for in the Controlled Substances Act shall be imposed.
(Ord. 198, passed 3-20-2001; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
2003 S-1
28 Tularosa - General Offenses
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST OR PERTAINING TO MINORS
Section
133.01 Abandonment of child prohibited
133.02 Cruelty to child prohibited
133.03 Contributing to delinquency of a minor
133.04 Curfew
133.05 Permitting loitering by minors
' 133.01 ABANDONMENT OF CHILD PROHIBITED.
Abandonment of child consists of the parent of a child, ten years old or less, or any person who has been entrusted with or who has assumed the care of the child, who intentionally leaves the child or abandons him or her under circumstances whereby the child may suffer from neglect, but which does not result in the death of or great bodily harm to the child.
(NMSA ' 30-6-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 133.02 CRUELTY TO CHILD PROHIBITED.
Cruelty to children consists of any parent, guardian or other person having care or custody of any child to:
(A) Intentionally cause or permit:
(1) The life of the child to be endangered;
(2) The health of the child to be injured; or
(3) The morals of the child to be impaired.
(B) Intentionally place the child in a situation where:
(1) The life of the child is endangered;
(2) The health of the child is injured; or
29
30 Tularosa - General Offenses
(3) The morals of the child is impaired.
(C) Willfully, torture, torment or cruelly punish or injure the child; or
(D) Willfully or negligently deprive the child of necessary food, clothing or shelter.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 133.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
(B) It shall be a violation of this section for any club, retailer, dispenser, bartender, waiter or servant or employee of any club, retailer or dispenser, or for any taxi driver, hotel employee or any other person to do any of the following acts:
(1) To sell, serve or give any alcoholic liquor to a minor;
(2) To buy alcoholic liquor for or to procure the sale or service of alcoholic liquor to a minor;
(3) To deliver alcoholic liquor to a minor; and/or
(4) To aid or assist a minor to buy, procure or be served with alcoholic liquor.
(C) It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to buy, receive, possess or permit himself or herself to be served with any alcoholic liquor.
(D) In the event any person, except a minor, shall procure any other person to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic liquor to a minor by actual or constructive misrepresentation of any facts calculated to cause, or by the concealment of any facts the concealment of which is calculated to cause the person selling, serving or delivering the alcoholic liquors to the minor, that the minor is legally entitled to be sold, served or delivered alcoholic liquors; and actually deceiving him or her by misrepresentation or concealment, then that person, and not the person so deceived by the misrepresentation or concealment, shall have violated this section.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 186, passed 8-18-1998) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Offenses Against or Pertaining to Minors 31
' 133.04 CURFEW.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or any other person having care or custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit or allow the minor to be upon any public thoroughfare, or any public place without adequate supervision on weekdays (Sunday through Thursday) from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. and on weekends from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(B) The restrictions mentioned above shall not apply to any minor who shall be accompanied by a parent, guardian or adult acting with the authority of the parent or any minor upon an errand of necessity on the performance of duty directed by any parent, guardian or other person acting with the authority of the parent or to any minor attending any school or church sponsored event or to any minor coming from or going to work.
(C) It should be the duty of peace officers to apprehend and take into custody any minor found in violation of this section. The officer shall thereupon notify the parent or guardian of the parent or guardian shall be deemed guilty of permitting a violation of this section.
(D) In the event that the parent or guardian cannot be located, the child shall be remanded to the custody of the proper juvenile authorities.
(E) For the violation of this section, the minor shall be released to the custody of his or her parent or guardian or other person having care or custody of minor upon written promise that the parent or guardian shall assume the responsibility that the child will comply with the provisions of this section. Juvenile authorities shall make a written report and keep a record of each violation. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating this section shall be punished in accordance with ' 130.99.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979; Am. Ord. 107, passed 10-18-1983) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 133.05 PERMITTING LOITERING BY MINORS.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any establishment serving alcoholic beverages to permit a minor under the age of 21 years to attend, frequent or loiter in or about the premises without being accompanied by the parent or guardian of the person; or the owner or operator of any poolroom to permit a minor under the age of 18 years to attend, frequent or loiter in or about the premises without being accompanied by the parent or guardian of the person.
(NMSA ' 30-20-10) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
32 Tularosa - General Offenses
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
Section
134.01 Escape; aid and attempt
134.02 Accessory
134.03 Barbed wire and electric fences
134.04 Concealing identity
134.05 False alarms and reports
134.06 Giving assistance to police officer
134.07 Impersonating an officer
134.08 Improper handling of fire
134.09 Malicious criminal prosecution
134.10 Malicious use of telephone
134.11 Perjury
134.12 Removal of barricades
134.13 Resisting or obstructing an officer
134.14 Tampering with evidence
134.15 Unauthorized use of vehicle signs
134.16 Disorderly conduct
' 134.01 ESCAPE; AID AND ATTEMPT.
(A) Aiding escape consists of either:
(1) Intentionally aiding any person confined or held in lawful custody or confinement to escape; or
(2) Any officer, jailer or other employee intentionally permitting any prisoner in his or her custody to escape.
(NMSA ' 30-22-11)
(B) Escape from custody of a peace officer consists of any person who shall have been placed under lawful arrest for the commission or alleged commission of any crime, unlawfully escaping or attempting to escape from the custody or control of any peace officer.
(NMSA ' 30-22-10)
33
34 Tularosa - General Offenses
(C) Escape from jail consists of any person who shall have been lawfully committed to any jail for the commission of a crime, escaping or attempting to escape from the jail or from a work detail to which the person is assigned.
(NMSA ' 30-22-2) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.02 ACCESSORY.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to procure, counsel, advise or encourage, aid or abet any other person in the commission of any offense defined herein under this Title.
(NMSA ' 30-1-13) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.03 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
Unlawful use of barbed wire and electric fences consists of erecting or maintaining any fence composed wholly of or in part of barbed wire or any fence so constructed as to produce an electric shock upon, along or about any lot or parcel of ground fronting upon or adjoining any street, alley, avenue or common or public thoroughfare, or along any ditch within the village limits, except that industrial or property protection fences may contain one or more strands of barbed wire if the wire is six feet or more above the ground.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.04 CONCEALING IDENTITY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal his or her true name or identity or disguise himself or herself by the use of a fictitious, altered or false voter's registration card, driver's license or any instrument purported to be issued by any agency of the government of the United States, the state or its political subdivisions, the District of Columbia or any state, territory, trusteeship or possession of the United States with the intent to obstruct due execution of the law or with the intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any public official, peace officer or any other person in the legal performance of his or her duties.
(NMSA ' 30-22-3) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.05 FALSE ALARMS AND REPORTS.
(A) False report consists of knowingly conveying or causing to be conveyed to any police agency of fire department a false report concerning fire or explosion or the placement of any explosives or explosive incendiary device or any other destructive substance and includes, but is not limited to , setting off a fire alarm.
Offenses Against Public Administration 35
(B) Any person who commits false report which causes death or great bodily harm to another is guilty of a fourth degree felony, but if such death or great bodily harm is not caused, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(NMSA ' 30-7-21) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.06 GIVING ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICER.
It shall be unlawful for any citizen 18 years or older to refuse to assist any peace officer in the preservation of the peace when called upon by the officer in the name of the United States or of the state or of the village.
(NMSA ' 30-22-2) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.07 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
(A) Impersonating a peace officer consists of:
(1) Without due authority exercising or attempting to exercise the functions of a peace officer;
(2) Pretending to be a peace officer with the intent to deceive another person.
(B) Whoever commits impersonating a peace officer is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, the offender is guilty of a fourth degree felony.
(C) As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER means any public official or public officer vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for crime, whether that duty extends to all crimes or is limited to specific crimes.
(NMSA ' 30-27-2.1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.08 IMPROPER HANDLING OF FIRE.
(A) Improper handling of fire consists of:
(1) Setting fire, or causing or procuring a fire to be set to any inflammable vegetation or forest material, growing or being on the lands of another person and without the permission of the owner thereof;
(2) Allowing fire to escape or spread from the control of the person having charge thereof without using reasonable and proper precaution to prevent such fire from escaping or spreading;
36 Tularosa - General Offenses
(3) Burning any inflammable vegetation or forest material whether upon his or her own land or that of another person, without using proper and reasonable precaution at all times to prevent the escape of the fire;
(4) Leaving any campfire burning and unattended upon the lands of another person; or
(5) Causing a fire to be started in any inflammable vegetation or forest material, growing or being upon the lands of another person, by means of any lighted cigar, cigarette, match or other manner and leaving the fire unquenched.
(B) Nothing herein shall constitute improper handling of fire where the fire is a backfire set for the purpose of stopping the progress of a fire then actually burning.
(NMSA ' 30-17-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.09 MALICIOUS CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
Malicious criminal prosecution consists of maliciously procuring or attempting to procure a complaint or otherwise causing or attempting to cause a criminal charge to be preferred or prosecuted against an innocent person, knowing or believing him or her to be innocent.
(NMSA ' 30-27-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.10 MALICIOUS USE OF TELEPHONE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to terrify, intimidate, threaten, harass, annoy or offend, to telephone another and use any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggest any lewd, criminal or lascivious act, or threaten to inflict injury or physical harm to the person or property of any person. It shall also be unlawful for any person to attempt by telephone to extort money or other thing of value from any other person, or to otherwise disturb by repeated anonymous telephone calls the peace, quiet or right of privacy of any other person at the place where the telephone call or calls were received, or to maliciously make a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to annoy or disturb another, or to disrupt the telecommunications of another.
(B) The use of obscene, lewd or profane language or the making of a threat or statement as set forth in division (A) above shall be prima facie evidence of intent to terrify, intimidate, threaten, harass, annoy or offend.
(C) Any offense committed by use of a telephone as set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed within the village if committed at either the place where the telephone call or calls originated or at the place where the telephone call or calls were received.
(NMSA ' 30-20-12) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Offenses Against Public Administration 37
' 134.11 PERJURY.
Perjury consists of making a false statement under oath or affirmation, material to the issue or matter involved in the course of any municipal proceeding, knowing the statement to be untrue.
(NMSA ' 30-25-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.12 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
Removal of barricades consists of knowingly or willfully removing, destroying or interfering with any barrier, guard or light or any other warning device placed before or at any dangerous place in or near the street, sidewalks or ways of the village for the purpose of warning or protecting the public from injury or damage; provided that removal after the danger has ceased and temporary removal to allow the passage of a vehicle with immediate subsequent replacement shall not be considered unlawful.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.13 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING AN OFFICER.
Resisting or obstructing an officer consists of:
(A) Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any officer or agent of this village or any other duly authorized person serving or attempting to serve or execute any process or any rule or order of any of the courts of this village or state or any other judicial writ or process;
(B) Resisting or abusing any judge, magistrate or peace officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties;
(C) Refusing to obey or comply with any lawful process or order given by a peace officer or judge acting in the lawful discharge of his or her duties; or
(D) Interfering with, obstructing or opposing any officer in the lawful discharge of his or her regular and affixed duties.
(NMSA ' 30-22-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.14 TAMPERING WITH EVIDENCE.
Tampering with evidence consists of destroying, changing, hiding, placing or fabricating any physical evidence with intent to prevent the apprehension, prosecution or conviction of any person or to throw suspicion of the commission of a crime upon another.
(NMSA ' 30-22-5) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
38 Tularosa - General Offenses
' 134.15 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF VEHICLE SIGNS.
Unauthorized use of vehicle signs consists of displaying on any vehicle, whether moving or parked, the words police, Police Department, Tularosa Police Department, Department of Police, DPS, Fire Department, Tularosa Fire Department or words or insignia of similar import without authority of the Chief of Police. Nothing herein shall apply to any State Police, County Sheriff or County Fire Department vehicles.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 134.16 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
Disorderly conduct consists of either:
(A) Engaging in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which creates a clear and present danger of violence that tends to disturb the public peace;
(B) Maliciously disturbing, threatening or, in an insolent manner, intentionally touching any house or vehicle occupied by any person;
(C) Inciting, causing, aiding, abetting or assisting in creating any riot, affray or disturbance at or within any dwelling or building, whether public or private, or at any other public place in the village;
(D) Using, in any public place, words which are inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction in an average person to whom the words were addressed;
(E) Remaining prostrate in the street or other public places or private places, whether drunk or sober, without the consent of the owner of the premises; and/or
(F) Prowling window peeping, loitering, or wandering upon the private property of another in the night time, without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof, while loitering prowling or wandering upon the private property of another in the night time or day time, peeking or looking in the door or window of any building or structure located thereon and which is inhabit by human beings, without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof.
(NMSA ' 30-20-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST ANIMALS
Section
135.01 Cruelty to animals
135.02 Injury to animals
' 135.01 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
Cruelty to animals consists of:
(A) Torturing, tormenting, depriving of necessary shelter, cruelly beating, mutilating, cruelly killing or over-driving any animal; or
(B) Unnecessarily failing to provide any animal with proper food or drink.
(NMSA ' 3-18-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 135.02 INJURY TO ANIMALS.
Injury to animals consists of willfully and maliciously poisoning, killing or injuring any animal or domesticated fowl which is the property of another. It is unlawful to injure animals.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
39
40 Tularosa - General Offenses
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
136.01 Abuse of privacy
136.02 Assault and battery
' 136.01 ABUSE OF PRIVACY.
(A) Interference with communications consists of knowingly:
(1) Tampering, displacing, removing, injuring or destroying any radio station, television tower, antenna or cable, telegraph or telephone line, wire, cable, pole or conduit belonging to another or the material or property appurtenant thereto;
(2) Cutting, breaking, tapping or making any connection with any television, telegraph or telephone line, wire, cable or instrument belonging to another;
(3) Reading, hearing, interrupting, taking or copying any message, communication or report intended for another by telegraph or telephone without his or her consent;
(4) Preventing, obstructing or delaying the sending, transmitting, conveying or delivering in the village of any message, communication or report by or through telegraph or telephone; or
(5) Using any apparatus to do or cause to be done any of the acts hereinbefore mentioned or to aid, agree with, comply or conspire with any person to do, or permit or cause to be done any of the acts hereinbefore mentioned.
(NMSA ' 30-7.2-1)
(B) Disturbing the remains of a dead person consists of knowingly:
(1) Disturbing or removing the remains, or any, part thereof, of any person permanently interred in any church, churchyard, mausoleum or cemetery, other than pursuant to an order of the District Court; or
(NMSA ' 30-12-1)
41
42 Tularosa - General Offenses
(2) Disturbing or removing any dead body, except within the authorization of a medical director, funeral director, medical investigator or law enforcement agency, or the authorized representative of any of the foregoing.
(C) Defacing tombs consists of either:
(1) Intentionally defacing, breaking, destroying or removing any tomb, monument or gravestone erected to any deceased person or any memento, memorial or any ornamental plant, tree or shrub appertaining to the place of burial of any human being; or
(2) Intentionally marking, defacing, injuring, destroying or removing any fence, post, rail or wall of any cemetery, graveyard or mausoleum erected within any cemetery, graveyard or mausoleum.
(NMSA ' 30-12-13) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 136.02 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
(A) Assault consists of either:
(1) An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of another; or
(2) Any unlawful act, threat or menacing conduct which causes another person to reasonably believe that he or she is in danger of receiving an immediate battery.
(NMSA ' 30-3-1)
(B) Battery is the unlawful, intentional touching or application of force to the person of another, when done in a rude, insolent or angry manner.
(NMSA ' 30-3-4) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
137.01 Definitions
137.02 Unlawful carrying
137.03 Negligent use
137.04 Exceptions; permits
137.05 Unlawful possession, transfer or sale
' 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CARRYING A DEADLY WEAPON. Being armed with a deadly weapon by having it on the person, or in close proximity thereto, so that the weapon is readily accessible for use.
DEADLY WEAPON. Any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; or any weapon which is capable of producing death or great bodily harm, including, but not restricted to any types of daggers, brass knuckles, switchblade knives, Bowie knives, poniards, butcher knives, dirk knives and all such weapons with which dangerous cuts can be given, or with a which dangerous thrusts can be inflicted, including swordcanes and any kind of sharp pointed canes, also slingshots, slug shoes, bludgeons or any other weapons with which dangerous wounds can be inflicted.
FIREARM. Any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it or by the power of springs and including what are commonly known as air rifles and BB guns.
(NMSA ' 30-7-1) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
43
44 Tularosa - General Offenses
' 137.02 UNLAWFUL CARRYING.
(A) Unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon consists of carrying a concealed loaded firearm or any other type of deadly weapon anywhere, except in the following cases:
(1) In the person's residence or on real property belonging to him or her as owner, lessee, tenant or licensee;
(2) In a private automobile or other private means of conveyances, for lawful protection of the person's or another's person or property, while traveling; or
(3) By a peace officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties.
(B) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the carrying of any unloaded firearm.
(NMSA ' 30-7-2) (Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 137.03 NEGLIGENT USE.
(A) Negligent use of a deadly weapon consists of:
(1) Unlawfully discharging a firearm, within or into the village limits, in the proximity of a building or vehicle, or into any building or vehicle so as to knowingly endanger a person or his or her property;
(2) Carrying a weapon while under the influence of an intoxicant or narcotic;
(3) Endangering the safety of another or his or her property by handling or using a firearm or other deadly weapon in a negligent manner; or
(4) Selling, loaning or furnishing any deadly weapon to a person with knowledge that the person is under the influence of any intoxicant or narcotic or that the person is incompetent.
(NMSA ' 30-7-4)
(B) The provisions set forth above shall not be constructed to forbid peace officers from carrying, wearing or discharging the weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
Weapons 45
' 137.04 EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS.
(A) The Village Board of Trustees may, at any time upon receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and others for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules.
(B) The permits shall be in writing affirmed by the Clerk-Treasurer conforming to such requirements as the Police Chief shall demand and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
' 137.05 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION, TRANSFER OR SALE.
(A) Unlawful possession or transfer of certain weapons consists of possessing, selling, lending, giving away or purchasing any form of brass knuckles, any form of bludgeon or any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, or any knife having a blade which opens or falls or is ejected into position by the force of gravity or by an outward, downward or centrifugal thrust or movement.
(NMSA ' 30-7-8)
(B) Unlawful sale of a deadly weapon consists of giving, selling, trading, bartering or exchanging for anything of value any deadly weapon or ammunition for any firearm to any person under the age of 18 years; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any parent or legal guardian from purchasing a weapon or ammunition for his or her child or ward.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-17-1979) Penalty, see ' 130.99
46 Tularosa - General Offenses

TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. GENERAL PROVISIONS
151. BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
152. SUBDIVISIONS
153. SIGNS
154. ZONING
155. MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
PARKS
156. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
1
2011 S-8
2 Tularosa - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Village Planning and Zoning Commission
150.01 Creation
150.02 Terms of office
150.03 Powers and duties
150.04 Rules and regulations
150.05 Removal of members
150.06 Building Inspector
VILLAGE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
' 150.01 CREATION.
There is hereby created a Village Planning and Zoning Commission to be composed of five full-time residents of the village who are qualified electors eligible to vote in a municipal election. The members of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall be nominated by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees to serve for the respective terms established by this section.
(Ord. 173, passed 6-17-1997; Am. Ord. 223, passed 6-19-2007; Am. Ord. 231, passed 12-16-2008)
' 150.02 TERMS OF OFFICE.
(A) The term of each member of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall be two years from the date of appointment.
(B) Upon the expiration of the term of any member, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointment as herein provided.
(C) In the event a vacancy occurs in the Commission prior to the expiration of the term of the member, it shall be filled by the appointment, as herein provided, of a member whose term shall expire at the end of the original term in which the vacancy occurred.
(Ord. 173, passed 6-17-1997)
3
2009 S-5
4 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 150.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power and authority to study and investigate the subject of village planning, for the purpose of formulating a master plan, and shall make surveys as it deems necessary for the formulation of a master plan.
(B) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power and authority to hold public hearings on the formulation of a master plan, request for variances to zoning regulations and any subject matter pertaining to enforcement of building codes.
(C) All personnel required to be hired for services under this section shall be appointed by the Village Board of Trustees from a list submitted to them by the Village Planning and Zoning Commission.
(D) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission may make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees for the passage of ordinances which it deems advisable.
(E) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall file an annual report with the Mayor and the Village Board of Trustees of its activities, meetings and progress.
(F) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have other powers, authority and jurisdiction as may be from time to time delegated to the Commission by ordinance of the Village Board of Trustees or by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
(G) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and authority to fulfill and perform its functions, promote village planning, and carry out the purposes of NMSA '' 3-19-1 et seq.,
as amended, subject to the approval in all respects by the Board of Trustees.
(H) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and authority to enforce and carry out the provisions of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the actions of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall be subject to the approval by the Board of Trustees; provided further, that any power and authority relating to planning, platting, subdividing, zoning, which is expressly given to the Board of Trustees by this code, shall be exercised first by the Village Planning and Zoning Commission whose recommendations shall then be considered by the Board of Trustees, which recommendations may be either followed in whole, in part or not followed. The Board of Trustees shall have the power and authority to modify any action taken by the Village Planning and Zoning Commission without resubmission of the matter to the Village Planning and Zoning Commission for further review.
(Ord. 173, passed 6-17-1997; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
2006 S-3
General Provisions 5
' 150.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(A) The Commission shall have authority to elect the Chairperson, Secretary and any other necessary officers. The powers and duties of the officers and of any employees of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall be established by the Commission by resolution.
(B) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business and shall publish the rules and regulations, together with procedures for compliance with the rules and regulations.
(C) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at least once a month, but may meet more often if necessary. The Commission shall establish a regular time and place to meet and conduct its business.
(D) For the conduct of ordinary business, a quorum of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of three regularly appointed members.
(E) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep a record of its transactions, findings, resolutions and determinations.
(F) The Chairperson, elected by the Village Planning and Zoning Commission, shall serve for a one-year term.
(Ord. 173, passed 6-17-1997)
' 150.05 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
The Board of Trustees may, by a majority vote of all of the members, remove any member of the Village Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 173, passed 6-17-1997)
' 150.06 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and authority to perform all acts of the Village Building Inspector as set forth in this code.
(Ord. 173, passed 6-17-1997)
6 Tularosa - Land Usage
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
151.01 Adoption of Building Code
151.02 Required payments
151.03 Definitions
151.04 Multiple-purpose buildings
151.05 Permit fees
151.06 Remedies of village
151.07 Excavation of public streets
151.08 Temporary structures; placement
151.99 Penalty
' 151.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
There is hereby adopted by the village for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and providing penalties for the violation thereof, the New Mexico Uniform Building Code, being the Uniform Building Code 1970 Edition, Volume One, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as approved and promulgated by the Construction Industries Commission of New Mexico, including all amendments thereto and all future editions thereof, unless otherwise amended in the future by the Board of Trustees. One copy of the code has been and now is filed in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, except as to the section of the Code relating to building permit fees, which fees shall be in accordance with ' 151.05 and the Uniform Building Code and the building permit fees established hereby shall be in force from and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the village.
(`75 Code, ' 6-1-1)
2003 S-1 7
8 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 151.02 REQUIRED PAYMENTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, remove, demolish a building or any other structure or to install a manufactured or modular structure within the limits of the village without first obtaining a village building site permit and a manufactured/modular structure installation permit or state building permit where applicable.
(B) The applicable permits shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises where the action proposed above is to be accomplished at all times during the project.
(C) Under no circumstances shall any public services such as sewer and water hookup be installed without the above required permits.
(Ord, 1, passed 12-8-1956; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 244, passed 8-15-2012)
' 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS. Buildings or parts of buildings to be used principally for the purpose of making a profit or gain; provided that the term COMMERCIAL BUILDING shall not be deemed to include single-family dwellings built for leasing purposes, but shall include, but not be restricted to duplexes, apartment houses, motels, cabin camps, hotels, and additions to or alterations of single-family dwellings made for rental purposes.
COST OF LABOR AND MATERIALS. The amount of money to be expended for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, or reparation of building; said amount to be determined in the case of residential buildings by multiplying the square footage of said building by the sum of $8. In the case of commercial buildings, by multiplying the square footage of said building by the sum of $6.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS. Buildings or parts thereof to be used for the purpose of habitation and shall include but not be restricted to private homes, private garages, outhouses and all other outbuildings used principally in connection with the actual living quarters.
SQUARE FOOTAGE. The number of square feet found by using the outside dimensions of said building.
(Ord. 1, passed 12-8-1956)
2013 S-9
Building Regulations; Construction 9
' 151.04 MULTIPLE-PURPOSE BUILDING.
Where a building shall be built for residential and commercial purpose as hereinabove defined, the building permit fee shall be determined according to the square footage of space to be used for each said purpose and assessment. Said fee shall be made on the basis provided in ' 151.03.
(Ord. 1, passed 12-8-1956)
' 151.05 PERMIT FEES.
The following fees shall be charged for the issuance of permits as aforesaid and shall be paid in cash to the Village Clerk-Treasurer at the time of making the application:
(A) A $50 manufactured/modular structure installation permit to ensure proper installation procedures are followed.
(B) A $25 site location fee to ensure that any proposed new structure or addition to an existing structure is situated on the lot in such a manner to comply with all applicable setback requirements required by the zoning ordinance. The permit issued shall have the issue date with the expiration of one year and be signed by the Village Clerk or Deputy.
(`75 Code, ' 6-1-5) (Am. Ord. 185, passed 7-21-1998; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 151.06 REMEDIES OF VILLAGE.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter, the proper authorities of the village, in addition to any other remedies herein provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, repair or maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent any act, conduct or use in or about such premises in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1, passed 12-8-1956)
' 151.07 EXCAVATION OF PUBLIC STREETS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate any street or public right-of-way in the village without first obtaining a permit and permission from the village by making application to the Village Clerk-Treasurer. Excavation in streets and avenues shall be made in a manner as to impede travel as little as possible and the time that the excavation shall be opened may be limited by the village. Efficient barricades shall be erected around all trenches and embankments made by such a person within the limits
2006 S-3
10 Tularosa - Land Usage
of any street or right-of-way and red lights shall be maintained thereon from dark to daylight until the street or right-of-way shall be restored to a safe passable condition. At no time during the progress of the work shall sidewalks be unnecessarily blocked of travel. Any excavation shall be compacted to 95% and repaved and the person making the excavation shall be responsible for any repairs for a period of one year from the date that the excavation is repaved.
(Ord. 104, passed 7-5-1983) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.08 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES; PLACEMENT.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Any structure, including a tent, which is not attached to a permanent foundation, or which lacks indoor plumbing. Exempt from this definition are the following:
(a) Any trailer, mobile housing unit or recreational vehicle as defined in this code;
(b) An accessory structure used solely for storage which lacks indoor plumbing, but which otherwise complies with the Uniform Building Code;
(c) A structure from which merchandise or services are not offered for sale to the general public and which is under 100 square feet in area; provided, any structure erected after October 17, 1995, shall be securely anchored to resist movement due to wind, flood or other factors;
(d) A structure from which merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale to the general public and which is under 100 square feet in area, provided that:
1. The structure is open for business within two weeks of its placement on subject property; and
2. The structure is removed from subject property within two weeks of the discontinuance of the sale of merchandise or services to the public or within six months after its placement on the property, whichever is less.
(e) A structure displayed for sale purposes only when securely anchored to resist movement due to wind, flood or other factors;
(f) A structure erected on property owned by the village;
(g) A structure used as a construction office at a site where construction work is being carried on; and
Building Regulations; Construction 11
(h) A structure which complies with the Uniform Building Code, except for attachment to a foundation, used for instruction at a school; and
(I) A structure which is equal to or greater than 100 square feet in area and which is erected for the purpose of conducting a special promotion for a like business in conjunction with and adjacent to the building duly licensed by and operating within the village limits, provided that the structure is erected only once during any three-month period, that the structure remains no longer than a period of 18 consecutive days, to include three weekends, that prior written approval from the Board of Trustees is obtained together with the conditions as the Board of Trustees may require, that a village building permit is obtained, and that the structure is adequately secured to the ground so as to resist movement caused by wind, flood or other factors. Extensions shall only be by special permit as specified in division (B) below. The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the property in a clean and orderly manner. If the applicant fails to clean the property, the Board of Trustees shall contract for the correction of the accumulation of trash or order its correction by the village at the expense of the applicant or owner of the property. The action by the village may jeopardize the approval of future permits.
(B) (1) Except as otherwise provided in division (A) above, no temporary structure shall be located in the village unless a special permit is first obtained for its use from the Board of Trustees. Duration of this special permit shall not exceed three months, and only one renewal shall be permitted.
(2) The Board of Trustees shall grant a special permit only on payment of a filing fee of $100 and a showing at a public hearing that:
(a) The structure is adequately secured to the ground to resist movement due to wind, flood or other factors;
(b) All property owners within 200 feet of the property for which the permit is sought, excluding public rights-of-way, have been notified by first class mail not less than 15 days before the hearing, of the time, place and purpose of the hearing on the issuance of the permit; and
(c) The placement of a temporary structure is not detrimental to the surrounding properties.
(C) Structures which become legal non-conforming uses upon the passage of this section, shall be subject to its provisions two years from the effective date hereof.
(D) No temporary structure shall be located in AA, A, B, C or E zoning districts, nor shall it be used for habitation purposes.
(E) Temporary buildings shall have no utility connections other than temporary electrical connections.
(Ord. 162, passed 10-17-1995)
12 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 151.99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, of such violation, be fined in a sum of not less than $50, nor more than $200, or shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or shall be subject to both such fine or imprisonment in the discretion of the Court trying the case. Each day that any person, firm or corporation shall be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1, passed 12-8-1956; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
2003 S-1
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
152.01 Purpose
152.02 Authority
152.03 Jurisdiction
152.04 Interpretation
152.05 Definitions
152.06 Variances and exceptions
Subdivision Procedure; Fees
152.25 Pre-application
152.26 Preliminary plat procedure
152.27 Final plat procedure
152.28 Review fees
152.29 Suitability of land
152.30 Plats and data for preliminary approval
152.31 Plats and data for final approval
152.32 Alternate summary approval
152.33 Guarantees of performance
152.34 Security and indemnity agreement
152.35 Exempted subdivision procedure
Design Standards
152.45 Street location and arrangement
152.46 Alley location
152.47 Street and alley standards
152.48 Utility improvements
152.49 Public sites and open spaces
152.50 Public sites
152.51 Monuments
152.52 Water rights
152.99 Penalty
13
2004 S-2
14 Tularosa - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 152.01 PURPOSE.
These subdivision regulations are to provide for the harmonious development of the village and its environs in order to establish conditions favorable to the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of citizens of the village.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.02 AUTHORITY.
These land subdivision regulations are authorized by NMSA '' 3-19-1 through 3-20-16, as amended.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.03 JURISDICTION.
These land subdivision regulations shall govern all platting of land within the village and all of the territory lying within three miles of the village's corporate limits or the larger area, as may be provided for from time to time under state law.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.04 INTERPRETATION.
The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements to meet the expressed intent of the subject regulations.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
AREA PLAN. A plat or sketch of any planned future development of undeveloped land which is contiguous to a proposed subdivision and is under control or ownership of the subdivider. Such a plan should indicate general land uses and major arterials.
Subdivisions 15
ARTERIAL STREET. A street which is used primarily for serving large volumes of comparatively high speed traffic from one area of the village to the other.
BIKE PATHS. A portion of the roadway or separate pathway designated for use by bicycles.
BLOCK. A grouping of parcels or lots together in one tract of land that is a unit of an overall subdivision with the parcels of land being the smallest unit.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Governing Body of the village. Final approval of all subdivision plats in the planning and platting jurisdiction of the village rests with this body.
BUILDING LINE. A line established by the setback requirements, as provided herein.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from local streets to the major arterial streets or highways.
COUNTY. Otero County, New Mexico.
COUNTY CLERK. The elected Clerk of the County or the Clerk=s authorized representative.
CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and culminated by a turn-around.
DRAINAGE CHANNEL. A natural water course or indenture for the drainage of surface water.
DRAINAGE PLAN. A plan indicating on-site drainage proposal, the passage of storm waters through the development and safe discharge of run-off onto adjacent lands or facilities. Also, a comprehensive analysis of:
(1) The existing storm drainage conditions of a proposed development; and
(2) The disposal of the increased runoff which is generated by the proposed development.
EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use, for specific purposes, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons.
ENGINEER. A person who is engaged in the practice of engineering and is qualified to so practice as attested by his or her legal registration as a professional engineer in the state.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. Husband, wife, father, stepfather, mother, stepmother, brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister, son, stepson, daughter, stepdaughter, grandson, stepgrandson, granddaughter, stepgranddaughter, nephew and niece, whether related by natural birth or adoption.
IMPROVEMENTS. Infrastructure such as streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, fire hydrants, storm drainage facilities, bike paths, trails and water, sewer and gas systems or parts thereof.
2004 S-2
16 Tularosa - Land Usage
LAND SURVEYOR. A person who engages in the practice of land surveying and is qualified to so practice as attested by his or her legal registration as a land surveyor in the state.
LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. It is also a tract of land described by metes and bounds and held in separate ownership, as shown on the records of the County Assessor.
MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREET. A street of relatively short length that provides direct access to a limited number of abutting residential properties and is designed to discourage its use by through traffic.
MUNICIPAL CODE or CODE. The ordinances of the village, known as the Tularosa Code.
PERFORMANCE BOND. A surety bond made out to the village in an amount equal to the estimated full cost of the improvements; the cost being estimated by the Village Engineer and the surety bond being legally sufficient to secure to the village that the improvements will be constructed in accordance with these regulations.
PLAT or REPLAT. A map, chart, survey or plan certified by a licensed professional surveyor which contains a description of subdivided or resubdivided land with ties to permanent survey monuments.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The total area of land deeded, reserved by plat or otherwise acquired by the village, the county or the state.
ROADWAY. The portion of the street available for vehicular traffic.
SETBACK. The lateral distance between the street or property line and building, gas pump, curb base, display stand or other object.
SIDEWALK. A pedestrian walkway with permanently improved surfacing.
STREET. A public way, which has been dedicated or served by plat other than an alley which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER. An owner or an owner's agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as set forth in these regulations.
SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVIDE. Subdivision for the purpose of approval by the village:
(1) For the area of land within the corporate boundaries of the village, the division of land into two or more parts by platting or by metes and bounds description into tracts for the purposes of:
(a) Sales for building purposes;
2004 S-2
Subdivisions 17
(b) Laying out a municipality or any part thereof;
(c) Adding to a municipality;
(d) Laying out suburban lots.
(2) For the area of land within the extraterritorial subdivision and platting jurisdiction of the village (as defined in NMSA ' 3-20-5), the division of land into two or more parts by platting or by metes and bounds description into tracts of less than five acres in any one calendar year for the purposes of:
(a) Sales for the building purposes;
(b) Laying out a municipality or any part thereof;
(c) Adding to a municipality;
(d) Laying out suburban lots.
However, SUBDIVISION does not include:
(1) The sale or lease of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within a building;
(2) The division of land created by court order where the order creates no more than one parcel per party;
(3) The division of land resulting only in the alteration of parcel boundaries where parcels are altered for the purpose of increasing or reducing the size of contiguous parcels and where the number of parcels is not increased;
(4) The division of land to create burial plots in a cemetery;
(5) The division of land to create a parcel that is sold or donated as a gift to an immediate family member;
(6) The division of land created to provide security for mortgages, liens, or deeds of trust, provided that the division of land is not the result of a seller-financed transaction;
(7) The division of land to create a parcel that is donated to any trust or nonprofit corporation granted an exemption from federal income tax, as described in section 501(c)(3) of the U.S. I.R.S. code of 1986, as amended; school, college, or other institution with a defined curriculum and a student body and faculty which conducts classes on the regular basis; or to any church or group organized for the purpose of divine worship, religious teaching, or other specifically religious activity.
TRAILS. A narrow path designed for use by pedestrians and horseback riders.
2004 S-2
18 Tularosa - Land Usage
VILLAGE. The Village of Tularosa, New Mexico.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY. An attorney employed or retained by the village whose duties include reviewing and approving contracts or agreements entered into by the village.
VILLAGE ENGINEER. A registered Professional Engineer employed or retained by the village whose duties include the review and approval of engineering drawings and/or designs of projects such as drainage, street construction and the like.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03)
' 152.06 VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this regulation would result in a need for variance or exception because of unusual topography, impose unreasonable burdens or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these regulations, the Board of Trustees may vary, modify or waive the requirements. No variance shall be allowed when the variance is requested because of inadequate drainage.
(B) Application for any variation shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed and shall state fully the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon by the subdivider.
(C) In no case shall any variation or modification be contrary to the mandatory requirements of state law. The variation shall not be in conflict with any zoning ordinance and map.
(D) Specifications or supplementary data required by these regulations for a preliminary or final plat may be waived whenever the specifications or date are determined by the Board of Trustees to be unnecessary for the consideration of the plat.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE; FEES
' 152.25 PRE-APPLICATION.
Prior to the fling of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider is urged to confer with village officials so as to become acquainted with these regulations.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
2004 S-2
Subdivisions 18A
' 152.26 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE.
(A) Application for subdivision shall be submitted to the village on prescribed forms.
(B) Two copies of the preliminary plat and supplemental material will be submitted by the subdivider with the written application. These copies will be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and a written report recommending approval, conditional approval or disapproval submitted to the developer.
(C) The Board of Trustees shall examine and review the preliminary plats and final plats presented by the subdivider to determine that the village subdivision regulations and requirements have been considered and are to be provided for in the final plat of a subdivision plan by the subdivider. The Board of Trustees, at its discretion, may recommend approval of the preliminary plat and final plat at the first meeting or it may act at the next regular meeting.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03)
2004 S-2
18 Tularosa - Land Usage
Subdivisions 19
' 152.27 FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE.
(A) An original plat on tracing cloth in ink (or reproducible Mylar) along with supplemental material shall be furnished to the village by the subdivider. The final plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary plat as approved, including any modifications and conditions specified. It may constitute only that part of the preliminary plat that the developer intends to record and develop at that time. The Planning and Zoning or the Board of Trustees shall approve or disapprove a plat within 35 days of the day of final submission of the plat. If the planning authority or Board of Trustees does not act within 35 days, the plat is deemed to be approved, and upon demand, the village shall issue a certificate approving the plat. The person seeking approval of the plat may waive their requirement and agree to an extension of this time period.
(B) It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to file and record with the County Clerk the final plat.
(C) The subdivider may submit a final plat to the Board of Trustees in lieu of a preliminary plat if it is a resubdivision of a lot in an approved subdivision, within the village limits, provided it does not affect any change of water or sewer lines, streets or easements.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 152.28 REVIEW FEES.
A non refundable fee of $500 for each plat, plus $50 for each lot in the subdivision, shall be made payable to the village at the time the application and preliminary plat is submitted.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.29 SUITABILITY OF LAND.
(A) The subdivider shall give consideration to the preservation of trees, scenic points and other community landmarks.
(B) Subdivisions shall be laid out so as to match existing topography insofar as possible.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.30 PLATS AND DATA FOR PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
(A) The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of one inch equaling 100 feet, and be prepared on 18-inch by 24-inch or 24-inch by 36-inch, sheets of Mylar paper. It shall show existing conditions and all proposals, including the following:
(1) Name of proposed subdivision, name and address of subdivider, agent and principal persons preparing the preliminary plat;
2006 S-3
20 Tularosa - Land Usage
(2) Scale and north arrow;
(3) Proposed benchmark locations, proposed location of and method of tie to permanent survey monuments and proposed location and type of subdivision control monuments and descriptions of all monuments found or set;
(4) Plat boundary lines: bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds; distances in feet and hundredths;
(5) Existing conditions of the site and its environs shown on the plat shall include the following:
(a) Present site designation or subdivision name;
(b) Easements on site: Location, width and purpose;
(c) Public right-of-way on and within 150 feet of the site: name, width, type and width of paving;
(d) Utilities on and adjacent to the site:
1. Location and size of water wells, water reservoirs, water lines, sanitary and storm sewers; and
2. Location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street lights. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction, distance and size of nearest lines.
(e) If required by the Board of Trustees, ground elevation on the site based on mean sea level datum as established by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey:
1. For land that slopes less than approximately 1%, show contour lines at intervals of not more than one foot and spot elevations at wall breaks in grade along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions.
2. For land that slopes more than 1%, show contour lines at five-foot intervals and indicate all swales and drainage channels and all bluffs, rock outcroppings and physical barriers affecting site development.
3. Contour lines and site topography shall extend 50 feet beyond the proposed subdivision boundaries.
(f) Existing storm drainage facilities on and adjacent to the site;
2006 S-3
Subdivisions 21
(g) Conditions on adjacent land significantly affecting design of the subdivision: approximate direction and gradients of ground slope, character and location of development and building types;
(h) Zoning on and adjacent to the site;
(i) A statement of ownership, signed by the subdivider; and
(j) Total area of the proposed plat to the nearest one-tenth acre.
(6) Location map showing location of the site in relation to well-known landmarks and village boundaries;
(7) Proposed lot lines and public right-of-way lines; street names; right-of-way and street widths; indicate roadways intended to be private, rights-of-way for public services or utilities and any limitations thereof;
(8) All lots in any subdivision shall meet the requirements hereof and each lot shall be dimensioned in a manner that setbacks, as required hereby, shall be met for any structure or building that may be or will be constructed on the lot; (No platted lot within a subdivision shall contain less square footage than that required by the zoning ordinance.)
(9) Number or letter to identify each proposed lot and block;
(10) Locations, dimensions, approximate areas and purposes of lots proposed to be reserved for the public; and
(11) Sites and approximate area for any multi-family dwellings or non-residential uses.
(B) A report on the proposed method of installing utilities, street paving, curb and gutter, sidewalks and sewer service shall be prepared and submitted to include the approximate time for accomplishing the improvements. The improvements shall be based on the maximum population density allowed in the zoning district in which the subdivision is located.
(C) Written comments where appropriate from village department (police, fire, water).
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03)
' 152.31 PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL.
(A) The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or drafting film such as Mylar or acetate. Drawings shall be on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets and shall be at a scale of one inch equaling 100 feet.
2004 S-2
22 Tularosa - Land Usage
(B) This final plat may be submitted for approval in contiguous section. The final plat shall show:
(1) Title, scale, the north arrow and date of survey;
(2) Plat boundary lines shall be surveyed and shown giving the bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds; (Distances shall be shown in feet and hundredths thereof.)
(3) Location and description of all monuments found or set within the plat area, including bench marks with elevation shown, and property owner;
(4) Zoning or proposed zoning shall be shown with boundaries shown at streets, highways or property lines; (Splitting of lots for zoning purposes shall not be allowed.)
(5) Lot lines and right-of-way lines, existing and proposed; lines to be eliminated shall be dashed; names of streets, right-of-way widths of all streets and alleys; private streets shall be so designated; the radius of all curves; lengths of all tangents on all rights-of-way; accurate dimensions, bearings and deflection angels of all curves;
(6) Location, dimensions, area and purpose of all easements, existing or proposed, and any limitations thereof;
(7) Number or letter to identify each lot and block and the address of each individual lot in accordance with village numbering system, if applicable;
(8) Location, dimensions, area and purposes of lots proposed to be reserved for the public;
(9) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by name and date;
(10) Statement that the subdivision is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owner of the land, acknowledged in a manner required for acknowledgment of deeds;
(11) Signed statements by the subdivider dedicating public rights-of-way and granting all required easements for public use;
(12) Certification and seal by a registered, licensed surveyor of New Mexico in accordance with the laws of the state, certifying the accuracy of the survey and plat, that he or she prepared or supervised preparation of the plat, and that he or she has shown all required easements;
(13) Certification by the village that all streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water, gas, fire hydrants, sewer systems and drainage requirements have been provided, and that the drainage analysis plan has been approved; and
Subdivisions 23
(14) Certification by authorized representatives of the local electric and telephone utilities that their systems' needs have been met.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.32 ALTERNATE SUMMARY APPROVAL.
(A) (1) When a subdivision consists of no more than two parcels of land or is a replat of a previously filed subdivision which does not increase the total number of lots by more than two lots:
(a) All resulting lots meet minimum lot size requirements;
(b) All municipal liens on the subject property have been paid in full;
(c) No provisions are required for utilities, easements, right-of-way or drainage;
(d) All owners of the subject property sign the plat and application; and
(e) None of the lots to be affected by the proposed subdivision have been previously subdivided using the summary subdivision procedure.
(2) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission may review and approve the subdivision provided.
(B) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission may also approve replats which decrease the number of lots of contiguous parcels in a previously filed subdivision, provided that street dedication and utility easements remain the same as on the original plat.
(C) Replats submitted for approval by summary procedures shall include releases by the affected utility companies.
(D) The Village Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to determine whether a replat of a previously approved subdivision or a subdivision of two parcels shall be approved by summary procedures.
(E) Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the Board of Trustees for final decision.
(F) In the absence of an appeal, within 20 days of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final.
2004 S-2
24 Tularosa - Land Usage
(G) The applicant is required to submit to the village the following:
(1) Completed application form, including waiver of public hearing;
(2) Base fee of $100; and
(3) The original Mylar and five copies of a final plat meeting all the five requirements of ' 152.31.
(H) The Planning and Zoning Commission will make an initial determination of eligibility for summary approval. If the proposal is ineligible, the Planning and Zoning Commission will promptly notify the applicant that the full subdivision procedures is required. If the proposal is facially eligible for summary procedure, the Planning and Zoning Commission will review the plat and the Board of Trustees will act at its regular or special meeting.
(I) By providing for the summary subdivision procedure, the village does not waive its rights to require the applicant to satisfy the village's usual requirements for subdivision approval.
(J) Nothing in this section is intended to limit the availability of the certificate of survey procedure contained in NMSA ' 3-20-2, as amended or superseded from time to time, provided that all applicable requirements are met.
(K) Approval by the village of a summary subdivision application will not relieve the applicant of the requirement of approval by the county for subdivisions within the village's extra-territorial platting jurisdiction.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 190, passed 8-19-1998; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03)
2004 S-2
Subdivisions 25
' 152.33 GUARANTEES OF PERFORMANCE.
Before a subdivision plat is placed on the agenda of a Board of Trustees meeting to be considered for a recommendation for final approval, one of the following must be submitted by the subdivider:
(A) A written agreement signed by the subdivider to construct all required improvements after the subdivision receives final approval from the village, but prior to filing and recording the final plat at the County Clerk's Office. The subdivider shall not receive the final plat for filing from the village until all required improvements have been inspected and approved by the Village Engineer or its authorized representative.
(B) If the improvements are not completed by the completion date, the agreement shall be in default and the village may take appropriate action to enforce the agreement. The agreement shall contain, among other provisions, the following:
(1) The subdivider shall make all repairs to his or her construction work and the replacement of defective material or workmanship which may become apparent for a period of three years after work has been completed and accepted by the village.
(2) The subdivider shall agree to supply and install all water lines and sewer lines of approved weight and quality within the subdivision in accordance with village standards, and also outside of the subdivision a sufficient distance to connect with the village's sewer and water system, and to furnish and install approved weight and quality valves, fire hydrants, man-hole rings and covers with sewer stub-outs, defined as y-branch fitting with factory-made clay plug and all appurtenances to the water and sewer systems.
(3) Should the present sewer or water lines leading to the subdivision not be adequate, the subdivider shall agree to bear the cost of additional lines and appurtenances thereto in order to carry the increased load made necessary by the subdivision.
(4) The subdivider shall agree to protect drainage structures, to build bridges, culverts and other drainage facilities in the area that may be necessary to protect the subdivision, the village and other lands in the area from floods because of the development.
(5) The subdivider shall agree to repair all damages to water lines, sewer lines and man-holes at his or her expense.
(6) The subdivider shall agree to retain and pay for the services of a competent registered engineer to inspect all work as the same progresses and make reports to the village; the engineer, paid for by the subdivider, shall be under the direction and control of the village.
2006 S-3
26 Tularosa - Land Usage
(7) Other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or deductions may be required by the Board of Trustees to ensure compliance with these regulations.
(C) In addition to the agreement a form of security shall be filed with the village. The amount of the security must cover the projected cost of all required improvements agreed to by the village. The amount shall be based on the projected costs at the time improvements are scheduled for completion.
(D) The following types of security shall be filed with the village:
(1) Performance bond. A surety bond acceptable to the village to cover estimated costs of improvements.
(2) Escrow account. An account established with a bank or financial institution in the amount of the projected cost of improvements which can only be drawn upon to cover the costs of improvements.
(3) Irrevocable standby letter of credit. Irrevocable authority to draw a draft for the projected cost of improvements.
(a) All security and agreements shall be approved as to form by the Village Attorney prior to submission to the Board of Trustees and shall be submitted with the final plat to the village for approval. After final approval by the village, the agreement establishing the form of security shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
(b) Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements agreed upon, the security and agreement shall be released in writing by the Village Clerk-Treasurer and shall be returned to the developer.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 152.34 SECURITY AND INDEMNITY AGREEMENT.
(A) Prior to presentation of a final plat to the village, the developer shall indicate whether the method used for completion of improvements will be tentative approval prior to filing the plat or acceptance of a security and indemnity agreement by the village.
(B) (1) During the period of tentative approval, (before completion of improvements and filing of the final plat) if a developer wishes to submit an indemnity agreement and security to the village in order to file the plat, the agreement shall specify the amount of time within which the improvements must be completed.
(2) In no case shall the agreement exceed the 22 months for completion under the tentative approval, but must conform to the date 22 months from village approval of the final plat.
2006 S-3
Subdivisions 27
(C) Required elements of an indemnity agreement shall include:
(1) A statement that indemnitor is the developer of the subdivision within the platting jurisdiction of the village and that compliance herewith requires certain guarantees of performance for the development of improvements.
(2) A statement providing for the indemnitor to indemnify the village from any and all costs, damages and legal expenses resulting from the village having to construct improvements in the subdivision, up to a specific dollar amount for all improvements required with final approval of the plat by the village. An accompanying quote or signed contract shall be required.
(3) A statement of the amount of time allowed for the developer to complete the improvements. In no case shall the date exceed 22 months from the date of approval of the final plat by the village. The agreement shall provide that the developer shall be permitted to sell or otherwise dispose of any lot within the subdivision at any time within the 22-month period.
(4) An accompanying letter of credit or irrevocable escrow account instructions or performance bond, to be made a part of the agreement.
(a) The security shall contain specifically named improvements and a description of the method to be used for disbursing funds from the security.
(b) The security shall extend at least 60 days beyond the required date for completion of the improvements.
(5) A statement providing for the remaining funds that have not yet been released for improvements, to be released to the village to the limits of the indemnity agreement, with legal recourse to collect any additional monies expended by the village for completion of the project, should the described improvements not be completed within the time agreed upon.
(D) Upon satisfactory completion of the required improvements and acceptance by the village, the security and indemnity agreement shall be released in writing by the village and shall be returned to the developer.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.35 EXEMPTED SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE.
(A) Eligibility. The exempted subdivision procedure may be used provided that:
(1) The division qualifies under one of the seven exemptions listed in the definition of subdivision;
(2) All resulting lots meet the current applicable minimum lot size requirements;
2006 S-3 Repl.
28 Tularosa - Land Usage
(3) The payment on all outstanding liens are current;
(4) Upon the transfer of any newly created lot by any method, the outstanding assessment on the lot must be paid in full;
(5) All owners of the subject property sign the plat and application;
(6) The exempted subdivision is within the village or within the extra-territorial platting jurisdiction.
(B) Verification of exemption.
(1) Any person claiming entitlement to an exemption under the provisions of this chapter shall file a written claim of exemption on the prescribed form available from the Village Clerk. When there is more than one owner, all owners of record of the property involved shall sign the claim of exemption.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Chairperson shall review the claim of exemption and supporting documents and shall mail written notice of whether the exemption has been approved or denied to the person claiming the exemption within 30 days after receipt of the completed claim of exemption and all required supporting documents. If the proposal is ineligible, the planning authority will promptly notify the applicant that the full subdivision procedure is required. If the proposal is eligible for the exempted procedure the planning authority will forward the exemption to the Mayor for signature.
(3) Approved claims of exemption shall be filed with the Otero County Clerk along with the conveyancing document and/or survey.
(C) Any exempted subdivision that increases the number of lots in the village shall be required to comply with ' 152.52 for each new lot created.
(Ord. 205, passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
DESIGN STANDARDS
' 152.45 STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.
(A) The character, extent, width and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and policies of the Village Board of Trustees, and shall be consistent and appropriate in their relationship to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience, safety and the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets.
(B) Where an arterial or collector street is not shown in the comprehensive plan and there is not an adopted future street line, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
2006 S-3 Repl.
Subdivisions 28A
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood properly approved by the village to meet a particular situation where topographic or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.46 ALLEY LOCATION.
Alleys shall not be provided where other provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, refuse collection and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.47 STREET AND ALLEY STANDARDS.
(A) If rights-of-way for public streets and alleys are needed, they shall be provided in accordance with the standards and requirements described as follows:
(1) Major thoroughfare: 60 feet.
(2) Collector street: 50 feet.
(3) Minor industrial or commercial street: 50 feet.
(4) Minor residential street: 40 feet.
(5) Marginal access street: 40 feet.
2004 S-2
28B Tularosa - Land Usage
Subdivisions 29
(6) Cul-de-sac: 50 feet radius. Streets which terminate in a cul-de-sac shall be no longer than 500 feet.
(7) Alley: 20 feet.
(8) Bike paths and trails, if provided, shall be as follows:
(a) Right-of-way, minimum: ten feet.
(b) Pavement width, if needed: ten feet.
(B) When rights-of-way are required, as stated herein, the developer may be required to provide curb and gutter on both sides of the street, but no more than 50 feet of paving width.
(C) Street jogs with centerline off-sets of less than 100 feet shall not be permitted.
(D) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any major secondary thoroughfare or arterial street at less than 75 degrees and no collector or minor street at less than 60 degrees.
(E) All naming and numbering of streets shall conform to an existing village plan for naming and numbering. Street names shall be used which will not duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Where a proposed street is to be a continuation of an existing street, the proposed street shall have the name of the existing street. The use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, lane, place or court shall not be a distinction sufficient to avoid confusion; therefore, duplicates with different suffixes shall not be used.
(F) Pavement widths shall be measured back-to-back of curbs where curbs are required.
(G) All subdivisions within the corporate limits of the village shall include standard curb and gutter on both sides of the street not closer than 40 feet from the back of one curb to the other with the area between the curbs surfaced with concrete or asphalt meeting the standard specifications of the village unless the Board of Trustees specifically authorizes and approves the subdivision without curb and gutter. Exception to curb and gutter may be waived if there are significant reasons, such as an undue hardship, create a drainage problem, environmentally unfeasible or would not conform to historical or architectural pattern.
(H) All working public ways shall meet or exceed village specifications.
(I) Subdivisions outside the village limits, but within the three-mile platting and planning jurisdiction of the village, will include standard curb, gutter and paving; however, they may be waived under variances of these regulations.
30 Tularosa - Land Usage
(J) Sidewalks may be required in all subdivisions within the village limits. They shall have a minimum width of four feet and shall be constructed in accordance with standard specifications of the village. Any exception shall require the express approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.48 UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) The subdivider shall be responsible for costs of installing water, gas and sewer lines, if provided, of adequate size to serve the development in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and other standard, as may be set by the village in any particular instance, to conform to the existing water and sewer system, but in no case shall there be less than a six-inch water line, and eight-inch sewer line and a two-inch gas line. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the Tularosa Code to the contrary, all water lines to be installed in subdivisions within the village shall be made of no other metal, but cast-iron or some other metal which is capable of conducting an electric charge.
(B) All utility improvements shall meet or exceed village specifications. The subdivider of a subdivision within the village limits shall make necessary arrangements to serve each lot with adequate water of the Tularosa water system. Sources and availability of water supply shall be provided when water services cannot be obtained through the Tularosa water system. Any individual or private system installed within the village limits or within the three-mile limit may be required to be compatible with the Tularosa water system.
(C) The subdivider of subdivisions within the village limits shall be responsible for the installation of fire hydrants. Locations shall be approved by the Village Fire Department. Subdivisions outside the corporate limits shall have an approved fire protection plan and provide the necessary fire hydrants or other protective measures deemed necessary.
(D) Subdivisions outside the village limits, but within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the village shall provide an adequate supply of potable water to each lot by a water system approved by the Environmental Improvement Division (EID) with proper provisions for the maintenance thereof, or shall serve each lot with a water main of the village water system. Where it is feasible and practical for an adequate water supply to be made available for every lot by the individual lot owner then to present evidence to this effect and include deed restrictions on the final plat requiring any individual water supply systems to comply with the requirements of the Environmental Improvement Division.
(E) Subdivisions within the corporate limits of the village shall have sewer lines connected to the sanitary sewer lines connected to the sanitary sewer system of the village in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code then in effect. Sewer lines shall be accessible to each lot within the subdivision. A proper method of sewage disposal shall, by means of an approved sewage treatment plant, be provided when sewer services cannot be obtained through the Tularosa sewage system. The sewers shall be constructed in accordance with standards established by the Village Board of Trustees.
Subdivisions 31
(F) Subdivisions outside the corporate limits, but within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the village, shall connect to a public sanitary sewer system if feasible. Where lots cannot be connected with a public sewer system, provisions must be made for sanitary sewerage, consisting of a central treatment plant or individual disposal devices for each lot. On lots where individual septic tanks are to be utilized, lots shall not be less than three-fourths of an acre in size, and may have to be larger depending on the soil type. The subdivision plat should include deed restrictions requiring that all such disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with Environmental Improvement Division standards. Location of septic tanks should take into consideration possibilities of future connections to a community sewer system. No privies or other primitive liquid waste disposal system may a used.
(G) Subdivisions shall base all required utilities on the maximum population density allowed by the zoning district in which the subdivision is located.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 152.49 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in a general community or master plan is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, the Board of Trustees may require the dedication or reservation of the area. However, the subdivider shall not be required to dedicate more than 5% of the total area of the subdivision to the village for public use, exclusive of streets and alleys.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.50 PUBLIC SITES.
Where deemed essential by the Board of Trustees, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, and specifically in large scale neighborhood unit developments, the Board of Trustees may require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs created by the development for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes. If locations for school are set aside in any proposed subdivision, the School Board shall purchase the lands from the subdivider for school purposes where subdivider has already donated 5% of the total area for parks, playgrounds and other public uses.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
' 152.51 MONUMENTS.
(A) Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points.
(B) The monuments shall be made of metal at least one inch in diameter and 30 inches long.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
2006 S-3
32 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 152.52 WATER RIGHTS.
(A) Any subdivider, prior to the approval of final plat, shall be required to transfer to the village sufficient water rights to serve all lots in the subdivision being presented for approval provided that no water right shall be required for any single lot for which water service from the municipal water system has historically been provided. Provided however, that any individual dividing a single lot into two part within the village limits will not be required to furnish water rights as to the additional lot but this exemption shall only be available once as to the original lot. If, at a later date, this lot is divided again, water rights will have to be given up in accordance with this section, excluding the 49 blocks.
(B) Sufficient water rights shall be defined as the right to divert from either surface or underground sources at least .45 acre feet per annum per lot. Provided that if the subdividers/developers do not have surface or ground water rights, the subdivider/developer will reimburse the village for acquiring water rights and transfer of these water rights for use in the Tularosa Municipal Water System.
(C) The water rights to be acceptable to the village must have been accepted for filing as prima facie evidence of the right with the State Engineer.
(D) The water rights shall be deemed to be acceptable when the State Engineer has recognized or authorized a transfer of the water rights and the place of diversion, change of purpose of use to municipal so that the water rights may be incorporated and used in the municipal water system by diversion from a surface source or a completed functional well for diversion from an underground basin.
(Ord. 169, passed 8-21-1996; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-14-2003; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 152.99 PENALTY.
(A) In addition to other penalties and remedies provided by law, any owner or agent of the owner, of any land located within the planning and platting jurisdiction of the village who transfers or sells the land prior to approval and recordation of the necessary plat with the County Clerk, as required in these regulations, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be penalized in the manner prescribed by law. The description of the land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transferring of land shall not exempt the transaction from the penalties.
(B) Any person who records with the County Clerk any plat in violation of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a violation of these regulations and state law and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500. Also, all village provided utilities and services shall be withheld or withdrawn until the time as these regulations are complied with, as provided by state law.
(Ord. 163, passed 10-17-1995)
2006 S-3
CHAPTER 153: SIGNS
Section
153.01 Purpose
153.02 Definitions
153.03 Permit required
153.04 Design
153.05 Size
153.06 Location and position
153.07 Lighting
153.08 Signs not requiring permits
153.09 Maintenance
153.10 Removal of obsolete business signs
153.11 Removal of unlawful signs
' 153.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the general welfare, health, safety and order within the village through standards, regulations and procedures governing the erection, use and/or display of devices, signs or symbols serving as visual communicative media to persons situated within or upon public rights-of-way or private properties. The regulations set forth on this chapter are intended to preserve the special qualities inherent in the village that attract tourists and residents alike, and that are the basis of the village's economic stability and growth.
(Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008)
' 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MARQUEE SIGN. A movable outdoor sign structure with interchangeable lettering. In some cases marquee signs have internal illumination
MONUMENT SIGN. An outdoor sign attached to the ground atop a low fixed structure less than five feet high, as opposed to a pedestal sign. The supporting structure usually has a footprint greater than the sign itself.
33
2009 S-6
34 Tularosa - Land Usage
PEDESTAL SIGN. An outdoor sign attached to the ground atop a tall fixed structure of single or multiple posts, as opposed to a monument sign.
SIGN AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any outdoor sign, display, figure, painting, poster billboard or similar thing designed, intended or used to advertise or inform the public of goods or services sold on premises where the advertising structure is located, or device is attached to, hung from, painted on or displayed in any manner from any building, tree, fence, structure, property or land, intended primarily to attract attention or inform persons not on the premises, except as follows:
(1) Flags or governmental insignia, excepting when used in commercial displays;
(2) Embellishment of architectural features of buildings or premises, except letters, animated components, trademarks, moving or apparently moving lights and advertising;
(3) Illustration of names of occupants, post office box numbers and property numbers where smaller than one square foot;
(4) Posting, legal notifications, traffic and other directional signs erected or required to be erected by government bodies;
(5) Private traffic signs bearing no advertising matter; and
(6) Advertising signage included on a commercial bench permitted on specific locations.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008)
' 153.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) A sign permit is required for all signs not specifically exempted in ' 153.08. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect within the village any non-exempted sign or other advertising structure without first obtaining a sign permit from the Village Clerk or Deputy, and signing an affidavit stating the individual or business understands and will comply herewith.
(1) The fee for such permit shall be payable at the time of approval as follows: less than nine square feet, $25; nine square feet or more, $50.
(2) The applicant is responsible to coordinate with all agencies involved and to obtain all necessary endorsements.
(B) A sign permit shall contain the following:
(1) Name, address and phone number of applicant;
2009 S-6
Signs 35
(2) Name, address, phone number and signature of property owner if different from applicant.
(3) Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected;
(4) Two blueprints or drawings of the plans and specifications to include:
(a) Dimensions (length, height and width);
(b) Material, including lighting, if required;
(c) Location, height and method of attachment to the building or ground;
(d) Any electrical permit required and issued for this sign(s); and
(e) Position of sign in relation to nearby building structures.
(C) The application shall be reviewed by the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission to assure conformance with the current ordinances.
(D) If the application is found to be in conformance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall endorse approval on the application. Upon payment of the prescribed fee, the Village Clerk or Deputy shall sign and issue the sign permit as the approving authority. A copy of the signed permit issued shall be made part of the consent agenda.
(E) If the application is found to be in nonconformance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall endorse on the application the reasons the application is not in conformance, return the application to the Village Clerk or Deputy, who shall notify the applicant that no permit can be issued without approval of the Governing Body. If a hearing is necessary, the Village Clerk or Deputy shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing before the Governing Body,
(F) A sign permit shall become null and void:
(1) If the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and erected within a period of six months after the date of the permit.
(2) Thirty days after a business closes or ceases to operate if no new business is established at that location. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building to see that any sign is removed which pertains to the business that was closed.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see ' 10.99
2009 S-6
36 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 153.04 DESIGN.
(A) The design of each sign or advertising structure shall conform with the Frontier, Western, Territorial or Spanish style architecture existing in Tularosa.
(B) Sign content shall be limited to business name, operating hours, and product or service information.
(1) Slogans and other subjective content should be avoided.
(2) Monument signs are recommended in place of pedestals wherever lot size and location permit.
(C) Signs may include a wide range of warm colors from matte black to ivory, preferably earth tones to blend with the natural surroundings.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008)
' 153.05 SIZE.
(A) Allowable amount of signage. The allowable amount of signage shall be determined by a general formula based on the square footage of the front of the building. Unless otherwise stated, the following standard formula will apply:
Amount of signage (in square feet) = 0.076 x square footage of the front of the building as designated by the owner or leaseholder
(B) Commercial businesses, all categories.
(1) The amount of signage shall be computed using the standard formula in division (A). This amount may be used for wall-mounted, freestanding, or a combination of both.
(2) The amount of signage for a business conducted on a property with no permanent structures or structures less than 250 square feet shall be allowed one freestanding sign, based on the linear feet of lot frontage as follows:
Lot Frontage
Sign Area
(linear feet)
(square feet)
0-150
151-300
301-600
3264100
2009 S-6
Signs 37
(3) Lots in excess of 600 linear feet shall be allowed two freestanding signs, provided they are separated by a minimum distance of 300 feet.
(C) Buildings with multiple tenants.
(1) In the case of more than one business located within one building (but less than four businesses), the total amount of signage square footage for all business within the building shall not exceed the amount allowed by the standard formula in division (A) above.
(2) The owner of the building shall determine the percentage of the total allowable sign size which each business within the building is allowed.
(D) Shopping centers.
(1) To be designated a shopping center, four or more shops or businesses must be on the premises. Shopping centers may be comprised of one or more tracts or ownerships maintaining a center identity under written agreement.
(2) A shopping center is allowed one freestanding sign for the purpose of identifying the center and the businesses therein.
(a) The size of the freestanding sign shall be computed from the formula of one square foot of sign space per each linear foot of the designated front of the property, with a maximum of 200 feet allowed.
(b) At least 50% of the center sign shall designate the shopping center, and the remaining shall or may be used for riders to advertise the individual businesses within the center.
(3) A center is also allowed wall-mounted signs using the standard formula in division (A) above.
(4) A temporary freestanding site sign may be allowed for a business within a center prior to the erection of a center sign. These signs must be joint signs with other businesses within the center, and shall be removed within 30 days following construction of the center sign.
(E) Service station canopy signs.
(1) The area allowable for freestanding canopies over service station service islands or like installations shall be calculated based on 1.5 times the horizontal plane of the canopy structure times 0.076.
(2) Not less than 25% of the allowable sign area shall be on the canopy facade.
2009 S-6
38 Tularosa - Land Usage
(3) The allowable area for canopy signs shall be in addition to allowable sign area for other structures on the premises
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-14-2003; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008)
' 153.06 LOCATION AND POSITION.
(A) A wall sign must be within the silhouette of the building to which it is attached.
(B) A freestanding sign shall not exceed the business building height, and no sign shall be located in such a way as to restrict driver or pedestrian visibility on any adjacent streets or sidewalks.
(C) No sign shall be located within five feet of a highway right-of-way.
(D) No freestanding signs shall be erected or maintained off the premises of the advertised business.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 153.07 LIGHTING.
(A) Light from any source intended to illuminate a sign shall be shaded, shielded or directed in such a way so that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect the safe vision of pedestrians or vehicle operators on public of private streets, driveways, or parking areas, and shall not adversely affect any surrounding premises.
(B) No flashing or moving forms of illumination or electronically controlled displays are permitted, and no portable marquee signs are permitted.
(C) No exposed neon will be used or erected in any outdoor sign.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 153.08 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS.
(A) Special political signs on private property shall be allowed, up to a total area of six square feet per sign for each premise in a residential zone, and up to 32 square feet in a nonresidential zone.
(1) Such signs may be erected no earlier than 45 days prior to any primary election, general election or municipal election.
(2) Such signs must be removed within ten days after the election to which the sign pertains or the termination of a candidacy.
2009 S-6
Signs 38A
(B) One construction sign, not to exceed 32 square feet, shall be allowed for all building contractors, one for all professional firms and one for all lending institutions on premises under construction, for a total not to exceed three signs. All signs shall be removed within 14 days of the beginning of the intended use of the project.
(C) Real estate signs are allowed as follows, when located on property for sale, rent or lease:
(1) One temporary real estate sign located on the property for each street frontage of developed premises or undeveloped lot of less than two acres.
(a) In residential zones, signs shall not exceed six square feet.
(b) In nonresidential zones, signs shall not exceed eight square feet on improved lots, and 16 square feet on unimproved lots.
(2) One temporary real estate sign, not exceeding 16 square feet, shall be allowed for each lot of two acres or more. If the lot has multiple frontages, one additional sign, not exceeding 16 square feet, shall be allowed, for a maximum of two sign units in the lot.
(3) All signs shall be removed within 14 days of sale or completed leasing.
(4) Real estate signs shall not exceed five feet in height.
(D) Banners, placards, or temporary signs.
(1) Banners, tent placards or signs of a temporary nature shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 14 days in any one quarter of a calendar year, unless additional days are approved by the Governing Body, in which case the owner shall apply for a sign permit.
(2) Banners, tent placards or signs of a temporary nature must be clear of sidewalk access.
(Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008)
' 153.09 MAINTENANCE.
(A) All signs will be kept in good repair and painted or maintained in an appropriate and safe manner.
(B) (1) Any sign deemed in disrepair by the Governing Body or its designated representative will be considered to be nonconforming to this chapter.
2009 S-6
38B Tularosa - Land Usage
(2) After receipt of a written notice, the owner will make the necessary repairs or remove the sign within 30 days of the notice.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 153.10 REMOVAL OF OBSOLETE BUSINESS SIGNS.
(A) Any sign now or hereafter existing, along with its supports, which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the premises, shall be taken down or removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure or land upon which the sign may be found, within ten days after written notice from the village.
(B) For failure to comply with the notice within the time specified in the order, the village is hereby authorized to cause removal of the sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which the sign is attached.
(Ord. 161, passed 5-16-1995; Am. Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 153.11 REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
(A) Any sign existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, for which the necessary approval and sign permit was not obtained pursuant to the provisions of any previous code, shall continue to be illegal and shall be removed or brought into conformance with this chapter.
(B) Further, the owner thereof shall continue to be liable for the penalties described in ' 10.99
(Ord. 226, passed 4-15-2008)
2009 S-6
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
154.01 Title and purpose
154.02 Definitions
Comprehensive Zoning Regulations and Standards
154.15 General regulations
154.16 RA Residential/Agricultural
154.17 R-1 Single Family Residential
154.18 R-2 Multiple Family Residential
154.19 R-MH Mobile Home Residential
154.20 HR Historical Residential
154.21 C Commercial
154.22 HC Historical Commercial
154.23 D Industrial
154.24 Nonconforming uses
154.25 Exceptions and modifications
154.26 Special uses
154.27 Off-street parking
Administration and Enforcement
154.35 Required permits
154.36 Board of Appeals
154.37 Code Enforcer
154.38 Recently annexed territory
154.39 Changes and amendments
154.99 Penalty
39
2003 S-1
40 Tularosa - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 154.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
(A) This chapter shall be known, referred to and recited as the Comprehensive Zoning Law of the village.
(B) The official zoning plan for the village is hereby established and adopted to serve the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and to provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources.
(Am. Ord. 203, passed 4-15-2003; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building, attached to or detached from the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and not used as a place of habitation.
APARTMENT HOUSE. A building designed or used for three or more dwelling units, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each unit.
BED AND BREAKFAST. A building within which temporary lodging with meals is provided for compensation.
BOARDINGHOUSE. A building containing not more than 15 rooms with sleeping facilities where meals or lodging and meals are provided for compensation and by previous arrangement to three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING, MAIN. The building occupied by the primary use.
BUILDING SITE. The ground area for a building or structure together with all yards and open space.
2004 S-2
Zoning 41
CARPORT. A canopy or shed open on two or more sides and attached to the main building, for the purpose of providing shelter for one or more vehicles.
CHILD CARE FACILITY. The use of a structure or portion thereof for the care of three or more children for compensation. Includes nursery, day care center, kindergarten.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections which allows a vehicle driver to see approaching vehicles. Nothing is permitted more than three feet high measured from street curb point or edge of street to obstruct a sight line which shall be the front street and side street lines of a corner lot and a line connecting points 30 feet distance from the intersection of the property line of such lot.
CLINIC. A building or portion thereof designed for, constructed or under construction or alteration for or used by two or more physicians, surgeons, dentists, psychiatrists, physiotherapists or practitioners in related specialties or a combination of persons in these professions.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE FAMILY. One or more connected rooms and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes, but not including a recreation vehicle or travel trailer, permanently installed on a permanent foundation and consistent with applicable aesthetics standards which may be adopted by village ordinance, which has received a permit from the village or another permitting agency with jurisdiction, and the structure is either:
(1) Constructed to the standards adopted by the village and other technical codes, as of the date of the unit's construction; or
(2) A multi-section manufactured home with a manufacture date not earlier than 12 years prior to the current date when application is made to erect the structure.
FAMILY.
(1) One or more persons who are related by blood or marriage living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities, or a group of not more than four persons living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities on a non-profit, cost sharing basis.
(2) The usual domestic servants residing on the premises shall be considered as part of the FAMILY.
FILLING STATION. Any building or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, lubricants or tires, and indoor car washing, minor motor adjustments and flat tire repair when incidental to the conduct of a filling station.
2004 S-2
42 Tularosa - Land Usage
GRADE. The elevation of the ground at a building or building site.
GUEST HOUSE. An attached or detached unit used as an accessory building to the primary single family home and not rented or otherwise conducted as a business. A GUEST HOUSE shall not exceed 600 square feet outside dimensions.
HOME OCCUPATION. A professional occupation conducted in dwellings and apartments, including that of a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, clergyperson or other similar professional person and dressmaking or tailoring; provided no person shall engage in such professional occupation, dressmaking or tailoring, other than those who reside on the premises; and provided further that in no case shall more than 25% of the floor area of any dwelling, exclusive of any accessory building, be used for any one or more of the said occupations; and provided that no HOME OCCUPATION shall be permitted in an accessory building; and provided further that no windows or other display or sign be used to advertise such occupancy other than single sign not more than 8 inches in width and 36 inches in length.
HOTEL. A building used as an abiding place of more than 15 persons who for compensation are lodged with or without meals and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours.
INSTITUTION. A building or group of buildings designed or used for non-profit, charitable or public service purposes of providing board, lodging and health care for persons aged, indigent or infirm, or a building or group of buildings for the purpose of performing educational or religious services and offering board and lodging to persons enrolled for training.
LODGING HOUSE. A building containing not more than 15 rooms with sleeping facilities where lodging only is provided for compensation and by previous arrangement to three or more persons but not exceeding 15 persons.
LOT. A parcel of land occupied or which may be hereinafter occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces and parking spaces as are required under this chapter and having its principal frontage upon an officially approved street or place, or upon a park or parkway provided such parcel of land abuts also on a street or place.
(1) LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
(2) LOT, DEPTH OF. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
(3) LOT, WIDTH OF. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
2003 S-1
Zoning 43
(4) LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a frontage on two approximately parallel streets or places.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the Otero County Clerk; or a parcel of land which became legally established and defined by deed or contract on or before the effective date of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable housing structure larger than 40 feet in body length, 8 feet in width or 11 feet in overall height, designed for and occupied by no more than one family for living and sleeping purposes that is not constructed to the standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and the Housing and Urban Development Zone Code 2 or Uniform Building Code, as amended to the date of the unit's construction or built to the standards of any municipal building code.
MODULAR HOME. A pre-manufactured structure as defined in NMSA ' 3-21A-2, as amended from time to time. MODULAR HOMES must meet UBC standards and be listed as approved by the New Mexico State Construction Industries Division. (See list of current approved manufacturers in the village office.)
MULTI-SECTION MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home that is a single family dwelling with a heated area of at least 36 by 24 feet and at least 864 square feet, and constructed in a factory to the standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and the Housing and Urban Development Zone Code 2 or the Uniform Building Code, as amended to the date of the unit's construction, and installed consistent with the Manufactured Housing Act and with the rules made pursuant thereto relating to permanent foundations.
NONCONFORMING USE. A building or land which does not conform with the height, area or use regulations of the district in which it is located.
NURSING or CONVALESCENT HOME. A building designed or used in whole or in part for the care of ill, senile or otherwise infirm persons residing on the premises.
PARKING SPACE. An impervious, hard-surfaced area enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 160 square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street, place or alley by an impervious hard- surfaced driveway at least eight feet in width which affords unobstructed ingress and egress for automobiles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A site zoned to provide temporary parking for recreational vehicles.
2003 S-1
44 Tularosa - Land Usage
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES (RVs). Self-contained dwelling units, factory built and assembled, designed for conveyance on their own wheels, designed and constructed especially for short-term occupancy and including vehicles commonly referred to as motor homes, pick-up campers and small trailers, not to exceed 44 feet in length.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of the building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joist, roof, rafter, foundation, pile or retaining wall or similar components, or in any building line of the building.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
STRUCTURE, MAIN. A building within which is conducted the principal use of the property.
USE, PERMITTED. A principal allowed use, an accessory use, or a special use specifically allowed.
USE, PROHIBITED. A use which is not specifically allowed.
YARD, FRONT. A yard between the front line of a building and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR. A yard between the extreme rear line of a building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE. A yard between the side lot line and the nearest part of the main building.
(Am. Ord. 203, passed 4-15-2003; Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 209, passed 1-20-04)
COMPREHENSIVE ZONING REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
' 154.15 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
(A) Establishment of districts. In order to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes, to regulate and restrict the height and size of the buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered, the size of yard and other open spaces and the density of population, the village is hereby divided into the following zones:
(1) RA Residential/Agricultural (former AA Suburban);
(2) R-1 Single Family Residential (former A);
2004 S-2
Zoning 45
(3) R-2 Multiple Family Residential (former B);
(4) R-MH Mobile Home Residential (former E Trailer);
(5) HR Historical Residential;
(6) C Commercial;
(7) HC Historical Commercial;
(8) D Industrial.
(B) Boundaries of zones.
(1) The boundaries of the zones are shown on the map entitled Village of Tularosa Zoning District Map, the original of which is on file with the Clerk of the village and this map, together with all the notations, references and other information shown thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and has the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described herein.
(2) The boundaries of the above-mentioned zones, as set out on the zoning map, are hereby described as follows:
(a) Class RA Residential/Agricultural.
1. All that area within the following described boundaries: beginning at a point on the west right-of-way line of Highway 54, 525 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Alamo Street; thence in a westerly direction perpendicular with Highway 54, a distance of 150 feet; thence in a northerly direction parallel to Highway 54 to the north corporate limits; thence east along the corporate limits to Highway 54; thence in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way line of Highway 54 to the point of beginning.
2. Also that area within the following described boundaries: beginning at a point on U. S. Highway 54, which is in direct line with the north side of an alley in the Sierra Terraces Subdivision, running east and west; thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of way line of Highway 54 to the north corporate limits; a distance of 150 feet; thence in a southerly direction parallel to Highway 54 to the point of beginning.
(b) Class R-1 Single Family Residential. All of that area within the corporate limits of the village left in black or white on the zoning map and not otherwise included in the description of any other district.
2003 S-1
46 Tularosa - Land Usage
(c) Class R-2 Multiple Family Residential. All of that area with the corporate limits of the village marked in blue on the zoning map.
(d) Class R-MH Mobile Home Residential. All of that area within the following described boundaries:
1. That land bounded by Central Avenue on the north, Bookout Road on the east, Padilla Lane on the south, and a line 250 feet east of and parallel to First Street on the west.
2. That land bounded by West Fourth Street on the north, La Luz Avenue on the east, West First Street on the south and the city limits on the west.
3. That land bounded by Higuera Street on the north, First Street on the east, Darby Lane on the South and U.S. Highway 54-70 on the west.
(e) Class HR Historical Residential. All of that area within the following described boundaries: beginning at a point at the intersection of Higuera and Eighth Street, thence in a northerly direction along Eighth Street to Alamo Street, thence in an easterly direction to First Street, thence in a southerly direction to Higuera Street, thence westerly along Higuera Street to the point of beginning, except for that area described below as HC Historical Commercial.
(f) Class HC Historical Commercial. All of that area within the corporate limits of the
village described as follows:
1. Beginning at the west right-of-way line of Highway 54-70 and Higuera Street, thence in a westerly direction to Fifth Street; thence in a northerly direction along Fifth Street to Encino Street; thence in an easterly direction along Encino Street to a point 150 feet west of the west right-of-way line of Highway 54-70; thence in a northerly direction parallel to Highway 54-70 to Alamo Street, thence east to the west right-of-way line of Highway 54; thence in a southerly direction along Highway 54 to the point of beginning.
2. Also that area beginning at the east line of Highway 54-70 and Higuera Street; thence east to Second Street; thence north to Fresno Street; thence west to Third Street; thence north to Encino Street; thence westerly along Encino Street to a point 150 feet east of the east right-of-way line of Highway 54-70 to the north side of Alamo Street; thence in a southerly direction along Highway 54-70 to the point of beginning.
(g) Class C Commercial. All of that area within the corporate limits of the village described as follows:
2003 S-1
Zoning 47
1. Beginning at east right-of-way line of Highway 54 and 70 at the southern corporate limits of the village; thence westerly along said corporate limits, a distance of 160 feet; thence in a northerly direction parallel to the west right-of-way line of Highway 54 and 70 to Higuera Street; thence east to the west right-of-way line of Highway 54-70; thence in a southerly direction along Highway 54-70 to the point of beginning.
2. Also that area beginning at the west right-of-way line of Highway 54-70 and Alamo Street, thence in a westerly direction along Alamo Street to a point 150 feet west of the west right-of-way line of Highway 54-70; thence in a northerly direction parallel to Highway 54 a distance of 525 feet from the north side of Alamo Street; thence east to the west right-of-way line of Highway 54; thence in a southerly direction along Highway 54 to the point of beginning.
3. Also that area within the following described boundaries: beginning at the east line of Highway 54-70 at the southern corporate limits of the village, thence easterly along the corporate limits a distance of 160 feet; thence in a northerly direction parallel to Highway 54-70 to Higuera Street; thence in a southerly direction along Highway 54-70 to the point of beginning.
4. Also that area within the following described boundaries: beginning at the right-of-way line of Highway 54 and 70 and the north side of Alamo Street; thence easterly along the north side of Alamo Street to the west side of First Street; thence in an easterly direction to an alley running east and west in the Baldwin Subdivision; thence along the alley to Bookout Road; thence south perpendicular to Highway 70 to a point which is 150 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Highway 70; thence easterly parallel to Highway 70 to the east corporate limits; thence north to the south right-of-way line of Highway 70, thence in a westerly direction along the right-of-way line to a point of beginning.
5. Along the area within the following described boundaries to wit: beginning at point on the north right-of-way line of Highway 70 which is the southeast corner of the Tularosa Gardens Subdivision; thence north along the east boundary of the subdivision to the south side of an alley, which is 90 feet from said right-of-way line; thence in a westerly direction along the south side of said alley to the west boundary of the Tularosa Gardens Subdivision; thence north along the boundary to a point 150 feet from the north right-of-way line of Highway 70; thence in a westerly direction parallel to the east boundary of the Sierra Terraces Subdivision, located 68.7 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Highway 70; thence north to the north side of the alley; thence west to Highway 54; thence in an easterly direction along the right-of-way line of Highway 70 to the point of beginning.
6. Also that certain tract of land in the form of a triangle at the intersection of Highways 54 and 70, as shown on the Zoning District Map.
2003 S-1
48 Tularosa - Land Usage
7. Also that tract of land designated as Hortaliza 103 on the map of the Tularosa Townsite filed in 1885 in the Office of the Probate Court in Doha Ana County, New Mexico, a copy of
which is on file in the office of the Otero County Clerk.
(h) Class D Industrial. All of that area within the following described boundaries:
1. A strip of land 150 feet in width on the east and west side of the right-of-way line of the Southern Pacific Railroad beginning at the southern corporate limits and proceeding in a northerly direction for the north corporate limits.
2. Also the area within the following described boundaries to wit: all of Hortaliza 103 and the west two-thirds of Hortaliza No 37 of the Townsite of Tularosa, as the same is shown on the map of Probate Court in Dona Ana County, New Mexico, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Otero County Clerk.
(3) In cases where zone boundaries, as shown on the map, do not coincide or approximately coincide with street lines, alley lines or lot lines, and no dimensions are shown, or set forth herein, the location of the zone boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map.
(C) Vacation of streets. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the Board of Trustees, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of same, and all area included therein shall then henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended zones.
(D) Used allowed; exceptions. No building or land shall hereinafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations as set forth in this chapter, with the exception of legal nonconforming buildings destroyed by fire, storm or other act of God or the public enemy; provided the restoration is accomplished with no increase in cubical content and no increase in floor area over the buildings existing immediately prior to damages.
(E) Location of buildings. Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot in conformance with applicable setback requirements provided in this chapter and, in no case, shall there be more than one main building on one lot.
(F) Reduction in area. No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family or other open space requirements of this chapter are not maintained. Minimum yards, parking and other open spaces, including lot area per family required for a permitted use, shall not be considered as yard or open space requirements for any use occupying another lot.
(G) Interpretation, purpose and conflict. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, these shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health,
2003 S-1
Zoning 49
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or requires larger open spaces or larger lots that are imposed or required by such ordinances or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.16 RA RESIDENTIAL/AGRICULTURAL ZONE.
(A) Purpose. This zone is intended to encourage a suitable environment for single family residential use in large parcels of land on the periphery of the built up portions of the village and to provide a low density of population.
(B) Uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Farming, including the usual farm buildings and structures, animal raising;
(2) Truck and flower gardening, nurseries and greenhouses;
(3) One single family dwelling unit per lot;
(4) Churches and temples;
(5) Public or private elementary and high schools and public and private nursery schools and kindergartens;
(6) Public and private conservation projects;
(7) Public parks, parkways and playgrounds;
(8) Private clubs and recreational uses, except commercial amusement enterprises operated for private profit;
(9) Temporary, unenclosed roadside stands offering for sale only farm or truck garden produce which are produced on the premises;
(10) Institutions of an educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic or similar nature;
(11) Home occupations;
2004 S-2
50 Tularosa - Land Usage
(12) Accessory buildings and use customarily incidental to any of the above uses; and
(13) Bulletin boards for churches, institutions or public building and signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area, pertaining to the lease, hire of or sale or use of a building or premises; provided, however, that not more than one sign of the above character shall be permitted and shall be so located as to cause no traffic hazard.
(C) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet;
(2) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(3) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet;
(4) The minimum lot size per single family dwelling shall be 6,000 square feet;
(5) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(D) Area regulations.
(1) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, one on each side of the buildings, having a combined width of not less than 25% of the width of the lot, provided that, in no case, shall either side yard be less than five feet and provided further, that the combined width of the two side yards need not exceed 21 feet.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 15 feet.
(3) Lot area per family. Every lot or tract of land upon which a dwelling is erected shall have an area of not less than 6,000 square feet per family; provided, however, that a single-family dwelling may be constructed upon any lot of record existing at the time of adoption of this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 209, passed 1-20-04)
' 154.17 R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
(A) Permitted uses. A building, not including a trailer, or land shall be used for the following purposes:
(1) One single-family dwelling per lot;
2004 S-2
Zoning 51
(2) Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated by city, state or federal agencies;
(3) Public libraries and museums;
(4) Public or private elementary and high schools and public or private nursery schools or kindergartens;
(5) Private recreational uses, such as tennis courts, swimming pools, operated exclusively for private use and not for commercial purposes;
(6) Churches and temples;
(7) Home occupations; and
(8) Accessory buildings including private garages and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business.
(B) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet;
(2) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(3) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet;
(4) The minimum lot size per single family dwelling unit shall be 6,000 square feet;
(5) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 209, passed 1-20-04)
' 154.18 R-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
(A) Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes:
2004 S-2
52 Tularosa - Land Usage
(1) Any use permitted in R-1 Single Family Residential;
(2) Boarding houses and lodging houses;
(3) Home occupations, provided that professional persons engaging in the home occupations may employ not more than two assistants;
(4) Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary or philanthropic nature. but not penal or mental institutions;
(5) Multiple family dwellings;
(6) Private clubs and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business;
(7) Private schools offering instruction in accounting, secretarial work, business administration, the fine or illustrative arts and similar subjects, except that no dancing, music or trade schools shall be permitted;
(8) Nursing and convalescent homes;
(9) Signs not exceeding six square feet in area of a permanent character and pertaining to the offering for rent of rooms in the main buildings;
(10) Tourist homes; and
(11) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same and not involving the conduct of a business, including storage garages where the lot is occupied by a multiple dwelling, apartment hotel, club, hospital or institutional building.
(B) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet; on through lots the required yard shall be on both streets;
(2) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(3) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet;
(4) The minimum lot size per single family or multiple family dwelling shall be 6,000 square feet;
2003 S-1
Zoning 53
(5) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.19 R-MH MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL
(A) Permitted uses.
(1) Any use permitted in R-1 Single Family Residential;
(2) Permanently placed mobile homes;
(3) Mobile home parks.
(B) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet;
(2) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(3) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet;
(4) The minimum lot or tract size per mobile home unit shall be 6,000 square feet. In any mobile home park the minimum lot or tract size per mobile home space shall be not less than 4,000 feet;
(5) No building shall exceed 15 feet in height.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.20 HR HISTORICAL RESIDENTIAL.
(A) Purpose.
(1) This zone and the Historical Commercial Zone are established to encompass the Forty Nine Blocks Historical District.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Any use permitted in R-1 Single Family Residential.
2003 S-1
54 Tularosa - Land Usage
(C) Setback, area, end height restrictions.
(1) The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet;
(2) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(3) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 15 feet;
(4) The minimum lot or tract size per mobile home unit shall be 6,000 square feet;
(5) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.21 C COMMERCIAL.
(A) Permitted uses. A building on land shall be used only for the following purpose:
(1) Any use permitted in R-2 Multiple Family Residential;
(2) Amusement places of theaters, except open air and drive-in theaters;
(3) Auto sales rooms;
(4) Auto service and repair establishments, subject to regulations in Chapter 93;
(5) Banks;
(6) Barber shops, beauty parlors, massage or similar personal service shops;
(7) Clinics;
(8) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or similar retail trade employing not more than five persons on the premises;
(9) Service stations;
(10) Storage units;
(11) General retail service and repair establishments similar to those enumerated in this chapter
2003 S-1
Zoning 55
but employing not more than ten persons on the premises, exclusive of drivers or employees who spend the greater part of their working time away from the premises;
(12) Hospitals;
(13) Hospitals or clinics for animals, except that no open kennels shall be maintained on the premises;
(14) Hotels;
(15) Laundries employing not more than five persons exclusive of drivers or other employees who spend the greater part of their working time away from the premises;
(16) Laundromats;
(17) Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (combined operation) employing not more than ten persons exclusive of drivers or other employees who spend the greater part of their working time away from the premises;
(18) Locksmith shops;
(19) Medical and dental clinics;
(20) Messenger and telegraph service stations;
(21) Milk distributing stations, but not involving any bottling on the premises;
(22) Nursing and convalescent homes;
(23) Offices of physicians, surgeons, dentists, psychiatrists, physiotherapists, lawyers, accountants, engineers and other professional uses;
(24) Parking spaces and lots for parking automobiles;
(25) Pharmacies, drugstores, restaurants, flower shops and retail stores;
(26) Photographers studios;
(27) Plumbing shops;
(28) Printing shops;
2003 S-1
56 Tularosa - Land Usage
(29) Restaurants;
(30) Shoe repairing shops, employing not more than five persons on the premises exclusive of drivers or other employees who spend the greater part of their working time away from the premises;
(31) Shops for the repair of electrical and radio equipment and other similar commodities, employing not more than five persons on the premises, exclusive of drivers or employees who spend the greater part of their working time away from the premises;
(32) Stores or shops for the conduct of a retail business;
(33) Tinsmithing shops employing not more than five persons, exclusive of drivers or other employees who spend the greater part of their working time away from the premises;
(34) RV Parks;
(35) Undertaking establishments;
(36) Used car sales lots, provided the lots shall not be used to store wrecked automobiles;
(37) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above listed uses, including sign or bulletin board relating only to services, articles and products offered within the building to which the sign is attached;
(38) The property line of an adult book store shall not be located within 300 feet of the property line of a school or church.
(B) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) Setback, area and height regulations for dwelling units are the same as in R-2 Multiple Family Residential;
(2) No front yard is required;
(3) The minimum side yard setback shall he five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(4) No rear yard is required, except where a lot abuts upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a rear yard or not less than 15 feet;
(5) Any building used primarily for the previously enumerated uses may not have more than 25% of the door area devoted to storage purposes incidental to the primary uses;
(6) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
2006 S-3
Zoning 57
' 154.22 HC HISTORICAL COMMERCIAL
(A) Purpose. This zone is established to recognize the commercial section of the Forty Nine Blocks Historical District.
(B) Permitted uses. Any uses permitted in C Commercial, provided that any outdoor (outside of a closed structure) display of inventory or merchandise, other than motor vehicles or trailers as defined in the uniform traffic ordinance, shall only be permitted between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.
(C) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) Setback, area and height regulations for dwelling units are the same as in R-2 Multiple Family Residential;
(2) No front yard is required;
(3) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(4) No rear yard is required, except where a lot abuts upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a rear yard or not less than 15 feet;
(5) Any building used primarily for the previously enumerated uses may not have more than 25% of the floor area devoted to storage purposes incidental to the primary uses;
(6) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 245, passed 2-13-2013)
' 154.23 D INDUSTRIAL
(A) Permitted uses. A building or land may be used for any purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of the village pertaining to nuisances as defined by statute or the common law, provided that no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses unless and until the location of the use shall have been approved by the Board of Trustees of the village:
(1) Acid manufacture;
(2) Fertilizer manufacture;
(3) Fireworks or explosives, manufacture or storage;
(4) Garbage, offal or dead animals, reduction or dumping;
2014 S-10
58 Tularosa - Land Usage
(5) Gas manufacture;
(6) Petroleum, refining or wholesale storage;
(7) Stock yards or slaughter of animals;
(8) Tanning or curing or storage of raw hides and skins; and
(9) Wrecking, dismantling or junking or automobiles or other vehicles; storage of automobiles or vehicles for wrecking, dismantling or junking or the salvaging or selling or parts therefrom, except when wholly carried on within a fully enclosed building.
(B) Setback, area, and height restrictions.
(1) Setback, area and height regulations for dwelling units are the same as in R-2 Multiple Family Residential;
(2) No front yard is required;
(3) The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet along each side lot line. The side lot on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 122 feet;
(4) No rear yard is required, except where a lot abuts upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than 15 feet;
(5) No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(C) Loading and unloading regulations.
(1) Any commercial or industrial building shall provide one space with minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 25 feet for the loading or unloading of trucks or trailers either within the building or upon the lot for every building containing 10,000 square feet or less gross floor area.
(2) One additional loading space shall be provided for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
2003 S-1
Zoning 59
' 154.24 NONCONFORMING USES
A nonconforming use of a building or portion thereof or land, which use existed on January 5, 1959, (effective date of Ordinance No. 10) and which use remains nonconforming at the time any subsequent amendment to this code is adopted, may be continued or changed subject to the following regulations:
(A) Any building, legally under construction or built prior to or on January 5, 1959, or at the time an amendment to this chapter becomes effective, may be established as a bona fide nonconforming use by the Board of Trustees, if the Board finds that the construction represents a substantial investment.
(B) No building or portion thereof or land used in whole or in part for nonconforming purpose, according to the provisions of this chapter, which hereafter becomes vacant for a continuous period of 12 calendar months, shall again be used, except in conformity with the regulations of the zone in which the building or land is situated.
(C) (1) A nonconforming use of a building or a portion thereof, or of land or a portion thereof, shall not he extended or enlarged by the attachment of signs to the building, by the placement of signs or displays materials on land outside of the building or by the attachment of racks, balconies or other projections from the building or in any other manner, except when required by law or ordinance.
(2) Dwellings which are nonconforming only as the height, yard area or lot area per family, however, may be structurally altered and their cubical content increased if the alteration or increase in cubical content does not further encroach upon any required yard space or off-street parking space.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.25 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
(A) Applicability. The regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
(B) Exceptions and modifications to lot-area-per-family requirements. Where a lot has less area than the minimum requirements for the district within which the lot is located and was a lot of record in separate ownership from adjacent property at the time of passage of this chapter, that lot may be used only for a single family dwelling purposes or for any non-dwelling purpose permitted in the district within which the lot is located.
(C) Exceptions and modifications of height limitations.
(1) The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to: church spires; ornamental towers and spires; belfries; radio or television antenna or aerials; monuments; chimneys; tanks; elevator
2003 S-1
60 Tularosa - Land Usage
bulkheads; water towers; smoke stacks; fire towers; state towers or sensory lofts; conveyors; cooling towers; and flag poles.
(2) Public, semi-public or public service buildings or schools, when permitted in any dwelling or C Commercial zone, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, and hospitals, churches and temples when permitted in any dwelling or C Commercial zone, may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet when the required front, side and rear yards are each increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located.
(D) Exceptions and modifications of yard and open space regulations.
(1) Where less than 60% of a lot is occupied by dwelling units in commercial and industrial districts, no side yards are required, except a side yard as may be required in the district regulations for a commercial or industrial building on the side of a lot abutting on a dwelling district. Where a side yard is provided, but not required, the yard shall be not less than ten feet in width. Where a rear yard is provided, but not required, the rear yard shall not be less than five feet in depth.
(2) More than one main institutional, public or semi-public, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot or tract, provided no building or portion thereof is located outside the buildable area of the lot.
(3) Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, except where accessory buildings are permitted in a rear or side yard, and except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices and or ornamental features projecting not to exceed 18 inches.
(4) A carport or canopy may project into a required side yard, provided that every part of the projection of the carport or canopy is unenclosed, is removed at least three feet from the nearest side lot line and does not extend more than 25 feet in length or more than 13 feet in height.
(5) An open unenclosed, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance of not more than ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies.
(6) Temporary roadside stands in RA Residential/Agricultural, may be located within the front yard.
(E) Exceptions and modifications to use regulations.
(1) Power plants, heating or refrigerating plants or apparatus or machinery, which are
accessory to permitted uses in RA Residential/Agricultural, shall be permitted in the above named
2003 S-1
Zoning 61
districts only if so placed and operated as to cause the least inconvenience to owners or tenants of adjoining lots and buildings and provided that all of the above mentioned activities comply with existing ordinances and do not cause serious annoyance or injury to occupants of adjoining premises by reason of the emission of odors, fumes or gases, dust, smoke, noise or vibration, light or glares or other nuisance.
(2) Existing railroads and utilities may continue to be operated and maintained in dwelling and commercial districts, but no new railroads or utility structure other than the usual poles, transformers and other similar appurtenances, wires, underground utilities, electric substations and gas pressure regulating and metering stations shall be established in the districts, except when so authorized by the Board of Trustees.
(3) Fences may be erected along the boundaries of a lot or yard area subject to the requirements of Uniform Building Code; one segment of fence may be erected in each required side yard area, in an alignment approximately parallel to the front lot line and connecting the main building with a fence on or along a side lot line.
(4) Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period that the construction work is in progress, but the temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work.
(F) Regulation of accessory buildings.
(1) Any accessory building may be built in a required side or rear yard.
(2) Required setbacks are:
(a) Forty feet from the front lot line;
(b) Two feet from either side or rear lot line;
(c) Twelve and one-half feet from the street side of a corner lot.
(3) Accessory buildings or structures permitted in an required rear or side yard by this chapter, shall not exceed 13 feet in height.
(4) On a corner lot or an interior lot an accessory building may project from required rear yard into a required side yard on or parallel to any interior side lot line; provided no portion of the accessory building is located over 25 feet from the rear property line.
(G) Community unit plan.
(1) An authorized agency of the municipal, state or federal government or the private owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than ten acres may submit to the Board of Trustees a plan for the use and development of all of the tract of land for residential and allied purposes.
2004 S-2
62 Tularosa- Land Usage
(2) The Board shall hold public hearings after proper study.
(3) Notice and publication of the public hearings shall conform to the procedure prescribed.
(4) In ' 154.39 for hearings on changes and amendments, regard shall be had for the following condition in determining whether to or approve or disapprove the plan:
(a) The property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be adversely affected;
(b) The plan is consistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
(c) That the buildings shall be used only for single-family dwellings, multiple dwellings and the usual accessory uses such as private or storage garage, parking spaces and for non-commercial community activities such as libraries, schools and other similar uses; and/or
(d) That the average lot area per family contained in the side, exclusive of the area occupied by streets, will not be less than the lot area per family required in the district in which it is located.
(5) If the Board of Trustees approves such a plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of land and the location and height of buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open space contemplated by the plan, do not conform in all respect to the district regulations of the district in which it is located.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 209, passed 1-20-04)
' 154.26 SPECIAL USES.
(A) The Board of Trustees, by special permit and subject to protective restrictions that are deemed
necessary may authorize the location, extension or structural alteration of any of the following buildings
2004 S-2
Zoning 63
or uses, or an increase in their height, in any district from which they are prohibited or limited by this chapter:
(1) Any public building erected or leased and used by any official agency or a municipal, state or federal government;
(2) Hospitals, clinics and institutions, provided, however, that the buildings may occupy not over 50% of the total area of the lot or tract and will not have any serious or depreciating effect upon the value of the surrounding property; and, provided, further, that the buildings shall be set back from all required yard lines heretofore established by this chapter and additional distance of not less than one foot for every foot of building height, over that required in the respective district, and that off-street parking space will be provided;
(3) Cemeteries or mausoleums;
(4) Greenhouses;
(5) Nurseries or truck gardens;
(6) Roadside stands, commercial amusement or recreational developments for temporary or seasonal periods;
(7) Extraction of sand, gravel, shells, top soil and other natural resources;
(8) Parking lots on land not more than 300 feet from the boundary of any shopping, commercial or industrial district, under such conditions as will protect the character of surrounding property;
(9) Drive-in theaters in a C Commercial zone, or in RA Residential/Agricultural;
(10) Radio or television broadcasting towers and stations;
(11) Filling stations and trailer parks in RA Residential/Agricultural, or in R-MH Mobile Home Residential; and
(12) Public or other non profit welfare agencies.
(B) Before issuance of any special permit for any of the above buildings or uses, the following
conditions shall be complied with:
(1) A public hearing in relation thereto shall be held before the Board of Trustees, notice
and publication of which hearing shall conform to the procedure for hearings on changes and amendments.
2003 S-1
64 Tularosa - Land Usage
(2) The Board of Trustees shall study the effect of the proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood and upon traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the public health, public safety or general welfare. No final actions shall be taken by the Board upon any application for a proposed building or use until the regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, next succeeding the date of the public hearing, unless a majority of the Board present, excluding the Mayor, shall vote in favor or against the application.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.27 OFF-STREET PARKING.
(A) General provisions.
(1) Location.
(a) For single family and multiple family dwellings, required parking shall be located on the same lot as the main building.
(b) For all other uses, required parking shall be located on the same lot or an abutting lot. Required parking shall not be located across the street or with an intervening property, except by conditional use permit.
(2) Mixed occupancies in a building. In the case of mixed uses in the building or on a lot, the total parking requirements shall he the sum of the requirements computed for the various uses.
(3) Joint use. Joint use of parking facilities may be authorized when the use is primarily daytime for one use and nighttime for the other or weekdays for one applicant and weekend for the other.
(4) Submission of plans. The plans for any proposed multiple family residential, mobile home park, commercial or industrial parking area shall be submitted with the site plan application.
(B) Parking spaces required.
(1) Apartments, rooming houses: One and one-half spaces for each dwelling unit;
(2) Automotive and machinery repair, sales or wholesaling: One space for each 600 feet of gross sales area;
(3) Banks, business and professional offices: One space for each 600 feet of gross floor area;
2003 S-1
Zoning 65
(4) Hotels, motels and bed and breakfasts: One space for each sleeping unit;
(5) Hospital, medical and dental clinics: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area;
(6) Libraries, museums, and similar non assembly cultural facilities: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area;
(7) Manufacturing: Not less than one space for each 800 square feet of gross door space plus one space for each employee during the maximum shift;
(8) Retail stores: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area;
(9) Residences (single family dwellings): Two spaces;
(10) Restaurants and bars: One space for each 100 feet of gross floor area;
(11) Schools, private and public: One space for each employee and one space for each three students of driving age;
(12) Stadiums, sports arenas, theaters, auditoriums and other places of public assembly: One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
(C) Parking requirements for uses not specified. Parking requirements for land uses not specified above shall be based on the most comparable use specified herein.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003; Am. Ord. 209, passed 1-20-04)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
' 154.35 REQUIRED PERMITS.
It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, remove, demolish or repair a building or any other side built structure or to install a manufactured or modular structure within the limits of the village without first obtaining a village building site permit and a manufactured/modular structure installation permit or state building permit where applicable.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
Cross-reference:
For provisions regarding required permits, see ' 151.02
2004 S-2
66 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 154.36 BOARD OF APPEALS.
(A) Creation. A Board of Appeals is hereby created and established. The word Board, when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the Board of Appeals. The Board shall consist of the Board of Trustees.
(B) Functions of the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure not in conflict with any state act or village ordinance. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, who shall be the Mayor. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact and shall keep record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the Clerk of the village and shall be a public record. All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be taken down by a reporter employed by the person, party or agency so desiring a record of the proceedings.
(C) Procedure.
(1) Appeals to the Board may be taken by any party aggrieved, or by any office, department, board or any other agency of the village affected by any decision of Code Enforcement or Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the decision of the Code Enforcement or Planning and Zoning Commission by filing with the Board and Code Enforcement or Planning and Zoning Commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
(2) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal to be conducted in accordance with the Battershell Guidelines no more than 30 days after notice, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the interested parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the Board of Trustees from holding any hearing at a regular meeting of the Board, provided due notice, as herein provided is given.
(D) Powers of Board.
(1) The Board shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty:
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Enforcer or Planning and Zoning Commission;
(b) In hearing and deciding appeals the Board shall have the power to grant an exception in the following instances:
2006 S-3
Zoning 67
1. Where the boundary line of a district divides a lot held in a single ownership at
the time of the passage of Ordinance No. 10 permit the extension of the district to include the entire lot;
2. Interpret the provision of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of the plan, as shown upon the map fixing the several districts, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid;
3. The Board shall have the authority to grant the following variances:
a. Permit a variance in the yard requirements, height restrictions or lot-area-per-family requirements of any district, but only where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of their provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other physical conditions, provided the variance shall not seriously effect any adjoining property or the general welfare.
b. Authorize, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this chapter relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose upon and practical difficulties or particular hardships, the variance of the strict application of the terms of the chapter as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only when the Board is satisfied that a granting of the variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a deviation from the comprehensive plan as established by this chapter, and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected.
(2) In consideration of all appeals and all proposes exceptions or variances under terms of the chapter, the Board shall, before making any exceptions or variances from this chapter in a specific case, first determine that it will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger public safety or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the village.
(3) In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made.
(E) Fees. A fee of $5 shall be paid to the Village Treasurer and receipt given therefore at the time the notice of appeal or petition for relief is filed, which sum is to be paid to the credit of the general revenue fund of the village.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
2003 S-1
68 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 154.37 CODE ENFORCER.
(A) (1) The Office of Code Enforcer is hereby created.
(2) The Code Enforcer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees. His or her appointment shall continue for such period as may be determined by the Board of Trustees.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcer to enforce this chapter. He or she shall examine all premises for which village permits have been issued and shall see that the provisions of law are complied with. He or she shall enforce all laws relating to location and maintenance of buildings and structures and make investigation in connection with matters referred to in this and other chapters of the village ordinances.
(C) The Code Enforcer is authorized to issue non-traffic citations.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.38 RECENTLY ANNEXED TERRITORY
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the village shall be subject to all the regulations of Zone RA Residential/Agricultural unless the Board of Trustees accepts a zoning plan with the annexation.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
' 154.39 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
(A) Initiation of change and procedures.
(1) The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing, amend the regulations and zoning districts herein established. If the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots and land included in the area proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation or within 100 feet, excluding public right-of-way, of the area proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation, protest in writing a proposed change in a zoning regulation, the proposed change in zoning shall not become effective unless the change is approved by a three-fourths vote of all the members of the Board of Trustees.
(2) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing to be conducted in accordance with the Battershell Guidelines shall be published, at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing, in an official paper or a paper of general circulation, and whenever a change in zoning is proposed for an area of one
2006 S-3
Zoning 69
block or less, notice to the public shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners, as shown by the records of the County Assessor, or lots or land within the area proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation, and within 100 feet, excluding public rights-of-way, of the area proposed to be changed by a zoning regulation.
(3) Public participation will be in accordance with the Battershell procedures. These procedures are intended to protect the due process rights of all parties involved. Persons wishing to give testimony on any item shall wait to be recognized, then go to the lectern, give their name and address, be sworn in and limit their comments to three minutes. A person may speak more than once provided they avoid being repetitive. Proponents shall speak first, followed by opponents.
(B) Fee. A fee of $65 shall be charged for filing application for rezoning to defray publication and administrative costs.
(C) Application for rezoning. Where deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, any future application for rezoning may be approved by the Board of Trustees subject to reasonable conditions regarding the future use of the property being rezoned. Thereafter, should the conditions not be complied with, the Board of Trustees shall have the right to revoke the rezoning permit and restore the zoning to its original classification; provided, however, that no revocation shall become effective until the owner of the property shall receive a written notice to appear before the Board of Trustees within 15 days from the time of the notice and be heard as to why such revocation should not forthwith be approved.
(D) Two-year limitations.
(1) Whenever a petition is filed requesting or proposing a change in an amendment of this chapter and the petition has been finally acted upon by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the above procedure or when the petition has received no action on the part of the Board of Trustees, or from the date of withdrawal of the petition; provided, however, that the petition has been officially advertised.
(2) The provisions of this section do not apply in cases when the Board of Trustees wishes to consider a comprehensive zoning revision of an area larger than 20 acres.
(Am. Ord. 204, passed 5-14-2003; Am. Ord. 217, passed 12-20-2005)
' 154.99 PENALTY.
(A) Penalty. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build, alter or install any buildings or structures in violation of the detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine of not more than $500 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. Each day each violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in this chapter shall be placed and shall exist, and any architect, building contractor, agent, person, or corporation employee in connection therewith
2006 S-3
70 Tularosa - Land Usage
and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined and/or imprisoned as herein provided.
(B) Enforcement procedure. Any possible violation shall be reported to the village office and recorded as a formal complaint. A representative of the village shall determine if a violation exists. The owner/ contractor of the project shall be notified by certified letter of the nature of the violation and what procedures shall be taken to correct same. If no response is received within ten days or if immediate action is necessary, it shall be the responsibility of the Mayor or his representative to enforce the ordinance.
(Ord. 204, passed 5-20-2003)
2006 S-3
CHAPTER 155: MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Section
General Provisions
155.01 Definitions
Mobile Home Parks
155.02 Development Plan
155.03 Size and density
155.04 Spacing and setbacks
155.05 Improvements required
155.06 Phasing
155.07 Walls and fences
155.08 Lot standards
155.09 Common-use areas
155.10 Lighting
155.11 Sanitation
155.12 Accessory uses
155.13 Existing mobile home parks
155.14 EID regulations
Recreational Vehicle Parks
155.25 Development Plan
155.26 Improvements required
155.27 Phasing
155.28 Walls and fences
155.29 Standards
155.30 Size and density
155.31 Common-use areas
155.32 Lighting
155.33 Sanitation
155.34 Toilet and lavatory facilities
155.35 Existing recreational vehicle parks
155.36 EID regulations
155.99 Penalty
71
2008 S-4
72 Tularosa - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 155.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following definitions unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMON-USE AREA. An area within a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park which is set aside for the use by management, tenants and guests in the park.
LOT. A tract of land in a mobile home park divided and set aside for rental or leasehold to a tenant in the park.
MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable housing structure that exceeds either a width of eight feet or a length of 40 feet constructed to be towed on its own chassis and designed so as to be installed without a permanent foundation for human occupancy as a residence. It may include one or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and expanded for additional capacity, or two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. This definition does not include recreational vehicles as defined in this section, or modular, prefabricated or manufactured homes, as defined by state law, designed to be permanently affixed to real property.
MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land with common ownership on which are located for habitation purposes two or more mobile homes, long-term recreational vehicles or a combination of both for the express purpose of a commercial enterprise.
PARK. As the context requires, this term refers to mobile home PARKS, recreational vehicle PARKS, or both.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle, with or without motive power, capable of human habitation or camping purposes and/or used for sporting, recreation or social activities including but not limited to trailers, motor coaches, motor homes, fifth-wheels, campers, camper shells and camper trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A tract of land with common ownership on which are located for short-term or long-term habitation two or more recreational vehicles, or spaces for the same.
SPACE. A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park designed for the accommodation of a recreational vehicle.
STREET. A private drive within a park used as access by the management, residents and guests of the park.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
2008 S-4
Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks 73
MOBILE HOME PARKS
' 155.02 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(A) Before the establishment of a mobile home park, whether new or pursuant to ' 155.13, in a properly zoned area, the owner shall submit to the Village Planning and Zoning Commission for review 12 copies of a detailed Development Plan of the proposed park, certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. Submission shall be at least 30 days before the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the Development Plan is to be considered and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $ 150 plus $50 per lot.
(B) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine if the proposed park conforms to this chapter and other applicable ordinances and shall recommend to the Board of Trustees approval or denial of the Development Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also recommend such conditions as may be necessary to promote safety, appearance and proper land use.
(C) The Board of Trustees shall review the Development Plan and the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall either approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the Development Plan.
(D) Mobile home parks shall be developed only in accordance with the terms of approval of the Development Plan by the Board of Trustees.
(E) Development Plan contents. The Development Plan shall show:
(1) North arrow and scale;
(2) Key map showing location of park;
(3) Outer boundary of park and streets and utilities within 100 feet;
(4) Location and dimension of all lots, spaces, open areas and common-use areas;
(5) Location of existing and proposed permanent buildings;
(6) Location and size of proposed and existing utilities in and adjacent to the park, including fire hydrants;
(7) A finished grading and drainage plan;
(8) Numbers of all lots;
(9) Location of all solid waste containers;
2008 S-4
74 Tularosa - Land Usage
(10) Density information, including gross acreage, number of mobile housing units proposed and the number of units per acre; and
(11) Identification of phases, if applicable (see ' 155.06).
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.03 SIZE AND DENSITY.
Mobile home parks shall be a minimum of five acres in size and shall not contain more than six mobile housing units per gross acre. In the case of a mobile housing unit constructed for occupancy by more than one family, each dwelling unit within the mobile housing unit shall be counted toward this density standard.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.04 SPACING AND SETBACKS.
(A) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(B) Front yard setback: 25 feet. Tongues shall not project into setback areas.
(C) Rear yard setback: ten feet.
(D) Side yard setback: five feet, with a minimum distance between mobile housing units of 14 feet.
(E) Minimum distance between a mobile housing unit and any building or the park boundary: ten feet.
(F) An area of unobstructed vision (sight triangle) of not less than 30 feet in any dimension shall be located on either side of a park street where it adjoins any public right-of-way.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.05 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
(A) Before the occupancy of any lot in a mobile home park, all required street and utility improvements within the park must be completed prior to approval by the village. Required street and utility improvements adjacent to the park must either be completed and accepted by the village or must be covered by a waiver of protest agreement and/or development contract if the village deems delayed improvements to be appropriate.
(B) All waterlines must be looped and fire hydrants installed according to village standards. Waterlines supporting fire hydrants must be at least six inches in diameter.
2008 S-4
Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks 75
(C) Internal street improvements shall meet the following standards:
(1) Street shall be at least 24 feet wide.
(2) Internal streets shall be improved with a double penetration surface or hot-mix asphalt in accordance with village standards.
(3) Each mobile home park shall provide direct access to public rights-of-way of at least a 50-foot width at a minimum of two points. The streets providing direct access shall not be blocked to through travel, or be either cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets.
(4) Street blocks shall not exceed 800 feet in length, and cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet with a 50-foot radius.
(D) For all platted public streets adjacent to the proposed mobile home park development, the developer shall construct streets to village standards as specified in the subdivision requirements in accordance with the village specifications. The village may also require that the developer provide service alleys as part of the Development Plan.
(E) The developer shall be responsible for extending and connecting all needed utilities to the mobile home park. Each lot shall be served by water, sewer and electrical connections. Mobile housing units may not be served by liquefied petroleum gas unless natural gas service cannot be obtained.
(F) Parking areas, sufficient in size to accommodate two motor vehicles and improved with an all-weather surface such as asphalt, concrete or gravel shall be provided on each lot.
(G) At a minimum, 48-inch walkways shall be provided from each mobile housing unit to an adjacent street. Walkways shall be improved with gravel, flagstone or other all-weather surface.
(H) A sign or monument bearing the name of the mobile home park and its street address shall be prominently displayed at each entrance.
(I) Skirting on mobile homes shall be required. All skirting to mobile housing units= undercarriages shall be of nonflammable materials and shall cover the tongue (if not removed).
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.06 PHASING.
A mobile home park may be developed in phases if each phase is clearly identified on the Development Plan. Each phase must contain not less than one-third of the park area, and the total park development time shall not exceed two years. Occupancy for any phase for which required improvements
2008 S-4
76 Tularosa - Land Usage
have been completed may begin before completion of improvements in later phases. However, not less than one-half of the required common-use area must be in the first phase.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.07 WALLS AND FENCES.
(A) Each mobile home park shall be completely surrounded by a solid perimeter wall or fence, not less than six (6) feet in height, and preferably finished in adobe style, subject to ' 155.04(F).
(B) Rear fences separating lots in the park are permitted if they are not less than four feet high and are constructed of nonflammable material.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.08 LOT STANDARDS.
(A) All lots and open areas in the park must be adequately drained, graded and landscaped to provide erosion and dust control.
(B) Each lot shall have frontage on an interior street in the park; frontage on a public road is prohibited.
(C) Not more than one mobile housing unit shall be parked on a given lot, and no mobile housing unit shall be parked in a mobile home park outside of a designated lot.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.09 COMMON-USE AREAS.
Each mobile home park shall have at least 5000 square feet of common-use area for every ten mobile housing unit lots within the park. Each common-use area shall have a minimum area of 5000 square feet and shall be maintained to preserve an attractive appearance and to protect the health and safety of its users. Common-use areas may be improved as recreational areas or landscaped for use as park areas.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.10 LIGHTING.
All streets within the mobile home park and open areas other than lots shall be lighted so as to clearly define the boundaries of streets and to provide for the safe use of the streets and the open areas. All lighting fixtures shall be located so that they do not directly shine on any public right-of-way or residential premises outside the mobile home park and shall be in compliance with village lighting requirements.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
2008 S-4
Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks 77
' 155.11 SANITATION.
Each mobile home park shall have provision for the collection of not less than one-half cubic yard of refuse weekly per lot. Dumpsters shall be centrally located among the lots served.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.12 ACCESSORY USES.
The following accessory uses are permitted:
(A) Day-care center for residents of the park;
(B) Sales and rental office; mobile home owners and/or managers are allowed to live on site;
(C) Model mobile home sales lots or areas not exceeding 5% of the area of the mobile home park;
(D) Home occupations as permitted in any single-family dwelling district, except a home occupation must not generate any additional traffic to the mobile home park;
(E) Storage of recreational vehicles, where the storage area is screened in the same manner as is required for the perimeter of the park;
(F) Self-storage units for the use of tenants of the park; and
(G) Services and conveniences for the occupants of the park and their guests, such as barbershops, beauty shops and laundromats.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.13 EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARKS.
Any existing mobile home park which either does not comply with all the provisions of this subchapter in effect at the time it was adopted shall be grandfathered in, if the following criteria is met: the existing mobile home park must have been licensed to operate within the village, prior to this subchapter being adopted. Any mobile home park that is not in compliance with village regulations and is not licensed to operate within the village will be treated as a new mobile home park and will have to abide with all stipulations of this subchapter. In the event that an existing mobile home park wishes to expand, it shall then have to conform with the teams of this subchapter at the time of any expansion(s), with minimum acreage provision applying to the total area of the expanded park.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
2008 S-4
78 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 155.14 EID REGULATIONS.
Each mobile home park shall comply with all rules and regulations of the State of New Mexico Environmental Division, including registration with the same. If any rule prescribed by the EID is more restrictive than a provision of this subchapter, such rule will apply.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
' 155.25 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(A) Before the establishment of a recreational vehicle park, whether new or pursuant to ' 155.35 in a properly zoned area, the owner shall submit to Village Planning and Zoning Commission for review 12 copies of a detailed Development Plan of the proposed park, certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. Submission shall be at least 30 days before the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the Development Plan is to be considered and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $150 plus $50 per space.
(B) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine if the proposed park conforms to this subchapter and other applicable ordinances and shall recommend to the Board of Trustees approval or denial of the Development Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also recommend such conditions as may be necessary to promote safety, appearance and proper land use.
(C) The Board of Trustees shall review the Development Plan and the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall either approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the Development Plan.
(D) Recreational vehicle parks shall be developed only in accordance with the terms of approval of the Development Plan by the Board of Trustees.
(E) Development Plan contents. The Development Plan shall show:
(1) North arrow and scale;
(2) Key map showing location of park;
(3) Outer boundary of park and streets and utilities within 100 feet;
(4) Location and dimension of all spaces, open areas and common-use areas;
(5) Location of existing and proposed permanent buildings;
2008 S-4
Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks 79
(6) Location and size of proposed and existing utilities in and adjacent to the park, including fire hydrants;
(7) A finished grading and drainage plan;
(8) Numbers on all spaces;
(9) Location of all solid waste containers;
(10) Density information, including gross acreage, number of recreational vehicle units proposed and the number of units per acre (see ' 155.30); and
(11) Identification of phases if applicable (see ' 155.27).
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.26 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
(A) Recreational vehicle parks are exempted from the requirement of individual water, sewer and electrical connections per space, if water is available within 100 feet of any space, and there are at least two dump facilities for each five acres of the park. Natural gas or LPG connections to individual spaces are prohibited.
(B) Before the occupancy of any space in a recreational vehicle park, all required street and utility improvements within the park must be completed prior to approval by the village.
(C) In the event that the developer wants to extend water, sewer and electrical connections to the Recreational Vehicle Park, he or she will be required to follow all village standards and/or state requirements. All waterlines must be looped. All waterlines supporting fire hydrants must be at least six inches in diameter.
(D) Recreational vehicle parks with 18 spaces or less will be required to follow the at the minimum the specifications pertaining to division (A) above.
(E) Internal street improvements for recreational vehicle parks five acres or more, and over 18 spaces shall meet the following standards:
(1) Streets shall be at least 24 feet wide;
(2) Internal streets shall be improved with a double penetration surface or hot-mix asphalt in accordance with village standards; and
2008 S-4
80 Tularosa - Land Usage
(3) Each recreational vehicle park shall provide direct access to public right-of-way of at least a 50-foot width at a minimum of two points. The streets providing direct access shall not be blocked to through travel.
(4) In the event that the developer wants to extend water, sewer and electrical connections to a recreational vehicle park, he or she will be required to follow all village standards and/or state requirements, at his or her expense.
(5) Parking areas, sufficient in size to accommodate two motor vehicles, and improved with an all-weather surface, such as gravel, asphalt or concrete.
(6) Sign or monument bearing the name of the recreational vehicle park and its street address shall be prominently displayed at each entrance. Sign shall conform to village standards.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.27 PHASING.
A recreational vehicle park five acres or more and over 18 spaces may be developed in phases if each phase is clearly identified on the development plan. Each phase must contain not less than one-third of the park area, and the total park development time shall not exceed two years. Occupancy for any phase for which required improvements have been completed may begin before completion of improvements in later phases. However, not less than one-half of the required common-use area must be in the first phase.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.28 WALLS AND FENCES.
(A) Each recreational vehicle park, regardless of size, shall be completely surrounded by a wall or fence not less than six feet high in a style conducive to the area around the park. An area of unobstructed vision (sight triangle) not less than 30 feet in any dimension shall be located on either side of a park street where it adjoins any public right-of-way.
(B) Rear fences are permitted if they are not less than four feet high and constructed with nonflammable materials.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.29 STANDARDS.
All recreational vehicle parks within properly zoned areas shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter relating to recreational vehicle parks.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
2008 S-4
Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks 81
' 155.30 SIZE AND DENSITY.
(A) Maximum density shall be 18 spaces per gross acre.
(B) Each space shall have a minimum size of 1,650 square feet.
(C) The yard setbacks are required only between recreational vehicles or buildings and the external boundaries, as follows:
(1) A minimum distance of 14 feet between recreational vehicle units;
(2) Minimum distance of ten feet between an RV unit and any building or the park boundary;
(3) An area of unobstructed vision (sight triangle) of not less than 30 feet in any dimension shall be located on either side of a park street where it adjoins any public right-of-way.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.31 COMMONBUSE AREAS.
Each recreational vehicle park of five acres or more shall have at least 5,000 square feet of common-use area for every 90 units within park. A common-use area shall be maintained to preserve an attractive appearance and to protect the health and safety of its users. Common-use areas may be improved as recreational areas or landscaped for use as park areas.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.32 LIGHTING.
All streets in a recreational area of five acres or more and open areas within the park shall be lighted so as to clearly define the boundaries of streets and to provide for the safe use of the streets and the open areas. All lighting fixtures shall be located so that they do not directly shine on any public right-of-way or residential premises outside the recreational vehicle park and shall be in compliance with village requirements.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.33 SANITATION.
Each recreational vehicle park regardless of size shall have provision for the collection of not less than one-half cubic yard of refuse weekly per lot. Dumpsters shall be centrally located among the lots served.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
2008 S-4
82 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 155.34 TOILET AND LAVATORY FACILITIES.
The following toilet and lavatory facilities shall be required for renters, users or occupants of recreational vehicle parks:
(A) Water-flush toilets and urinals shall be provided, and shall not be farther than 300 feet from any space not provided with an individual sewer connection;
(B) One lavatory shall be provided for up to six toilets. One additional lavatory shall be provided for each two toilets when more than six toilets are required; and
(C) Separate facilities shall be provided for men and women. Urinals shall be acceptable for no more than one-third of the toilets required in the men=s facilities.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.35 EXISTING RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.
Any existing recreational vehicle park which either does not comply with all the provisions of this subchapter in effect at the time it was adopted shall be grandfathered in, if the following criteria is met: the existing recreational vehicle park must have been licensed to operate within the village, prior to this subchapter being adopted. Any recreational vehicle park that is not in compliance with village regulations and is not licensed to operate within the village will be treated as a new recreational vehicle park and will have to abide with all the stipulations of this subchapter governing recreational vehicle parks. In the event that an existing recreational vehicle park wishes to expand, it shall then have to conform with the terms of this subchapter at the time of any expansion(s), with minimum acreage provision applying to the total area of the expanded park.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.36 EID REGULATIONS.
Each recreational vehicle park shall comply with all rules and regulations of the State of New Mexico Environmental Division, including registration with the same. If any rule prescribed by the EID is more restrictive than a provision of this subchapter, such rule will apply.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
' 155.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to ' 10.99, General Penalty.
(Ord. 222, passed 6-19-2007)
2008 S-4
CHAPTER 156: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
156.01 Statutory authorization
156.02 Findings of fact
156.03 Statement of purpose
156.04 Methods of reducing flood losses
156.05 Definitions
156.06 Lands to which this chapter applies
156.07 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
156.08 Establishment of development permit
156.09 Compliance
156.10 Abrogation and greater restrictions
156.11 Interpretation
156.12 Warning and disclaimer or liability
156.13 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
156.14 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
156.15 Permit procedures
156.16 Variance procedures
156.17 General standards for flood hazard reduction
156.18 Specific standards
156.19 Standards for subdivision proposals
156.20 Penalties for non compliance
' 156.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the State of New Mexico has in NMSA Chapter 3, Articles 18, 41 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the governing body of the Village of Tularosa does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) There appear to be flood hazard areas in the Village of Tularosa based on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated December 17, 2010 which may be subject to periodic inundation, resulting in loss of
83
2011 S-8
84 Tularosa - Land Usage
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which may adversely affect the public's health, safety and general welfare.
(B) Flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(A) Protect human life and health;
(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(G) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
(A) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 85
(B) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
(D) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
(E) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.05 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be inundated by the 1%-annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community, subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, Vl-30, VE or V.
2011 S-8
86 Tularosa - Land Usage
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).- The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year (also called the Base Flood).
BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM's effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as existing structures.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 87
(2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mud slide (i.e., mud flow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). See Flood Elevation Study.
FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY. See Regulatory Floodway.
2011 S-8
88 Tularosa - Land Usage
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities and port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor); provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 89
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Area of Special Flood Hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers
2011 S-8
90 Tularosa - Land Usage
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural pan of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 91
' 156.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of Tularosa.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
The areas of special flood hazard have not been identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), Community Number 35035C0660D, dated December 17, 2010.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.09 COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.11 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
2011 S-8
92 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 156.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.13 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.14 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(A) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;
(B) Review permit application to determine whether proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding;
(C) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter;
(D) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 D.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(E) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 93
(F) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the New Mexico Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management (DHSEM), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(G) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(H) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with ' 156.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.15 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
(A) Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing criteria of ' 156.18(B);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with ' 156.14(A).
(B) Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
2011 S-8
94 Tularosa - Land Usage
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, executed at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.16 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
(A) The Appeal Board shall be the Tularosa Board of Trustees and shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(B) The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(C) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(D) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(E) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 95
(F) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of two acres or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the two acres, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(G) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (' 156.03).
(H) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(I) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(J) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(K) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in ' 156.16 are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
2011 S-8
96 Tularosa - Land Usage
' 156.17 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements.
(A) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(B) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(C) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(D) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(E) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(F) New and replacement sanitary/sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
(G) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.18 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) ' 156.07, (ii) ' 156.14, or (iii) ' 156.19, the following provisions are required:
(A) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division as proposed in ' 156.15, is satisfied.
(B) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 97
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this division. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
(C) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(D) Manufactured homes.
(1) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed in Zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially unproved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral damage.
2011 S-8
98 Tularosa - Land Usage
(3) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of ' 156.18(D) of this section be elevated so that either:
(a) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or
(b) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.19 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
(A) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with '' 156.02, 156.03 and 156.04 of this Code.
(B) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the Floodplain Development Permit requirements of '' 156.08, 156.15 and the provisions of '' 156.17 to 156.20 of this Code.
(C) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured homes parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to ' 156.07 or 156.14 of this Code.
(D) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(E) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
' 156.20 PENALTIES FOR NON COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
2011 S-8
Flood Damage Prevention 99
conviction thereof be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Tularosa from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 243, passed 4-20-2011)
2011 S-8
100 Tularosa - Land Usage

INDEX
1
2 Tularosa - Index
INDEX
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Definitions, 93.02
Exceptions, 93.04
Permit, 93.05
Prohibited acts, 93.03
Removal of vehicles, 93.06
Violation, 93.01
ADMISSION FEES
Avoiding payment, 132.08
Penalty, 132.99
AGREEMENTS, TSO III
ALARMS, FALSE; FALSE REPORTS, 134.05
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Conditions for Possession and Sale
Consumption or sale in public places, 113.36
Curb service, 113.37
Delivery for resale, 113.35
Drinking in certain places, 113.40
Hours of sale, 113.39
Inspection of premises, 113.43
Minors, 113.42
Possession in certain premises, 113.38
Sale to intoxicated persons, 113.41
Definitions, 113.01
Licensing Provisions
Application and fees, 113.16
License required, 113.15
Persons prohibited from obtaining licenses, 113.18
Revocation or suspension of licenses, 113.20
Special licenses, 113.19
Tax period; date of payment, 113.17
3
4 Tularosa - Index
ALLEYS (See SUBDIVISIONS)
ANIMALS
Administration and Enforcement
Animal shelter, 95.36
Enforcement, 95.30
Impoundment, 95.31
Interference with police officer, 95.34
Investigation, 95.33
Rabies; procedure, 95.32
Records, 95.35
Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs
Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs; registration required, 95.55
Definitions, 95.52
Exceptions, 95.53
Findings and intent, 95.51
Penalty, 95.99
Prohibited acts, 95.56
Seizure of dog; petition to District Court, 95.54
Short title, 95.50
Definitions, 95.01
Disposition of dead animals, 95.05
Guide dogs, 95.03
Licensing dogs; tags and collars, 95.02
Offenses against animals
Cruelty to animals, 135.01
Injury to animals, 135.02
Prohibited Activity
Animals at large, 95.15
Cruelty; poisoning, 95.16
Public nuisances, 95.17
Riding or driving animals on sidewalks, 95.18
Restraint, 95.04
ANNEXATIONS, TSO II
ASSAULT AND BATTERY, 136.02
BARRICADES; REMOVAL, 134.12
BOARD OF APPEALS (See ZONING)
2009 S-5
Index 4A
BRIBERY
Penalty, 132.99
Public official or employee, 132.15
BUILDING CODE (See BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION)
BUILDING INSPECTOR; CODE ENFORCER (See ZONING)
BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Adoption of Building Code, 151.01
Definitions, 151.03
Excavation of public streets, 151.07
Multiple-purpose buildings, 151.04
Penalty, 151.99
Permit fees, 151.05
Remedies of village, 151.06
Required payments, 151.02
Temporary structures; placement, 151.08
2009 S-6
4B Tularosa - Index
Index 5
BURGLARY
Possession of burglary tools, 132.13
Penalty, 132.99
BURNING (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGISTRATION PROVISIONS
Licensing Provisions; Fees
Administration; records, 110.04
Exhibition of license, 110.06
Fee assessment; issuance of license, 110.05
Fee schedule, 110.02
License refusal; revocation, 110.03
License regulations, 110.09
Policy, 110.01
Prior ordinances; application, 110.08
Remedies, 110.07
Municipal Gross Receipts Tax
Dedication, 110.38
Effective date, 110.39
General provisions, 110.36
Imposition of, 110.35
Specific exceptions, 110.37
Registration Provisions; Fees
Application procedure, 110.22
Exemption, 110.21
Imposition of fee, 110.20
Renewal; application, 110.23
CHECKS
Penalty, 132.99
Worthless checks, 132.09
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION; CREATION, 33.01
CLEAN INDOOR AIR
Definitions, 96.03
Posted smoke-free and smoking-permitted areas, 96.08
Prohibition of smoking near entrances, windows and ventilation systems, 96.06
Purpose, 96.02
Responsibilities of employers, 96.07
Short title, 96.01
2009 S-6
6 Tularosa - Index
CLEAN INDOOR AIR (Cont=d)
Smoking-permitted areas, 96.05
Smoking prohibited, 96.04
CODE OF ORDINANCES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Application to future ordinances, 10.03
Captions, 10.04
Copies of code, 10.19
Definitions, 10.05
Effective date of ordinances, 10.15
Errors and omissions, 10.10
General penalty, 10.99
Interpretation, 10.02
Official time, 10.11
Ordinances repealed, 10.13
Ordinances unaffected, 10.14
Ordinances which amend or supplement code, 10.17
Reasonable time, 10.12
Reference to offices, 10.09
Reference to other sections, 10.08
Repeal or modification of ordinance, 10.16
Rules of interpretation, 10.06
Section histories; statutory references, 10.18
Severability, 10.07
Title of code, 10.01
COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS
Appeals, 111.09
Application, 111.04
Definitions, 111.01
Exemptions, 111.03
Fees and duration, 111.05
License required, 111.02
Licenses and identification, 111.06
Regulations generally, 111.07
Renewals, 111.10
Suspension or revocation of license, 111.08
CONCEALING IDENTITY, 134.04
CREDIT CARDS
Credit cards, 132.01
Penalty, 132.99
2009 S-6
Index 7
CRIMINAL CODE (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
Definitions, 130.04
Jurisdiction, 130.03
Limitations on actions, 130.02
Penalty, 130.99
Short title, 130.01
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (See ANIMALS)
DISORDERLY CONDUCT, 134.16
DOGS (See ANIMALS)
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE (See TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS)
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL (See also TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS)
Drinking in public places, 132.25
Drug paraphernalia, 132.28
Marijuana; unlawful possession, 132.27
Penalty, 132.99
Selling alcohol in public places, 132.26
ELECTION PROCEEDINGS, 34.01
EMBEZZLEMENT
Embezzlement, 132.02
Penalty, 132.99
ESCAPE; AID AND ABET, 134.01
EVIDENCE TAMPERING, 134.14
EXTORTION
Extortion, 132.03
Penalty, 132.99
FAIR HOUSING
Administration, 91.08
Definitions, 91.02
Discrimination in brokerage services, 91.06
Discrimination in financing or housing, 91.05
Discrimination in sales or rentals, 91.04
Education and conciliation, 91.09
8 Tularosa - Index
FAIR HOUSING (Cont'd)
Enforcement, 91.10
Exemption, 91.07
Interference, coercion or intimidation, 91.11
Penalty, 91.99
Policy, 91.01
Unlawful practice, 91.03
FALSE PRETENSES
False pretenses, 132.04
Penalty, 132.99
ELECTRIC FENCES; BARBED WIRE, 134.03
FIRE
Improper handling, 134.08
FIREWORKS (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 156.10
Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, 156.07
Compliance, 156.09
Definitions, 156.05
Designation of the Floodplain Administrator, 156.13
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator, 156.14
Establishment of development permit, 156.08
Findings of fact, 156.02
General standards for flood hazard reduction, 156.17
Interpretation, 156.11
Lands to which this chapter applies, 156.06
Methods of reducing flood losses, 156.04
Penalties for non compliance, 156.20
Permit procedures, 156.15
Specific standards, 156.18
Standards for subdivision proposals, 156.19
Statement of purpose, 156.03
Statutory authorization, 156.01
Variance procedures, 156.16
Warning and disclaimer or liability, 156.12
2011 S-8
Index 8A
FORGERY
Forgery, 132.06
Penalty, 132.99
FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS, TSO I
FRAUD
Fraud, 132.07
Penalty, 132.99
GAMBLING; RAFFLES
Commercial gambling prohibited, 132.44
Definitions, 132.40
Fraudulently operating a lottery, 132.43
Gambling and lottery prohibited, 132.41
Gambling devices, 132.46
Penalty, 132.99
Permissive lottery, 132.42
Premises; permission to gamble prohibited, 132.45
GARAGE AND YARD SALES (See PAWNBROKERS; SECOND-HAND DEALERS)
2011 S-8
8B Tularosa - Index
Index 9
GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS (See also INDUSTRIAL WASTE; WATER)
Application for service; deposit; approval, 51.03
Connection required; fee, 51.04
Extension policy, 51.13
Inspection, 51.07
Liability for payment, 51.02
Liens, 51.10
Meters, 51.05
Repairs, 51.08
Service charges, 51.01
Sewer Utilities; Specifications
Installations, 51.44
Joints, 51.43
Manholes, 51.41
Minimum size, 51.42
Pipes, 51.40
Special considerations, 51.11
Storage of water, 51.09
Tampering with system, 51.06
Water Utilities; Specifications
Fittings, 51.26
Hydrants, 51.27
Lines; flushing requirements, 51.29
Mains, 51.28
Pipes, 51.25
Village duties; connections, lines and installation, 51.30
Water wells, 51.12
GUIDE DOGS (See ANIMALS)
GUNS (See WEAPONS)
HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Definition, 90.01
Insects
Declaration of public nuisance, 90.51
Definitions, 90.50
Destruction of larvae, 90.53
Premises to be kept clean and free, 90.52
Use of insecticides, 90.54
Penalty, 90.99
10 Tularosa - Index
HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES (Cont'd)
Specific Nuisances
Abandonment of dangerous containers, 90.15
Abandonment of shopping carts; removal, 90.20
Accumulation of refuse, 90.18
Attachment of items to utility poles, 90.19
Conduct offensive to public well-being, 90.16
Fireworks, 90.21
Loitering, 90.24
Obstruction on sidewalks, 90.17
Open burning, 90.22
Public dances, 90.23
Weed Control
Definitions, 90.35
Removal by city, 90.38
Unlawful growth or accumulation on lots, 90.36
Unlawful growth or accumulation on tracts, 90.37
INDECENT EXPOSURE
Indecent exposure, 132.60
Penalty, 132.99
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Board judgement; handling of wastes, 53.07
Control installation, 53.11
Cost recovery system, 53.14
Definitions, 53.02
Described substances, 53.06
Designated discharge, 53.04
Discharge prohibited, 53.03
House connections, 53.16
Industrial charge, 53.15
Liquids and wastes; prohibited discharge, 53.05
Preliminary treatment; flow equalizing, 53.10
Rate schedule, 53.13
Samples, 53.12
Sanitary sewer line and construction, 53.17
Testing, 53.08
Title, 53.01
Traps provided, 53.09
INSECTS (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
Index 11
JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION; POLICE
Incarceration of convicted, 31.03
Mandatory fees, 31.05
Municipal Judge, 31.01
Police, generally
Assistance, 134.06
Impersonating, 134.07
Restricting or obstructing an officer, 134.13
Police Reserve Corps
Assisting regular police officers, 31.23
Authority; Chief of Police; rules and regulations, 31.16
Carrying firearms, 31.21
Creation, 31.15
Identification cards; insignia; uniform, 31.20
Impersonating member prohibited, 31.26
Powers and duties, 31.22
Qualifications for membership, 31.17
Rank or rating, 31.19
Termination of membership, 31.25
Training, 31.18
Workman=s compensation benefits; indemnity insurance, 31.24
Suspension; probation; community service, 31.04
Temporary Municipal Judge, 31.02
LABOR MANAGEMENT RELATIONS BOARD (See PERSONNEL)
LARCENY
Larceny, 132.10
Penalty, 132.99
LITTERING
Condition of violation; suspension, 92.03
Definitions, 92.01
Unlawful behavior, 92.02
LOITERING (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
LOTTERY (See GAMBLING; RAFFLES)
MARIJUANA (See DRUGS AND ALCOHOL)
2010 S-7
12 Tularosa - Index
MINORS (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, PAWNBROKERS; SECOND-HAND
DEALERS)
Offenses against or pertaining to minors
Abandonment of child prohibited, 133.01
Contributing to delinquency of a minor, 133.03
Cruelty to child prohibited, 133.02
Curfew, 133.04
Permitting loitering by minors, 133.05
MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Definitions, 155.01
Mobile Home Parks
Accessory uses, 155.12
Common-use areas, 155.09
Development Plan, 155.02
EID regulations, 155.14
Existing mobile home parks, 155.13
Improvements required, 155.05
Lighting, 155.10
Lot standards, 155.08
Phasing, 155.06
Sanitation, 155.11
Size and density, 155.03
Spacing and setbacks, 155.04
Walls and fences, 155.07
Recreational vehicle parks
Common-use areas, 155.31
Development Plan, 155.25
EID regulations, 155.36
Existing recreational vehicle parks, 155.35
Improvements required, 155.26
Lighting, 155.32
Phasing, 155.27
Sanitation, 155.33
Size and density, 155.30
Standards, 155.29
Toilet and lavatory facilities, 155.34
Walls and fences, 155.28
MOTOR VEHICLE (See ABANDONED VEHICLES, TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS)
2009 S-6
Index 12A
MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAX (See BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
PROVISIONS
MUNICIPAL JUDGE (See JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION; POLICE)
NOISE REGULATIONS
Excessive noises enumerated, 94.03
Excessive noise prohibited, 94.02
General provisions, 94.01
NUISANCES (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
PARKING (See TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS, ZONING)
PAWNBROKERS; SECOND-HAND DEALERS
Bond, 112.02
Compliance required, 112.07
Definition, 112.09
Evidence of ownership; prerequisite to certain transactions, 112.06
Garage and yard sales, 112.12
Hours of business, 112.08
Inspection permitted, 112.11
License required, 112.01
Records, 112.03
Records required, 112.10
Reports, 112.04
Transactions with juveniles and the like, 112.05
PERJURY, 134.11
PERSONNEL (See also JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION; POLICE, VILLAGE GOVERNMENT;
MAYOR AND TRUSTEES)
Conflicts, 32.02
Definitions, 32.03
Employee rights, 32.04
2009 S-6
12B Tularosa - Index
Index 13
PERSONNEL (Cont'd)
Employer/Employee Relations
Appropriate bargaining units, 32.15
Decertification, 32.18
Elections, 32.16
Exclusive representation, 32.17
Judicial enforcement; standard of review, 32.25
Negotiations; impasse resolution, 32.20
Prohibited practices; employees, labor organization or representative, 32.22
Prohibited practices; employers, 32.21
Scope of bargaining, 32.19
Strikes and lockouts, 32.23
Valid agreements, 32.24
Labor Management Relations Board
Creation and terms, 32.35
Hearing procedures, 32.37
Powers and duties, 32.36
Management rights, 32.05
Purpose, 32.01
PHONE
Malicious use of telephone, 134.10
POLICE (See also ANIMALS, JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION; POLICE)
PRIVACY; ABUSE, 136.02
PROSECUTION
Malicious criminal prosecution, 134.09
PROPERTY OFFENSES
Criminal damage to property, 131.02
Injuring or tampering with vehicles, 131.01
Protection of ditches, 131.03
Trespassing, 131.04
Veteran=s Memorial Park, preservation of, 131.06
Wrongful entry of public facility, 131.05
PROSTITUTION
Prostitution generally, 132.70
Patronizing prostitutes, 132.71
Promoting prostitution, 132.72
Penalty, 132.99
2009 S-6
14 Tularosa - Index
PUBLIC LIBRARY
Board, 35.03
Director, 35.02
Established, 35.01
Property acquisition and disposal, 35.05
Unlawful acts, 35.04
RABIES (See ANIMALS)
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS, TSO IV
REFUSE (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES, SOLID WASTE)
SECOND-HAND DEALERS (See PAWNBROKERS; SECOND-HAND DEALERS)
SERVICES AND ACCOMMODATIONS
Falsely obtaining services and accommodation, 132.05
Penalty, 132.99
SEWER UTILITIES (See GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS; INDUSTRIAL
WASTE)
SHOPLIFTING
Shoplifting, 132.12
Penalty, 132.99
SIGNS
Definitions, 153.02
Design, 153.04
Lighting, 153.07
Location and position, 153.06
Maintenance, 153.09
Permit required, 153.03
Purpose, 153.01
Removal of
Obsolete business signs, 153.10
Unlawful signs, 153.11
Signs not requiring permits, 153.08
Size, 153.05
Unauthorized use of vehicle signs, 134.15
2009 S-6
Index 15
SOLID WASTE
Collection Requirements; Receptacles
Collection, transport and disposal, 50.21
Compulsory solid waste collection, 50.15
Disturbing receptacles, 50.20
Failure to deposit refuse in proper receptacles; authority to remove, 50.17
Failure to pay fees, 50.18
Fee schedule, 50.16
Placement, construction and maintenance of receptacles, 50.19
Unauthorized dump sites, 50.22
Definitions, 50.01
Enforcement procedures, 50.03
Fees, 50.02
Franchise Agreement Regulations
Assignment, sale, sublease or subcontract, 50.62
Certification of state approval, 50.57
Collection arrangements, 50.58
Collector=s duties, 50.51
Fees, 50.60
Indemnification, 50.59
Insurance coverage, 50.54
Performance bond, 50.56
Right to use rights-of-way, 50.53
Service to government, 50.55
Term and renewal, 50.52
Termination, 50.63
Type of franchise, 50.50
Vehicular equipment, 50.61
Prohibited Activity
Burning or burying solid waste, 50.35
Infectious waste, flammable, explosive or combustible material, 50.38
Removal of dead animals, 50.37
Scattering or disposal of solid waste, 50.36
SMOKING REGULATIONS (See CLEAN INDOOR AIR)
SPEED LIMITS (See TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS)
STOLEN PROPERTY
Receiving stolen property, 132.11
Penalty, 132.99
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS (See BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION, TRAFFIC;
GENERAL PROVISIONS, SUBDIVISIONS)
2008 S-4
16 Tularosa - Index
SUBDIVISIONS
Authority, 152.02
Definitions, 152.05
Design Standards
Alley location, 152.46
Monuments, 152.51
Public sites, 152.50
Public sites and open spaces, 152.49
Street and alley standards, 152.47
Street location and arrangement, 152.45
Utility improvements, 152.48
Water rights, 152.52
Interpretation, 152.04
Jurisdiction, 152.03
Penalty, 152.99
Purpose, 152.01
Subdivision Procedure; Fees
Alternate summary approval, 152.32
Exempted subdivision procedure, 152.35
Final plat procedure, 152.27
Guarantees of performance, 152.33
Plats and data for final approval, 152.31
Plats and data for preliminary approval, 152.30
Pre-application, 152.25
Preliminary plat procedure, 152.26
Review fees, 152.28
Security and indemnity agreement, 152.34
Suitability of land, 152.29
Variances and exceptions, 152.06
SWIMMING (See WATER)
SWINDLING
Swindling, 132.14
Penalty, 132.99
TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Administrative designation, 70.04
Code adopted by reference, 70.01
Maximum penalty, 70.01
Ordinance
Available for inspection, 70.06
Copies for purchase, 70.07
2011 S-8
Index 17
TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS (Cont'd)
Penalty assessment misdemeanors; option; effect, 70.03
Penalty assessment program, 70.02
Permitted traffic control devices, 70.04
Preference to vehicles upon streets, 70.01
Prohibited signage, 70.04
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specific places, 70.01
Additional parking restrictions, 70.05
Street or highway, 70.01
Traffic control devices, 70.04
TRAILERS (See ZONING)
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE (See TRAFFIC; GENERAL PROVISIONS)
VETERAN=S MEMORIAL PARK
Preservation of, 131.06
VILLAGE GOVERNMENT; MAYOR AND TRUSTEES
Compensation, 30.02
DMV administrative fees, 30.03
Duties, 30.01
VILLAGE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Building Inspector, 150.06
Creation, 150.01
Powers and duties, 150.03
Removal of members, 150.05
Rules and regulations, 150.04
Terms of office, 150.02
WATER (See also GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS, SUBDIVISIONS)
Maintenance and Protection of Supply
Application, 52.01
Declaration of nuisance, 52.08
Enforcement, 52.02
Penalty, 52.99
Picnicking, 52.03
Pollution, 52.05
Running and irrigation of water, 52.10
Soil erosion, 52.06
Swimming, 52.04
Watering of livestock, 52.07
Well and liquid waste disposal setback, 52.09
2011 S-8
18 Tularosa - Index
WEAPONS
Definitions, 137.01
Exceptions; permits, 137.04
Negligent use, 137.03
Unlawful carrying, 137.02
Unlawful possession, transfer or sale, 137.05
WEEDS (See HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES)
WELLS (See GENERAL WATER AND SEWER PROVISIONS)
ZONING
Administration and Enforcement
Board of Appeals, 154.36
Changes and amendments, 154.39
Code Enforcer, 154.37
Recently annexed territory, 154.38
Required permits, 154.35
Definitions, 154.02
Districts
C Commercial, 154.21
D Industrial, 154.23
HR Historical Commercial, 154.22
R-1 Single Family Residential, 154.17
R-2 Multiple Family Residential, 154.18
R-MH Mobile Home Resident, 154.19
RA Residential/Agricultural, 154.16
Exceptions and modifications, 154.25
General regulations, 154.15
Nonconforming uses, 154.24
Off-street parking, 154.27
Penalty, 154.99
Purpose, 154.01
Special uses, 154.26
Title, 154.01
2011 S-8

