7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 1/640
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Elko, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and including
ordinance 837, passed January 8, 2019, and resolution 36-99, passed August 10, 1999. Ordinances and resolutions of
the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they
are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of
the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE CITY OF ELKO:
Section 1. Enactment Of Elko City Code. The Elko City code, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and hereby approved
and accepted in its published form on the date hereof is hereby adopted and enacted as the law of the city of Elko.
Section 2. Upon passage of the ordinance two (2) copies of the Elko City code adopted and enacted hereby shall be
filed with the librarian of the Nevada state library, and there after the same shall be received in all courts of this state as
an authorized compilation of the general municipal ordinances of the city of Elko. These copies shall be supplemented
as hereinafter provided.
Section 3. One copy of this Elko City code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk of the city of Elko as part of this
ordinance and shall be perpetually retained in the city clerk's office without supplementation or alteration as the original
Elko City code adopted and enacted by the ordinance. Such official copy shall be received as prima facie evidence in
all courts and places without further proof as the original Elko City code adopted by this board.
One further copy of this Elko City code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk of the city of Elko which the city clerk
shall keep currently supplemented as provided in this ordinance, and which shall be available for inspection by the
public in the office of the city clerk, and which shall be received as prima facie evidence in all courts and places without
further proof as the Elko City code as supplemented.
Section 4. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification and supplementation, the loose leaf type of
binding for the Elko City code and to supply continuous supplement service each newly adopted ordinance of the
provisions of this Elko City code shall, within thirty (30)days following the date of passage and adoption be printed with
proper code title, chapter and section number, excluding from the ordinances the titles, enacting clauses, signatures,
attestations and other formal parts, and such supplement to this code so prepared shall be inserted in its proper place
in the Elko City Code by the city clerk of the city of Elko. Two (2) copies of the supplements as prepared shall be
submitted to the librarian of the Nevada state library for insertion in the copies of the Elko City code on file. Copies of
such supplements shall be made available to the public on such terms and at such price or charge as the city manager
shall determine from time to time.
Section 5. The Elko City code shall have incorporated therein as a part thereof a copy of the city charter of the city of
Elko as amended and extended, together with all further amendments, extensions, supplements and changes thereto.
This ordinance passed and adopted this ninth day of June, 1964, by the unanimous vote of the board of supervisors of
the city of Elko.
APPROVED: June 9, 1964
Mayor
ATTEST:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 2/640
Clerk
ELKO CITY CHARTER
AN ACT incorporating the city of Elko, in Elko County, Nevada, and defining the boundaries thereof, under a new
charter; and providing other matters properly relating thereto.
(Approved April 15, 1971)
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEVADA, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND ASSEMBLY, DO ENACT AS
FOLLOWS:
Section 1. The charter of the city of Elko is as follows: Each section of the charter shall be deemed to be a section of
this act for the purpose of any subsequent amendment.
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION OF CITY; GENERAL POWERS; BOUNDARIES;
WARDS AND ANNEXATIONS; CITY OFFICES
Section 1.010 Preamble; Legislative Intent.
1. In order to provide for the orderly government of the city of Elko and the general welfare of its citizens the
legislature hereby establishes this charter for the government of the city of Elko. It is expressly declared as the
intent of the legislature that all provisions of this charter be liberally construed to carry out the express
purposes of the charter and that the specific mention of particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in
any way the general powers necessary to carry out the purposes of the charter.
2. Any powers expressly granted by this charter are in addition to any powers granted to a city by the general
law of this state. All provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes which are applicable generally to cities (not
including, unless otherwise expressly mentioned in this charter, chapter 265, 266 or 267 of NRS) which are not
in conflict with the provisions of this charter apply to the city of Elko.
Section 1.020 Incorporation Of City.
1. All persons who are inhabitants of that portion of the state of Nevada embraced within the limits set forth in
section 1.030 shall constitute a political and corporate body by the name of "city of Elko" and by that name they
and their successors shall be known in law, have perpetual succession and may sue and be sued in all courts.
2. Whenever used throughout this charter, "city" means the city of Elko.
Section 1.030 Description Of Territory.
The territory embraced in the city is that certain land described in the official plat required by NRS 234.250 to
be filed with the county recorder and county assessor of Elko County, as such plat is revised from time to time.
Section 1.050 Elective Offices.
1. The elective officers of the city consist of:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 3/640
(a) A mayor.
(b) Four members of the city council.
2. Such officers must be elected as provided by this charter.
Section 1.060 Elective Offices: Vacancies.
Except as otherwise provided in NRS 268.325:
1. A vacancy in the city council must be filled by a majority vote of the members of the city council within 30
days after the occurrence of the vacancy. A person may be selected to fill a prospective vacancy in the city
council before the vacancy occurs. In such a case, each member of the city council, except any member
whose term of office expires before the occurrence of the vacancy, may participate in any action taken by the
city council pursuant to this section. The appointee must have the same qualifications as are required of the
elective official.
2. No such appointment extends beyond the first Monday in:
(a) If the appointee is filling a vacancy occurring in an office for which an election is held pursuant to
subsection 2 of section 5.010, July after the next municipal election, at which election the office must be
filled.
(b) If the appointee is filling a vacancy occurring in an office for which an election is held pursuant to
subsection 1, 3 or 4 of section 5.010, January after the next municipal election, at which election the office
must be filled.
Section 1.070 Appointive Offices.
1. The city council of the city shall appoint the following officers:
(a) City clerk.
(b) City attorney.
(c) Chief of police.
(d) Municipal judge.
(e) Fire chief.
(f) City manager.
(g) City engineer, who may be the city manager.
2. The city council may establish such other offices and appoint such other officers as it may deem necessary.
Section 1.080 Appointive Officers: Duties; Salary.
1. All appointive officers of the city shall perform such duties under the direction of the city manager as may be
designated by the city council.
2. All appointive officers of the city shall receive such salary as may be designated by the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 4/640
Section 1.090 Officers' Performance Bonds.
The city council may require from all officers and employees of the city constituted or appointed under this
charter, other than members of the city council, sufficient security for the faithful and honest performance of
their respective duties.
Section 1.100 Mayor And Members Of City Council Not To Hold Other Office.
1. The mayor and the members of the city council:
(a) Shall not hold any other elective office with Elko County or the city, except as otherwise provided by law
or as a member of a board or commission for which no compensation is received.
(b) Must not be elected or appointed to any office created by or the compensation for which was increased or
fixed by the city council until 1 year after the expiration of the term for which such person was elected.
2. Any person holding any office proscribed by subsection 1 automatically forfeits his office as mayor or as
member of the city council.
Section 1.110 Oath Of Office.
Every person elected or appointed to fill any office shall subscribe to the official oath as provided by the city
council. Every such person shall swear or affirm that he is not under any direct or indirect obligation to vote for,
appoint or elect any person to any office, position or employment in the city government. (SB 134, eff. 6-2-
2011; Ord. AB11, amended, 10-2-2001; Legislative Updates, amended, 11-13-2000)
ARTICLE II
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Section 2.010 City Council: Qualifications; Election; Term Of Office; Salary.
1. The legislative power of the city is vested in a city council consisting of four members and the mayor.
2. The members of the city council must be:
(a) Bona fide residents of the city for at least 2 years before their election.
(b) Qualified electors within the city.
3. All members of the city council must be voted upon by the registered voters of the city at large and, except
as otherwise provided in section 5.010, shall serve for terms of 4 years.
4. The members of the city council must receive a salary in an amount fixed by the city council.
Section 2.020 City Council: Contracts.
Members of the city council may vote on any lease, contract or other agreement, which extends beyond their
terms of office.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 5/640
Section 2.030 City Council: Duties Concerning Departments.
1. The city council shall establish a finance department of the city, and may establish such other departments
as it determines are necessary. The city council shall control and supervise the departments of the city and
may establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the administration of the departments.
2. The mayor shall designate from among the members of the city council members to act as liaison for the
different departments and functions of the city.
3. Reserved.
4. The duties of each department must be designated by the city council.
Section 2.040 City Council: Discipline Of Members, Other Persons; Subpoena Power.
1. The city council may:
(a) Provide for the punishment of any member of the city council for disorderly conduct committed in its
presence.
(b) Order the attendance of witnesses and the production of all papers relating to any business before the
city council.
2. If any person ordered to appear before the city council fails to obey the order:
(a) The city council or any member thereof may apply to the clerk of the district court for a subpoena
commanding the attendance of the person before the city council.
(b) The clerk may issue the subpoena, and any peace officer may serve it.
(c) If the person upon whom the subpoena is served fails to obey it, the court may issue an order to show
cause why the person should not be held in contempt of court and upon hearing of the matter may adjudge
the person guilty of contempt and punish him accordingly.
Section 2.050 Meetings: Quorum.
1. The city council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and, by ordinance, may provide for
additional regular meetings.
2. A majority of all members of the city council constitutes a quorum to do business, but a lesser number of the
members of the city council may meet and recess from time to time, and compel the attendance of the absent
members.
3. Except as otherwise provided by law, all sessions and all proceedings of the city council must be public.
Section 2.060 Meetings: Special And Emergency.
1. In addition to its regularly scheduled meetings, the city council may hold special and emergency meetings.
Special and emergency meetings may be held on call of the mayor or by a majority of the city council in a
manner that complies with the provisions of chapter 241 of NRS.
2. At a special meeting:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 6/640
(a) No business may be transacted except such as has been stated in the call of the meeting.
(b) No ordinance may be passed except an emergency.
Section 2.070 Meetings: Time And Place; Rules.
The city council may:
1. Fix the time and place of its meetings and judge the qualifications and election of its own members.
2. Adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings.
Section 2.080 Oaths And Affirmations.
The mayor, each member of the city council and the city clerk may administer oaths and affirmations relating to
any business pertaining to the city before the city council or to be considered by the city council.
Section 2.090 Powers Of City Council: Ordinances, Resolutions And Orders.
1. The city council may make and pass all ordinances, resolutions and orders not repugnant to the constitution
of the United States or the state of Nevada, or to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes or of this charter,
necessary for the municipal government and the management of the affairs of the city, and for the execution of
all the powers vested in the city.
2. When power is conferred upon the city council to do and perform anything, and the manner of exercising the
power is not specifically provided for, the city council may provide by ordinance the manner and details
necessary for the full exercise of the power.
3. The city council may enforce ordinances by providing penalties not to exceed those established by the
legislature for misdemeanors.
4. The city council has such powers, not in conflict with the express or implied provisions of this charter, as are
conferred generally by statute upon the governing bodies of cities organized under a special charter.
5. The city council shall not pass any ordinance increasing or diminishing the salary of any elective officer
during the term for which he is elected or appointed.
Section 2.100 Ordinances: Passage By Bill; Amendments; Subject Matter; Title Requirements.
1. No ordinance may be passed except by bill and by a majority vote of the whole city council. The style of all
ordinances must be as follows: "The city council of the city of Elko does ordain:"
2. An ordinance must not contain more than one subject, which must be briefly indicated in the title. Where the
subject of the ordinance is not so expressed in the title, the ordinance is void as to the matter not expressed in
the title.
3. Any ordinance which amends an existing ordinance must set out in full the ordinance or sections thereof to be
amended, and must indicate matter to be omitted.
Section 2.110 Ordinances: Enactment Procedure; Emergency Ordinances.
1. All proposed ordinances when first proposed shall be read to the city council by title and may be referred to
a committee for consideration, after which an adequate number of copies of the proposed ordinance must be
filed with the city clerk for public distribution. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 3, notice of the filing
must be published once in a newspaper qualified pursuant to the provisions of chapter 238 of NRS, as
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 7/640
amended from time to time, and published in the city at least 10 days before the adoption of the ordinance. The
city council shall adopt or reject the ordinance or an amendment thereto, within 30 days from the date of such
publication.
2. At the next regular meeting or adjourned meeting of the city council following the proposal of an ordinance,
the ordinance must be considered again with the report of the committee, if any. Thereafter, it must be read as
first introduced, or as amended, and thereupon the proposed ordinance must be finally voted upon or action
thereon postponed.
3. In cases of emergency or where the ordinance is of a kind specified in section 7.020, by unanimous consent
of the city council, final action may be taken immediately or at a special meeting called for that purpose, and no
notice of the filing of the copies of the proposed ordinance with the city clerk need be published.
4. All ordinances must be signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and published by title, together with
the names of the members of the city council voting for or against passage, in a newspaper qualified pursuant
to the provisions of chapter 238 of NRS, as amended from time to time, and published in the city for at least
one publication, before the ordinance shall become effective. The city council may, by majority vote, order the
publication of the ordinance in full in lieu of publication by title only.
5. The city clerk shall keep on file all ordinances, including the affidavits of publication by the publisher.
Section 2.120 Codification Of Ordinances; Publication Of Code.
1. The city council may codify and publish a code of its municipal ordinances in the form of a municipal code.
The city council may incorporate into the municipal code a copy of this charter and such additional data as the
city council may prescribe. When the municipal code is published, two copies of the code must be filed with the
librarian at the supreme court law library.
2. The ordinances in the code must be arranged in appropriate chapters, articles, and sections excluding the
titles, enacting clauses, signature of the mayor, attestations and other formal parts.
3. The codification must be adopted by an ordinance and must not contain any substantive changes,
modifications or alterations of existing ordinances. The only title necessary for the ordinance is "An ordinance
for codifying and compiling the general ordinances of the city of Elko".
4. The codification may be amended or extended by ordinance.
Section 2.130 Powers Of City Council: Public Property, Buildings.
1. The city council may:
(a) Control the property of the corporation.
(b) Erect and maintain all buildings necessary for the use of the city.
(c) Purchase, receive, hold, sell, lease, convey and dispose of property, wherever situated, for the benefit of
the city, improve and protect such property, and do all other things in relation thereto which natural persons
might do.
2. The city council may not, except as otherwise specifically provided by this charter or any other law,
mortgage, hypothecate or pledge any property of the city for any purpose.
Section 2.140 Powers Of City Council: Eminent Domain.
The city council may condemn property for the public use in the manner prescribed by chapter 37 of NRS, as
amended from time to time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 8/640
Section 2.150 Powers Of City Council: Licensing, Regulation And Prohibition Of Businesses, Trades And
Professions.
1. The city council may:
(a) Regulate all businesses, trades and professions.
(b) Fix, impose and collect a license tax for revenue upon all businesses, trades and professions.
2. The city council may establish any equitable standard to be used in fixing license taxes collected pursuant to
this section.
Section 2.160 Powers Of City Council: Recreational Facilities; Definition.
1. The legislature finds and declares that recreation facilities for the use and enjoyment of all the inhabitants of
the city are public uses and municipal purposes, and that the acquisition, construction and operation thereof by
the city council will promote the morals, amusement, entertainment, health, welfare and safety of the
inhabitants of the city.
2. As used in sections 2.160, 2.170 and 2.180, "recreation facility" or "recreation facilities" means a place,
structure, area or other facility used for community recreation, such as playgrounds, playing fields or courts,
beaches, lakes, rivers, swimming pools, dams constructed across streams or rivers for the creation of
swimming pools and recreational reservoirs, gymnasiums, auditoriums, camps, parks, ski facilities, golf
courses, natural reservations, recreation grounds, fairgrounds, exposition buildings, convention halls, field
houses, amusement halls and recreation centers.
Section 2.170 Powers Of City Council: Recreational Facilities; Financing.
The city council may:
1. Establish, construct, purchase, lease, rent, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise acquire,
reconstruct, improve, extend, better, alter, repair, equip, furnish, regulate, maintain, operate and manage
recreation facilities within or without the city, including personal or real property, improvements and fixtures
thereon, property of any nature appurtenant thereto or used in connection therewith, and every estate interest
and right, legal or equitable, therein, including terms for years.
2. Deposit the proceeds of any of the license taxes collected pursuant to section 2.150 in a special fund in the
city treasury for the purpose of:
(a) Operating and maintaining recreation facilities under the jurisdiction of the city council.
(b) Improving, extending and bettering such recreation facilities.
(c) Constructing, purchasing or otherwise acquiring such recreation facilities.
3. Accept contributions, grants or other financial assistance from the federal government or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, corporate or otherwise, the state of Nevada or any of its political subdivisions or from
any other source, for or in aid of any recreation facility within the area of operation of the city council, and
comply with such conditions, trust indentures, leases or agreements as may be necessary, convenient or
desirable.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 9/640
Section 2.180 Powers Of City Council: Recreational Facilities; Flood Control Projects.
Whenever any recreation facility is affected by or will be affected by any flood control project being constructed
or to be constructed under the provisions of any federal law, if the city council finds that the flood control project
will improve, better and protect the recreation facility, the city council may give assurances to and perform any
other acts required by and satisfactory to the secretary of the army that the local cooperation required for the
flood control project by federal law will be furnished by the city.
Section 2.190 Powers Of City Council: Police Ordinances.
The city council may enact and enforce such local police ordinances as are not in conflict with the general laws
of the state of Nevada.
Section 2.200 Powers Of City Council: Fire Protection; Regulation Of Explosives, Inflammable Materials; Fire
Codes And Regulations.
The city council may:
1. Organize, regulate and maintain a fire department.
2. Provide for the appointment of a fire chief and prescribe his duties.
3. Regulate or prohibit the storage of any explosive, combustible or inflammable material in or transported
through the city, and prescribe the distance from any residential or commercial area where it may be kept. Any
ordinance adopted pursuant to this subsection that regulates places of employment where explosives are
stored must be at least as stringent as the standards and procedures adopted by the division of industrial
relations of the department of business and industry pursuant to NRS 618.890.
4. Establish, by ordinance, a fire code and other regulations necessary to carry out the purposes of this
section, and to provide for the prevention, suppression and extinguishment of fires and conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire, explosion or combustion, and to provide for the enforcement of all such codes and
regulations by imposing adequate penalties for violations thereof.
Section 2.210 Powers Of City Council: Public Health; Board Of Health; Regulations.
The city council may:
1. Provide for safeguarding public health in the city.
2. Create a board of health and prescribe the powers and duties of the board.
3. Provide for the enforcement of all regulations and quarantines established by the board of health by
imposing adequate penalties for violations thereof.
Section 2.220 Powers Of City Council: Buildings; Construction And Maintenance Regulations; Building And
Safety Codes.
The city council may:
1. Regulate all matters relating to the construction, maintenance and safety of buildings, structures and
property within the city.
2. Adopt any building or safety code necessary to carry out the provisions of this section and establish such
fees as may be necessary.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 10/640
Section 2.230 Powers Of City Council: Zoning And Planning.
The city council may:
1. Divide the city into districts and regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair or use of buildings, structures or land within the districts.
2. Establish and adopt ordinances and regulations relating to the subdivision of land.
Section 2.240 Powers Of City Council: Subdivision; Payment For Installation Of Utilities.
The city council may require the owners of land who lay out and plat the land into lots, streets and alleys to
guarantee the payment for the installation of sewers, water mains and lines, drains, curbs and gutters, and the
grading and paving of streets within the division or subdivision defined by the plat.
Section 2.250 Powers Of City Council: Rights Of Way, Parks, Public Buildings And Grounds And Other Public
Places.
The city council may:
1. Lay out, maintain, alter, improve or vacate all public rights of way in the city.
2. Regulate the use of public parks, buildings, grounds and rights of way and prevent the unlawful use thereof.
3. Require landowners to keep the adjacent streets, sidewalks and public parks, buildings and grounds free
from encroachments or obstructions.
4. To the extent permissible under the Nevada constitution and the constitution of the United States, regulate
and prevent in all public places:
(a) The distribution and exhibition of handbills or signs.
(b) Any practice tending to annoy persons passing in such public places.
(c) Public demonstrations and processions.
5. Prevent riots or any act tending to promote riots in any public place.
Section 2.260 Powers Of City Council: Traffic Control.
The city council may, by ordinance, regulate:
1. All vehicular, pedestrian and other traffic within the city and provide generally for the public safety on public
streets and rights of way.
2. The length of time for which vehicles may be parked upon the public streets and publicly owned parking lots.
Section 2.270 Powers Of City Council: Parking Meters; Off Street Public Parking Facilities.
1. The city council may acquire, install, maintain, operate and regulate parking meters at the curbs of the
streets or upon publicly owned property made available for public parking. The parking fees to be charged for
the use of the parking facilities regulated by parking meters must be fixed by the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 11/640
2. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council may acquire property within the city by any
lawful means, including eminent domain, for the purpose of establishing off street public parking facilities for
vehicles. The city council may, in bonds issued to acquire property for this purpose pledge the on street parking
revenues, the general credit of the city, or both, to secure the payment of the principal and interest thereon.
Section 2.280 Powers Of City Council: Railroads.
The city council may:
1. License, regulate or prohibit the location, construction or laying of tracks of any railroad or streetcar in any
public right of way.
2. Grant franchises to any person or corporation to operate a railroad or streetcar upon public rights of way and
adjacent property.
3. Declare a nuisance and require the removal of the tracks of any railroad or streetcar in any public right of
way.
4. Condemn rights of way for any public purpose across any railroad right of way.
5. Prescribe the length of time any public right of way may be obstructed by trains standing thereon.
6. Require railroad companies to fence their tracks and to construct cattle guards and crossings and to keep
them in repair.
7. Require railroad companies to provide protection against injury to persons or property.
8. Compel railroad companies to raise or lower their tracks to conform to any grade established by the city.
9. Compel railroad companies to provide that drainage from property adjacent to their tracks not be impaired.
Section 2.290 Powers Of City Council: Nuisances.
The city council may:
1. Determine by ordinance what shall be deemed nuisances.
2. Provide for the abatement, prevention and removal of those nuisances at the expense of the person
creating, causing or committing the nuisance.
3. Provide that the expense of removal is a lien upon the property upon which the nuisance is located. Such a
lien must:
(a) Be perfected by filing with the county recorder a statement by the city clerk of the amount of expenses
due and unpaid and describing the property subject to the lien.
(b) Be coequal with the latest lien thereon to secure the payment of general taxes.
(c) Not be subject to extinguishment by the sale of any property on account of the nonpayment of general
taxes.
(d) Be prior and superior to all liens, claims, encumbrances and titles other than the liens of assessments
and general taxes.
4. Provide any other penalty or punishment of persons responsible for such nuisances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 12/640
Section 2.300 Powers Of City Council: Animals And Poultry.
The city council may:
1. Fix, impose and collect an annual per capita tax on all animals and provide for the capture and disposal of all
animals on which the tax is not paid.
2. Regulate or prohibit the running at large and disposal of all kinds of animals and poultry.
3. Establish a facility for animal control and may appoint or hire such personnel as may be necessary to
operate the facility.
4. Prohibit cruelty to animals.
Section 2.310 Powers Of City Council: Abatement Of Noxious Insects, Rats And Disease Bearing Organisms.
The city council may take all steps necessary and proper for the extermination of noxious insects, rats and
other disease bearing organisms, either in the city or in territory outside the city but so situated that such
insects, rats and disease bearing organisms migrate or are carried into the city.
Section 2.320 Powers Of City Council: Sanitary Sewer Facilities.
The city council may:
1. Provide for a sanitary sewer system or any part thereof, and obtain property therefor either within or without
the city.
2. Sell any product or byproduct thereof and acquire the appropriate outlets within or without the city and
extend the sewer lines thereto.
3. Establish sewer fees and provide for the enforcement and collection thereof.
Section 2.330 Powers Of City Council: Provisions Of Utilities.
The city council may:
1. Provide, by contract, franchise or public enterprise, for any utility to be furnished to the city for the residents
thereof.
2. Provide for the construction of any facility necessary for the provision of the utilities.
3. Fix the rate to be paid for any utility provided by public enterprise. Any charges due for services, facilities or
commodities furnished by any utility owned by the city is a lien upon the property to which the service is
rendered and may be perfected by filing with the county recorder of Elko County a statement by the city clerk of
the amount due and unpaid and describing the property subject to the lien. Each such lien must:
(a) Be coequal with the latest lien thereon to secure the payment of general taxes.
(b) Not be subject to extinguishment by the sale of any property on account of the nonpayment of general
taxes.
(c) Be prior and superior to all liens, claims, encumbrances and titles other than the liens of assessments
and general taxes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 13/640
Section 2.340 Powers Of City Council: Cemeteries; Acquisition And Maintenance.
The city council may, by any lawful means:
1. Acquire and maintain property for public use as a cemetery.
2. Survey, plat, map, fence, ornament, and otherwise improve all public cemetery grounds.
3. Convey cemetery lots owned by the city, and pass rules and ordinances for the protection and government
of cemetery grounds.
4. Vacate public burial and cemetery grounds.
5. Prohibit subsequent burials therein.
6. Provide for the removal therefrom of all bodies, which may have been interred therein.
Section 2.350 Powers Of City Council: Television Franchises.
1. The city council may contract with, authorize or grant a franchise to, any person, company or association to
construct, maintain and operate a television installation system which requires the use of city property or that
portion of the city dedicated to public use for the maintenance of cables or wires underground, on the surface
or on poles for the transmission of the television picture.
2. Any franchise granted must require a time within which actual construction must be commenced, a time
within which distribution of television must be completed, and the posting of a bond in an amount to be set by
the city council to assure compliance therewith.
Section 2.360 Powers Of City Council: Flood Control.
The city council may:
1. Construct, within or without the city limits, works designed to protect the city from floods.
2. Acquire by purchase or condemnation any property or water right necessary or appropriate for that purpose.
3. Enact all ordinances and regulations necessary to carry the power conferred in this section into effect. (SB
134, eff. 6-2-2011; Ord. AB11, amended, 10-2-2001; Legislative Updates, amended, 11-13-2000; Article II,
amended, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE III
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
Section 3.010 Mayor: Qualifications; Duties; Mayor Pro Tempore.
1. The mayor must be:
(a) A bona fide resident of the city for at least 2 years before his election.
(b) A qualified elector within the city.
2. The mayor shall:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 14/640
(a) Serve as ex officio president of the city council and preside over its meetings.
(b) Serve as the chief executive officer of the city.
(c) Be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes.
(d) Perform such emergency duties as may be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the city.
(e) Perform such other duties, except administrative duties assigned by the city council to the city manager,
as may be prescribed by ordinance or by the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes which apply to a mayor
of a city organized under the provisions of a special charter.
3. The city council shall elect one of its members to be the mayor pro tempore who:
(a) Holds such office and title, without additional compensation, during the term for which he was elected.
(b) Must perform the duties of mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor.
(c) Must act as mayor until the next municipal election if the office of mayor becomes vacant.
Section 3.020 City Manager: Duties.
1. The city manager shall perform such administrative duties as the city council may designate. The city council
shall fix the duties and salary of the city manager.
2. The city manager may appoint such personnel as he may deem necessary, subject to the approval of the
city council.
Section 3.030 City Clerk: Duties.
The city clerk shall:
1. Keep the corporate seal and all books and papers belonging to the city.
2. Attend all meetings of the city council and keep an accurate journal of its proceedings, including a record of
all ordinances, bylaws and resolutions passed or adopted by it. After approval at each meeting of the city
council, the city clerk shall attest the journal after it has been signed by the mayor.
3. Sign all warrants issued.
4. Number and countersign all licenses issued by the city. All licenses must be in a form devised by the city
clerk and approved by the city council.
5. Enter upon the journal the result of the vote of the city council upon the passage of ordinances, or of any
resolution appropriating money, abolishing licenses or increasing or decreasing the rates of licenses.
6. Act as ex officio city treasurer, registry agent and license collector.
7. Perform such other duties as may be required by the city council.
Section 3.040 City Clerk's Bond.
The city clerk is liable and accountable on his official bond for the performance of his duties under the
provisions of this charter, and the city council may require from him such additional security as may be
necessary from time to time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 15/640
Section 3.050 City Attorney: Qualifications; Duties.
The city attorney shall be:
1. A duly licensed member of the state bar of Nevada but he need not be a resident of the city.
2. The legal officer of the city.
Section 3.070 Chief Of Police: Police Officers.
The chief of police may, subject to approval of the city council, appoint and supervise such police officers as
may be deemed necessary.
Section 3.080 City Officers: Duties Restricted And Altered.
The city council may prescribe by ordinance the powers and duties of all city officers and may add to, alter or
restrict such powers and duties.
Section 3.090 City Officers: Absence From Office.
If any appointive officer removes his office from the city, or absents himself therefrom for more than 30 days
without leave of the city council, his office must be declared vacant by the city council, and the vacancy filled by
appointment as provided in this charter.
Section 3.100 City Officers: Collection And Disposition Of Money.
1. All taxes, fines, forfeitures or other money collected or recovered by any officer or person pursuant to the
provisions of this charter or any valid ordinance of the city must be paid by the officer or person collecting or
receiving the money to the finance department of the city, which shall dispose of the money in accordance with
the ordinances, regulations and procedures established by the city council.
2. The city council may, by proper legal action, collect all money that is due and unpaid to the city or any officer
thereof, and the city council may pay from the general fund all fees and expenses necessarily incurred by it in
connection with the collection of that money.
Section 3.110 Removal Of Officers:
If any officer is adjudged guilty of nonfeasance, misfeasance or malfeasance in office, by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the city council may declare the office vacant and fill the vacancy so caused as provided
by law. (Ord. AB11, Amended, 10-2-2001; Article III, Amended, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE IV
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Section 4.020 Municipal Court: Municipal Judge.
The salary of the municipal judge must be fixed by the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 16/640
Section 4.030 Disposition Of Fines.
All fines and forfeitures for the violation of ordinances shall be paid into the treasury of the city in the manner to
be prescribed by ordinance. (Ord. AB11, Amended, 10-2-2001; Article IV, Amended, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE V
ELECTIONS
Section 5.010 Municipal Elections.
1. On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June 2011, there must be elected by the qualified voters of the
city, at a general election to be held for that purpose, a mayor and two members of the city council, all of whom
hold office until their successors have been elected and qualified pursuant to subsection 4.
2. On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June 2009, there must be elected by the qualified voters of the
city, at a general election to be held for that purpose, two members of the city council, both of whom hold office
until their successors have been elected and qualified pursuant to subsection 3.
3. On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2012, and at each successive interval of 4 years
thereafter; there must be elected by the qualified voters of the city, at a general election to be held for that
purpose, two members of the city council, both of whom hold office for a period of 4 years and until their
successors have been elected and qualified.
4. On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2014, and at each successive interval of 4 years
thereafter, there must be elected by the qualified voters of the city, at a general election to be held for that
purpose, a mayor and two members of the city council, all of whom hold office for a period of 4 years and until
their successors have been elected and qualified.
Section 5.020 Applicability Of State Election Laws; Elections Under Control Of City Council.
1. All elections held under this charter are governed by the provisions of the election laws of this state, so for
as such laws can be made applicable and are not inconsistent herewith.
2. The conduct of all municipal elections is under the control of the city council. For the conduct of municipal
elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections, and for the recount of ballots in cases of doubt or fraud,
the city council shall adopt by ordinance all regulations which it considers desirable and consistent with law and
this charter.
Section 5.030 Qualifications, Registration Of Voters.
1. Every person who resides within the city at the time of holding a municipal election, and whose name
appears upon the official register of voters in and for the city, is entitled to vote at the municipal election and for
all officers to be voted for and on all questions that may be submitted to the people at the election, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
2. Nothing in this charter denies or abridges the power of the city council to provide for supplemental
registration.
Section 5.040 Names On Ballots.
The full names of all candidates, except those who have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed
on the official ballots without party designation or symbol. The use of nicknames in conjunction with the
candidates' legal names is allowed and the nicknames may be printed on the official ballots. If two or more
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 17/640
candidates have the same surname or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their residence
addresses shall be printed with their names on the ballot.
Section 5.050 Ballots For Ordinances And Charter Amendments.
An ordinance or charter amendment to be voted on in the city shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The
ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement describing the
substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following
question: "Shall the above described (ordinance) (amendment) be adopted". The ballot or voting machine or
device shall be so marked as to indicate clearly in what manner the voter may cast his vote, either for or
against the ordinance or amendment.
Section 5.060 Availability Of Lists Of Registered Voters.
If, for any purpose relating to a municipal election or to candidates or issues involved in such an election, any
organization, group or person requests a list of registered voters of the city, the department, office or agency
which has custody of the official register of voters shall either permit the organization, group or person to copy
the voters' names and addresses from the official register of voters or furnish such a list.
Section 5.070 Watchers And Challengers.
A candidate is entitled upon written application to the election authorities at least 5 days before the election to
appoint two persons to represent him as watchers and challengers at each polling place where voters may cost
their ballots for him. A person so appointed has all the rights and privileges prescribed by watchers and
challengers under the election laws of this state. The watchers and challengers may exercise their rights
throughout the voting or until the ballots have been counted.
Section 5.080 Voting Machines.
The city council may provide for the use of mechanical or other devices for voting or counting votes that is not
inconsistent with law or the regulations of the secretary of state.
Section 5.090 Election Returns; Canvass; Certificates Of Election; Entry Of Officers Upon Duties; Tie Vote
Procedure.
1. The election returns from a municipal election must be filed with the city clerk, who shall immediately place
the returns in a safe or vault. No person may handle, inspect or in any manner interfere with the returns until
the returns are canvassed by the city council.
2. The city council shall meet within 6 working days after an election and canvass the returns and declare the
result. The election returns must be sealed and kept by the city clerk for 2 years, and no person may have
access thereto except on order of a court of competent jurisdiction or by order of the city council.
3. The city clerk, under his hand and official seal, shall issue to each person declared to be elected a certificate
of election. The officers so elected shall qualify and enter upon the discharge of their respective duties on the
first Monday in:
(a) If the officer is elected pursuant to subsection 1 or 2 of section 5.010, July next following his or her
election.
(b) If the officer is elected pursuant to subsection 3 or 4 of section 5.010, January next following his or her
election.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 18/640
4. If any election should result in a tie, the city council shall summon the candidates who received the tie vote
and determine the tie by lot. The clerk shall then issue to the winner a certificate of election.
Section 5.100 Contest Of Election.
A contested election for any municipal office shall be determined according to the law of the state regulating
proceedings in contested elections in political subdivisions. (SB 134, eff. 6-2-2011; Ord. AB11, amended, 10-2-
2001; Legislative Updates, amended, 11-13-2000; Article V, amended, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE VI
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section 6.010 Local Improvement Law.
The city council, on behalf of the city and in its name, without any election, may from time to time acquire,
improve, equip, operate and maintain, convert to or authorize:
1. Curb and gutter projects;
2. Drainage projects;
3. Off street parking projects;
4. Overpass projects;
5. Park projects;
6. Sanitary sewer projects;
7. Security walls;
8. Sidewalk projects;
9. Storm sewer projects;
10. Street projects;
11. Underground electric and communication facilities;
12. Underpass projects; and
13. Water projects.
Section 6.020 Local Improvement Law: Collateral Powers.
The city council on behalf of the city for the purpose of defraying all the costs of acquiring, improving or
converting to any project authorized by section 6.010, or any portion of the cost thereof not to be defrayed with
money otherwise available therefor, is vested with the powers granted to municipalities by chapters 271 and
704A of NRS, as amended from time to time. (Ord. AB11, amended, 10-2-2001; Article VI, amended, 10-23-
2000)
ARTICLE VII
LOCAL BONDS AND FRANCHISES
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 19/640
Section 7.010 Acquisition, Operation Of Municipal Utilities.
The city may, in the manner and for the purposes provided in this charter and Nevada Revised Statutes as they
apply to cities, grant franchises and acquire in any manner any public utility, and hold, manage and operate it,
either alone or jointly, with any level of government or instrumentality or subdivision thereof.
Section 7.020 Borrowing Money.
1. Subject to the limitations imposed by this article, the city may, for any corporate purpose, including without
limitation any purpose expressly authorized by this charter or by Nevada Revised Statutes for a city:
(a) Borrow money; and
(b) Issue bonds or other securities. The local government securities law, as amended from time to time,
applies to all securities so issued, except for securities issued pursuant to section 6.020.
2. Any property tax levied to pay the principal of or interest on such indebtedness must be levied upon all
taxable property within the city as provided in NRS 350.590 to 350.602, inclusive. (Ord. AB11, amended, 10-2-
2001; Legislative Updates, amended, 11-13-2000; Article VII, amended, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE VIII
REVENUE
Section 8.010 Municipal Taxes.
1. The city council shall annually, at the time prescribed by law for levying taxes for state and county purposes,
levy a tax not exceeding 3 percent upon the assessed value of all real and personal property within the city,
except as provided in the local government securities law and the consolidated local improvements law, as
amended from time to time. The taxes so levied must be collected at the same time and in the same manner
and by the same officers, exercising the same functions, as prescribed in the laws of the state of Nevada for
collection of state and county taxes. The revenue laws of the state must, in every respect not inconsistent with
the provisions of this charter be applicable to the levying, assessing and collecting of the municipal taxes.
2. In the matter of the equalization of assessments, the rights of the city and the inhabitants thereof must be
protected in the same manner and to the same extent by the action of the county board of equalization, as are
the state and county.
3. All forms and blanks used in levying, assessing and collecting the revenues of the state and counties must,
with such alterations or additions as may be necessary, be used in levying, assessing and collecting the
revenues of the city. The city council shall enact all such ordinances as it may deem necessary and not
inconsistent with this charter and the laws of the state for the prompt, convenient and economical collecting of
the revenue.
Section 8.020 Revenue Ordinances.
The city council may pass and enact all ordinances necessary to carry into effect the revenue laws in the city
and to enlarge, fix and determine the powers and duties of all officers in relation thereto. (Ord. AB11, amended,
10-2-2001; Legislative Updates, amended, 11-13-2000; Article VIII, amended, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE IX
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 20/640
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 9.010 Severability Of Provisions.
If any portion of this charter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this charter. The
legislature hereby declares that it would have passed the charter and each portion thereof, irrespective of the
portion which may be deemed unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
Section 9.020 Effect Of Enactment Of Charter.
1. All rights and property of every kind and description which were vested in the city prior to the enactment of
this charter shall be vested in the same municipal corporation on the effective date of this charter. No right or
liability, either in favor of or against such corporation existing at the time of becoming incorporated under this
charter, and no action or prosecution shall be affected by such change, but it shall stand and progress as if no
change has been made.
2. Whenever a different remedy is given by this charter, which may properly be made applicable to any right
existing at the time of such city so becoming incorporated under this charter, such remedy shall be cumulative
to the remedy before provided, and used accordingly.
3. All ordinances and resolutions in effect in the city prior to the effective date of this charter shall, unless in
conflict with the provisions of this charter, continue in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
4. The enactment of this charter shall not effect any change in the legal identity of the city.
5. The enactment of this charter shall not be construed to repeal or in any way affect or modify:
(a) Any special, local or temporary law.
(b) Any law or ordinance making an appropriation.
(c) An ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized.
(d) The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this charter becomes effective.
(e) Any bond of any public officer. (Ord. AB11, amended, 10-2-2001)
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
ELKO CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
This compilation and codification of the general ordinances of the city of Elko, Nevada, is declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Elko, Nevada. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate title heading, its chapter
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 21/640
heading, and its section heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself.
(1964 Code)
1-1-2: CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED:
The ordinances embraced in the following titles and chapters shall be designated and shall constitute the ELKO CITY
CODE, and may be so cited. (1964 Code)
1-1-3: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1964
Code)
1-1-4: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any such
unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (1964 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
Except as provided in section 1-1-2 of this chapter, and unless expressly continued by specific provisions of this code,
all ordinances of the city of a general, public and permanent nature enacted prior to the date of passage of this
ordinance, are hereby repealed, effective coincidentally with the effective date of this ordinance. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the following ordinances of the city are expressly repealed, effective coincidentally with the
effective date of this ordinance: City ordinance nos. 3, 5, 16, 23, 24, 30, 31, 37, 42, 45, 47, 55, 60, 62, 63, 70, 71, 73,
76, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85, 88, 89, 94, 95, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 115, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134,
135, 136, 139, 140, 141, 142, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 152, 153 and 154. (1964 Code)
1-2-2: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
A. The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way affect or modify:
1. Any special or temporary ordinance.
2. Any ordinance making an appropriation.
3. Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized.
4. The continued existence and operation of any agency, department or office heretofore legally established or held.
5. Any bond of any public officer.
6. Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 22/640
7. Tax levy ordinances.
8. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
9. Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting specialrights to persons or corporations.
10. Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants.
11. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places.
12. Improvement ordinances.
13. Ordinances relating to elections.
14. Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city.
15. All special ordinances.
B. All ordinances, rights and obligations set forth in subsection A of this section shall continue and exist in all respects
as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.
C. The repeal of prior ordinances provided in section 1-2-1 of this chapter shall not affect any act done, or any cause of
action accrued or established, or any plea, defense, bar or matter subsisting before the time when such repeal
takes effect.
D. All the provisions of the ordinances repealed by section 1-2-1 of this chapter shall be deemed to have remained in
force from the time they became effective so for as they may apply to any department, agency, office or trust, or to
any transaction, event, limitation, right or obligation, or to the construction of any contract already affected by such
ordinances, notwithstanding the repeal of such provisions.
E. No fine, forfeiture or penalty incurred under ordinances existing prior to the time this code takes effect shall be
affected by repeal of such existing ordinances, and the recovery of such fines and forfeitures and the enforcement
of such penalties shall be effected as if the ordinance repealed had remained in effect.
F. Where an offense was committed prior to the time this code takes effect, the offender shall be punished under the
ordinance in effect when the offense was committed.
G. No ordinance which heretofore has been repealed shall be revived by the repeals provided in section 1-2-1 of this
chapter.
H. The repeal by section 1-2-1 of this chapter of any ordinance validating previous acts, contracts of transaction shall
not affect the validity of such acts, contracts or transactions, but the same shall remain as valid as if there had been
no such repeal.
I. If any provision of this code enacted by this ordinance and derived from an ordinance which amended or repealed a
preexisting ordinance is held unconstitutional, the provision of section 1-2-1 of this chapter shall not prevent the
preexisting ordinance from being law if that appears to have been the intention of the city council or the people.
(1964 Code)
1-2-3: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct,
duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions only. (1964 Code)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 23/640
1-2-4: PENDING SUITS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is
expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in
any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that
the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
B. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance
making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by
virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of
the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this code. (1964 Code)
Chapter 3
FINES AND PENALTIES, COMMITMENT; RECOVERY BY
EXCEPTION, REQUIRED WORK, CHAIN GANG; WORK CREDIT;
AND LATE CHARGES
1-3-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Every person convicted of a violation of this code or of committing an act which is prohibited or made or declared
unlawful, or made or declared an offense by this code, or any city ordinance, shall be punished by imprisonment in the
county jail or city jail, or in such other place as may be provided by the city for the incarceration of offenders, for not
more than six (6) months, or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both fine and
imprisonment, unless this code or ordinance violated at the time of commission of such offense prescribes a different
specific fine or penalty. (Ord. 321, 12-8-1981)
1-3-2: INCARCERATION:
The municipal court, before whom any conviction is had, may order any person upon whom any fine or penalty shall be
imposed to be committed to the county jail or the city jail, or to such other place as may be provided by the city for the
incarceration of offenders, until such fine or penalty shall be fully paid. (Ord. 233, 8-10-1976)
1-3-3: PRISONERS REQUIRED TO WORK:
Upon the commitment to jail of any person convicted of a violation of this code or a city ordinance, the municipal court
may, in its discretion, adjudge and enter upon the docket a supplemental order that such offender shall be required to
work for the city on the streets or public works of the city at such labor as his or her strength will permit, when the
weather will permit, not exceeding eight (8) hours each working day and not exceeding six (6) days of each week. If a
fine was imposed for such work, the person so employed shall be allowed four dollars ($4.00) for each one day's
workon account of such fine, which shall apply on such fine until the same shall be exhausted or otherwise satisfied.
(Ord. 233, 8-10-1976)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 24/640
1-3-4: RECOVERY OF FINES AND JAIL CREDIT:
Fines imposed by the municipal court may be recovered by execution against the property of the defendant, or the
payment thereof enforced by imprisonment in the county jail, the city jail, or such other place as may be provided by
the city for the incarceration of offenders, at the rate of one day for every four dollars ($4.00) of such fine. (Ord. 233, 8-
10-1976)
1-3-5: CHAIN GANG:
When any person is ordered by the municipal court to work for the city under these penalty provisions, the chief of
police, or other police officers, sheriff or other person having charge of such violator while performing such work, may
employ the formation of a chain gang or any other reasonably humane and efficient means to provide for the proper
employment for the benefit of the city and to safeguard and prevent escape while being so employed. (Ord. 233, 8-10-
1976)
1-3-6: CORPORATIONS:
In all cases where a corporation is convicted of a violation of this code or a city ordinance for the commission of which
the natural person would be punishable, and there is no other punishment prescribed by this code or ordinance
violated, such corporation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 321, 12-8-
1981)
1-3-7: PUBLIC WORKS:
As used in this chapter, "public works" shall include the construction, or repair or cleaning of any street, road, sidewalk,
public square, park, building, cutting away hills, grading, putting in sewers, or other work whatsoever, which is or may
be authorized to be done by and for the use of the city and the expense of which is not to be borne exclusively by
individuals as property particularly benefited thereby. (Ord. 233, 8-10-1976)
1-3-8: COMMITMENT FOR NONPAYMENT OF FINE:
Any person who is sentenced to pay a fine and who is financially able to pay such fine but refuses or neglects to pay
such fine may be imprisoned by the municipal court toenforce payment of the fine. No person who is an indigent shall
be imprisoned for nonpayment of a fine because of being financially unable to pay the fine. Any person fined who is an
indigent may request indigent status by filing with the municipal judge a written affidavit setting out facts with some
particularity, definiteness and certainty concerning such person's financial disability. The municipal judge shall forthwith
consider the application and shall make such further inquiry as such judge may deem necessary. If the judge finds that
the applicant is an indigent, the indigent shall not be imprisoned for nonpayment of the fine. (Ord. 233, 8-10-1976)
1-3-9: LATE CHARGES:
The city council members may set by resolution a late charge for overdue payment for any services provided by the
city to the public. Any such late charge must accompany the overdue payment to defray the expenses incurred by the
city in handling and processing such delinquent payments and to compensate the city for the loss of use of such
revenue. Services provided by the city which may be subject to a late charge include, but are not limited to, the
following: water, sewer, street light services, landfill charges, and land lease payments. (Ord. 582, 5-14-2002)
Chapter 4
DEFINITIONS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 25/640
1-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
ADOPTING AUTHORITY: When used herein as to rules and regulations, it shall mean any officer, employee, agent or
agency of the city of Elko, including councils or commissions of members thereof, authorized by ordinance to make
rules and regulations.
CITY: The city of Elko, Elko County, Nevada.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Elko.
CITY TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city of Elko.
CODE OR THIS CODE: This Elko city code.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end
of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Elko.
COUNTY: The county of Elko, Nevada.
GENDER: A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships
and corporations, as well as to males.
INTERPRETATION: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general
provisions imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be
controlling.
NUMBER: Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OR/AND: "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
OWNER: When applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant, or owner of a community property interest therein, or the owner of the whole thereof.
PERSON: Shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a
unit, including the officers thereof, as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except real property.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include land, tenements and hereditaments, and all buildings thereon and permanent
improvements thereto.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET: Shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane,
viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto within the city. (1964 Code)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 26/640
Chapter 5
ELECTION REGULATIONS
1-5-1: CONDUCTING OF CITY ELECTIONS:
All city elections and the manner of holding the same shall be governed and conducted in accordance with the city
charter, this chapter, and the laws of the state governing general elections, so far as the same can be made applicable
to such city elections, and except as herein provided, and the rules and regulations for the conduct of primary and
general elections in all counties of the state, issued by the department of state, the state of Nevada, pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes title 24, so far as the same can be made applicable to city elections, and except as herein
provided. In those elections held at the time of state elections as provided hereafter, the city clerk may work in
cooperation with the county clerk of the county of Elko to ensure compliance with the city clerk's duties and
responsibilities hereunder and to avoid unnecessary expense and use of resources by the city. Only those minimum
requirements of state law in conducting city elections shall be required of any city election and any variance therefrom
shall not invalidate any city election. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-4: CANDIDATES:
A. A candidate for any office to be voted for at a general city election shall file an affidavit of candidacy with the city
clerk during regular business hours of the city clerk. The city clerk shall charge and collect from each candidate and
each candidate shall pay to the city clerk, at the time of filing of the affidavit of candidacy, a filing fee as set by
resolution of the city council. All filing fees so collected by the city clerk shall be deposited to the credit of the
general fund of the city. No person shall be deemed a candidate for office at such election or be entitled to have his
name placed upon the official ballot unless such person has filed such affidavit of candidacy and paid the filing fee
as set by the city council.
B. A candidate for any office to be voted for at the general city election must file a declaration of candidacy with the city
clerk not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on any business day not earlier than the first Monday in March of the
year in which the election is to be held nor later than the second Friday after the first Monday in March. The
secretary of state shall prescribe the form for the declaration of candidacy. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-5: PRECINCTS:
The city will be divided into precincts designated by the Elko County election officials in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-6: BALLOTS:
Official general city election ballots shall contain the names of candidates grouped alphabetically under the title of the
office for which such candidates file. In years in which the mayor will be elected, the candidates for mayor shall be
listed first followed by the candidates for council members. At the top of the general election ballots shall be printed
"Official Ballot", under that shall be printed "Elko City General Election", and under that shall be printed the date of the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 27/640
election. All other details relating to ballots shall be controlled and governed by the laws of the state governing general
election laws, so far as the same may be applicable, and the rules and regulations, for the conduct of primary and
general elections, as amended from time to time, issued by the secretary of state, so far as the same may be
applicable. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-7: ABSENT AND EARLY VOTING BALLOTS:
Voting by absent ballot or early voting by personal appearance shall be conducted as prescribed by the laws of the
state in effect at the time of such voting as set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 293C, so far as such laws are
applicable to city elections. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-8: REGISTRATION:
A. Every person who resides within the exterior boundaries of the city at the time of holding any city election, and
whose name appears upon the official register of voters in and for the city, shall have the right to vote at each city
election, whether special, primary or general, and for all officers to be voted for and on all questions that may be
submitted to the people at any such primary, general or special city election.
B. Registration of the electors or voters in the city shall be accomplished in the manner provided in the election laws of
the state, so far as the same can be made applicable and which are not inconsistent herewith. Registration shall
close at the time specified in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 293C for the close of registration for a general
election. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-9: SAMPLE BALLOTS AND VOTERS LISTS:
Unless otherwise ordered by the city council, no list of electors registered to vote at any city election need be
published. The city clerk shall, at least ten (10) days before any election, cause to be mailed to each registered voter in
the city a sample ballot for his precinct with a notice informing the voter of the location of his polling place. If the
location of the polling place has changed since the last election:
A. The city clerk shall mail a notice of the change to each registered voter in the city not sooner than ten (10) days
before mailing the sample ballots; or
B. The sample ballot must also include a notice in at least 10-point bold type immediately above the location which
states:
NOTICE: THE LOCATION OF YOUR POLLING PLACE HAS CHANGED SINCE THE LAST ELECTION.
(Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-10: ELECTION BOARDS:
Election boards shall be appointed as prescribed by the laws of the state in effect at the time of such election as set
forth in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 293C. (Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 778, 1-14-2014)
1-5-12: NOTICES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 28/640
Notice of close of registration shall be given by the city clerk at the time and in the manner provided for in Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 293C and Nevada administrative code chapter 293C. The city clerk shall include in the notice
of close of registration a statement indicating the last date and time on which persons may file affidavits of candidacy
and pay the filing fee for such election in the manner specified in section 1-5-4 of this chapter. The city council shall, by
resolution, enact a proclamation and order containing the information required by NAC 293C.060 pertaining to the
publication of notices designating the offices for which candidates are to be elected. The city clerk shall thereafter
publish in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city, a copy of the proclamation, resolution and order
described in this section. The proclamation, resolution and order shall be published once a week for four (4)
consecutive weeks, the first publication thereof to be made within one week from the date of enactment of such
proclamation, resolution and order. The city clerk shall also post a copy of the proclamation, resolution and order in the
office of the city clerk within one week from the date of its enactment and shall further post a copy of the notice of close
of registration to be given pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 293C in the office of the city clerk within one
week of the date of first publication of such notice of close of registration. (Ord. 799, 1-12-2016)
Chapter 6
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE CITY COUNCIL1
1-6-1: REGULAR MEETINGS:
A. Time: The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month,
commencing at four o'clock (4:00) P.M.; provided, however, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the
city council falls upon a date designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such meetings shall be held at the
same hours on the next succeeding day not a holiday.
B. Place: All regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the city hall of the city, or at such place as may be
designated by the unanimous consent of the city council. If the meeting is not held at the city hall, notice of such
meeting shall be given to each member of the city council by certified mail, with the postage and certification
charges prepaid, and mailed to each member of said council at least three (3) working days prior to the time for
such meeting.
C. Meeting Cancellation: A regular meeting of the city council may be cancelled by majority vote of the city council.
Notice of such cancellation shall be posted in the same manner as ameeting agenda pursuant to section 1-6-6 of
this chapter, and published in a newspaper of local circulation. (Ord. 578, 12-12-2001)
1-6-2: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
A. Time: Special meetings may be held at the city hall on call of the mayor or by a majority of the city council, by giving
a minimum of three (3) working days' written notice of such special meeting to each member of the city council prior
to the meetings, and notice as required by the Nevada open meeting law, Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241.
B. Place: All special meetings of the city council shall be held at the city hall, or at such other place within the city as
may be designated by the mayor or a majority of the city council upon giving proper notice of the time and location
of the meeting as required by the Nevada open meeting law.
C. Business Transacted: No business may be transacted unless the requirements of section 1-6-6 of this chapter have
been complied with. (Ord. 423, 6-23-1992)
1-6-3: MEETINGS; ASSENT TO ACTION:
No action shall be taken by a majority of the city council at any regular or special meeting, unless such meeting is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 29/640
properly noticed or called, and the record thereof, is assented to in writing by all of the members of the city council.
(Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-4: PUBLIC MEETINGS:
A. Except as provided by law, or herein, all meetings of the city council, whether regular or special or called, shall be
open and public, and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of the city council subject to their removal
for violation of section 1-6-16 of this chapter; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall be construed to
prevent the city council from holding:
1. A closed meeting to consider the character, alleged misconduct, professional competency or physical or mental
health of a person.
2. A closed meeting for the discussion of the appointment of any person to public office or as a member of a public
body.
B. The city council may exclude from any such public or private meetings, during the examination of a witness, any or
all other witnesses in the matter being investigated by the city council. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-5: QUORUM:
A simple majority of all members of the city council, consisting of four (4) council members and the mayor, will
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. In the absence of a quorum, the city council may meet and recess
from time to time, and may compel the attendance of the absent members. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-6: AGENDA AND NOTICE OF AGENDA:
A. Agenda: Any person desiring to present any matter to the city council, shall, at least four (4) working days prior to
the meeting of the city council at which such person wishes to present such matter, notify the city manager, or in his
absence the assistant city manager, or in his absence the city clerk, and request time for the meeting, and supply
the name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who shall appear before the city council, a
summary of the matter or matters to be presented and a copy of any written material to be submitted to the city
council, if the material is such that copies can be supplied without unnecessary expense, also an estimate of the
length of time required for the presentation. If the agenda for the meeting requested is full, the mayor or city council,
or the city manager may set the matter for presentation at the next meeting of the council, special or regular, at
which there is time available in the agenda. The city council shall refuse to hear any matter not placed on the
agenda at least four (4) working days prior to such meeting, as herein provided, and the matter must be set for
presentation at a later date. The city manager, or in his absence the assistant city manager, or in his absence the
city clerk, shall prepare an agenda according to the order of business for each meeting, and furnish the mayor and
each member of the city council with a copy of the same prior to the council meeting and as far in advance of the
meeting as time for preparation will permit, but not less than three (3) working days prior to said meetings.
B. Notice Of Agenda: Except in an emergency, as set forth in section 1-6-20 of this chapter, written notice of the
agenda to be discussed at all meetings shall be given at least three (3) working days before the meeting. The
notice shall include the time, place, location and agenda of the meeting. A copy of the notice shall be posted at the
Elko city office, the Elko County courthouse, the city police office in Elko, and the Elko County library. If a regular or
special meeting of the city council is held at a place other than the city offices, then the notice shall be posted in
such meeting place, the Elko County courthouse, the city police office and the Elko County library. A copy of said
notice shall be mailed to any person who requested notice of the meetings of the city council in the same manner in
which notice is mailed to amember of the city council. A request for the notice shall lapse six (6) months after it is
made and this fact shall be made by enclosure with or notation upon the first notice sent to a requesting person. It
shall be the responsibility of the city manager, or in his absence the assistant city manager, or in his absence the
city clerk, to see that the proper posting and mailing of the notice of said meetings has been carried out. In that the
regular meetings of the city council are held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month, the city
manager shall see that the notice of meetings is posted no later than four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. on the
Wednesday preceding the meeting. In the event a legal holiday falls on a working day between the Tuesday
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 30/640
meeting and the preceding Wednesday, then the posting shall be moved back one working day for each day
recognized as a legal holiday. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-7: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The presiding officer of the city council shall be the mayor, or if the mayor is absent from the city, sick or unable or
refuses to perform the duties of his office, the vice president. In case of the absence of both the mayor and vice
president, the remaining council members shall elect one of their members to act instead of the mayor or vice
president. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and a decorum at all regular and special meetings of the
council. He shall state every question coming before the council, announce the decision of the council on all subjects
and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council, in which event a majority vote of the
city council shall govern conclusively to determine such question of order. The presiding officer shall vote on all
questions the same as other council members, his name being called last. The mayor shall sign all ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the city council during his presence. In the event of the absence of the mayor, the presiding
officer shall sign ordinances, or resolutions as then adopted. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-8: CALL TO ORDER:
The mayor, or in his absence, the vice president, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall
immediately call the council to order. In the absence of the mayor and vice president, the city clerk shall call the council
to order, whereupon a temporary chairperson shall be elected by the members of the council present. Upon arrival of
the mayor or vice president, the temporary chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair upon conclusion of the
business immediately before the council. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-9: ROLL CALL:
Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk, or the clerk's deputy, shall take the roll of the
members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-10: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
(Rep. by Ord. 575, 10-9-2001)
1-6-11: READING OR APPROVAL OF MINUTES:
Unless the reading of the minutes of the city council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes
may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a synopsis thereof. (Ord.
254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-12: RULES OF DEBATE:
A. Presiding Officer May Debate And Vote, Etc.: The mayor or vice president, or such other member of the city council
as may be presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are
by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a council
member by reason of his acting as the presiding officer.
B. Getting The Floor; Improper References To Be Avoided: Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair,
and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all
personalities and indecorous language.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 31/640
C. Interruptions: A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it be to call him to order,
or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the
question of order be determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed.
D. Privilege Of Closing Debate: The council member moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the
privilege of closing the debate.
E. Motion To Reconsider: A motion to reconsider any action taken by the city council, may be made only on the day
such action was taken. It may be made either immediately, during the same session, or at a recessed or adjourned
session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing sides, but may be seconded by any member,
and may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor; it shall
be debatable. Nothing hereinshall be construed to prevent any member of the city council from making or remaking
the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the city council.
F. Remarks Of Council Members; When Entered In Minutes: A council member may request, through the presiding
officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the city council
entered in the minutes. If the city council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes.
G. Synopsis Of Debate; When Entered In Minutes: The city clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with consent
of the city council to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any questions coming regularly before the
city council. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-13: ADDRESSING COUNCIL:
Any person desiring to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do; provided,
however, that under the following headings of business, unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, any qualified
person may address the council without securing such prior permission:
A. Written Communications: Interested parties or their authorized attorney or representative may address the council
by written communications in regard to matters then under discussion.
B. Oral Communications: Taxpayers or residents of the city, or their authorized attorney or representative, may address
the council by oral communications on any matter that appears on the agenda; provided, however, that preference
shall be given to those persons who may have notified the city manager, or in his absence the city clerk, in advance
of their desire to speak.
C. Reading Of Protests, Etc.: Interested persons or their authorized attorney or representative may address the council
by reading of protests, petitions or communications relating to zoning, sewer and street proceedings, hearings on
protests, appeals and petitions, or similar matters in regard to matters then under consideration. (Ord. 254, 9-19-
1977)
1-6-14: ADDRESSING COUNCIL AFTER MOTION MADE:
After a motion is made for consideration by the council of a matter set forth in the agenda, no person shall address the
council without first securing the permission or the presiding officer so to do. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-15: MANNER OF ADDRESSING COUNCIL; TIME LIMIT:
Each person addressing the council shall first give his name and address for the records, and unless further time is
granted by the presiding officer, shall limit his address to five (5) minutes. All remarks shall be concise and direct,
based on the facts of the case, and addressed to the council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 32/640
other than the mayor, the members of the council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any
discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No
question shall be asked a council member except through the presiding officer. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-16: DISTURBING MEETINGS; PENALTIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do any of the following at any meeting of the city council:
1. Disturb the meeting or the peace of the city council;
2. Behave in a disorderly manner;
3. Use profane, vulgar or obscene language;
4. Use threatening, offensive, abusive, impertinent or slanderous remarks;
5. Disrupt the meeting by act, comment, demonstration or noise;
6. Refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer;
7. Violate the order and decorum of the meeting.
B. Any person or persons violating any provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3, of
this code and may be removed from the meeting, except for a council member, and denied further attendance at
such meeting.
C. The chief of police, or such member or members of the police department as he may designate, shall be sergeant at
arms of the council meeting. He or they shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for
the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the city council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer,
it shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms to place any person who violates any provision of this section under
arrest, remove such person from the meeting and cause such person to be prosecuted under the provisions of this
code. The complaint to be signed by the presiding officer.
D. By a majority vote of the council, any council member maybe punished or reprimanded for disorderly conduct during
a meeting, and, with the concurrence of four (4) of the council members, may expel a member from a meeting for
violations of any provision of this section. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-17: MINUTE ENTRY OF DISSENT:
Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his dissent from, or protest against, any action of the council
entered on the minutes. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-18: FILING OF REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS:
All reports submitted to the city council and resolutions passed by the city council, shall be filed with the city clerk and
entered on the minutes. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-19: ADJOURNMENT:
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-20: EMERGENCY MEETINGS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 33/640
An emergency meeting may be held when unforeseen circumstances which require immediate action occur. Such
circumstances include, but are not limited to, disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes, or any
impairment of the health and safety of the public. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
1-6-21: WORKING DAY:
Those days during which the governmental offices in the city are normally open for full time business, being Monday
through Friday, and excepting legal holidays. (Ord. 254, 9-19-1977)
Chapter 7
CITY FINANCES
1-7-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
All financial operations of the city shall be accomplished in compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes. These
operations include, but are not limited to, budgeting, accounting, auditing and financial reporting. (Ord. 568, 6-26-2001)
1-7-2: GENERAL FUND BUDGETING:
A. General Fund: The general fund shall be used to account for all general purpose services provided to the citizens of
the city and general tax revenues used to provide those services.
1. General Fund Revenues:
a. Establishment Of "Base" General Fund Revenues: The tentative budget for each fiscal year shall include total
general fund revenues calculated by estimating current year revenues and factoring the total up by an inflation
factor.
b. Estimated General Fund Revenues: All general fund revenues will be estimated using historic data, trend
analysis and information provided by other agencies.
The estimate for sales taxes each year shall be reduced by a factor equal to that percentage of the total
sales tax collections attributable to construction, as reported by the department of taxation.
c. "Base" Revenues Exceed Estimated Revenues: When the "base" general fund revenues exceed estimated
general fund revenues, the city council shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Reduce specific service levels resulting in a budget savings equal to the difference between "base" and
estimated general fund revenues.
(2) Increase the property tax rate, where allowable, to a tax rate that will produce an amount equal to the
difference between "base" and estimated general fund revenues.
(3) Increase other fees or taxes to generate revenue equal tothe difference between "base" and estimated
general fund revenues.
d. Estimated Revenues Exceed "Base" Revenues: When estimated general fund revenues exceed "base"
general fund revenues, the city council shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Enhance specific service levels resulting in increased expenditures equal to the difference between "base"
and estimated general fund revenues.
(2) Lower the property tax rate that will reduce estimated property tax revenue in an amount equal to the
difference between "base" and estimated general fund revenues.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 34/640
(3) Allocate that amount equal to the difference between "base" and estimated general fund revenues to a
specific capital project.
(4) Allocate that amount equal to the difference between "base" and estimated general fund revenues to the
capital equipment fund.
(5) Reduce other fees or taxes to reduce estimated revenues to equal "base" revenues.
2. General Fund Expenditures:
a. Every effort shall be made to increase efficiency of city operations in order to reduce expenditure levels.
b. An appropriation equal to one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) of general fund operating expenditures shall be
budgeted in a "contingency" account each year.
3. General Fund Ending Fund Balances:
a. Disposition Of Excess Fund Balances:
(1) Excess fund balance shall be calculated by subtracting the estimated ending fund balance from the audited,
or actual, fund balance.
(2) Any excess fund balance shall be allocated as follows:
(A) Twenty five percent (25%) to a revenue stabilization fund, established pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes section 354.6115, up to the maximum amount allowed.
(B) Thirty seven and five-tenths percent (37.5%) to a capital equipment reserve fund.
(C) Thirty seven and five-tenths percent (37.5%) to a facility reserve fund.
b. Ending Fund Balance: An ending fund balance equal to eight and three-tenths percent (8.3%) of operating
expenditures shall be budgeted each year.
B. Capital Equipment Fund: The capital equipment fund shall be used to accumulate resources and make purchases of
capital equipment for general purpose, nonenterprise, operations.
1. Resources: Annual resources shall consist of:
a. That amount of sales tax revenues attributable to "construction" as reported by the department of taxation.
b. Transfers from the general fund of any excess ending fund balances.
c. Transfers from the general fund of available resources.
d. Property taxes.
2. Expenditures:
a. Each year, the city council shall adopt a five (5) year capital equipment plan.
b. Single capital equipment purchases in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), with an
expected life of ten (10) years or more, may be considered for medium term financing.
c. Prior to giving approval for specific capital equipment purchases, the following factors shall be considered:
(1) Frequency of use for the proposed equipment.
(2) Availability and costs associated with renting the equipment. (Ord. 568, 6-26-2001)
1-7-3: PROPERTY TAX RATES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 35/640
A. Establishment Of Rates: The city council shall determine the property tax rate each year after compilation of a
tentative budget, and approval of the final budget after the appropriate public hearings.
B. Adoption Of Rate By Resolution: The city council shall adopt the property tax rate each year by resolution. (Ord.
568, 6-26-2001)
1-7-4: CAPITAL EQUIPMENT FINANCING:
The capital equipment fund shall be used to accumulateresources and make purchases of capital equipment for
general purpose, nonenterprise, operations.
A. Resources: Annual resources shall consist of:
1. That amount of sales tax revenues attributable to "construction", as reported by the department of taxation.
2. Transfers from the general fund of any excess ending fund balances.
3. Transfers from the general fund of available resources.
4. Property taxes.
B. Expenditures:
1. Each year, the city council shall adopt a five (5) year capital equipment plan.
2. Single capital equipment purchases in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), with an expected
life of ten (10) years or more, may be considered for medium term financing.
3. Prior to giving approval for specific capital equipment purchases, the following factors shall be considered:
a. Frequency of use for the proposed equipment.
b. Availability and costs associated with renting the equipment. (Ord. 568, 6-26-2001)
Chapter 8
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
1-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and terms defined in this chapter have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DIVISION: The division of records management to the city clerk's office.
DUPLICATE: Any accurate and unabridged copy of a record or series of records which is not an original.
NONRECORD MATERIAL: Published books and pamphlets, books and pamphlets printed by a governmental printer,
worksheets used to collect or compile data after the data has been included in a record, answer pads for a telephone
or other informal notes, stenographers' notes after the information contained therein has been transcribed, unused
forms except ballots, brochures, newsletters, magazines or newspapers, except those portions of newspapers retained
as evidence of publication, scrapbooks and property left or deposited with an office which would otherwise be defined
as a record, except that the ownership of that property does not reside with the city of Elko.
OFFICE: An office, department, council, commission, committee, agency, or any other subdivision of the city of Elko.
ORIGINAL: An "original", as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes section 52.205, a reproduction made pursuant to the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 36/640
provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes section 239.051, or any record designated by the records committee to be an
original. An original made pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes section 239.051 consists of both the
stored copy, and the copy maintained for the use of authorized persons.
RECORD: All documents, papers, letters, pamphlets, books, maps, charts, blueprints, drawings, photographs, films,
sound recordings, magnetic or other tapes, hardware and software used to process electronic data, punched cards,
computer generated printouts, audio or video discs or other discs used to store and retrieve information, portions of
newspapers received as evidence of publication, artifacts entered as exhibits in a proceeding in any court, and any
other documentary evidence, regardless of physical form or characteristics, and including all duplicates thereof, made
or received pursuant to a law or ordinance, or in connection with the transaction of the official business of any office of
the city of Elko.
RECORDS COMMITTEE: The records committee established in section 1-8-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-2: RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM:
A. Created: Pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes section 239.125(1), the records management
program is hereby created in the office of the city clerk. The division is administered by the city clerk.
B. Intent: It is the intent of the city council that the records management program, follow accepted:
1. Procedures for the management of records to increase the efficiency of the records keeping system and reduce
the administrative costs associated with the creation, maintenance, use, retention and disposition of records; and
2. Standards of archival practice to ensure the preservation of records with permanent value and maximum
accessibility to records for the general public. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-3: DUTIES OF CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall:
A. Establish standards, procedure and techniques for the effective management of records;
B. Make continuing surveys of current practices for the management of records and recommend improvements in
those practices, including the use of space, equipment and supplies to create, maintain and store records;
C. Establish standards for the preparation of schedules providing for the retention of records of continuing value and
for the prompt and orderly disposition of records which no longer possess sufficient administrative, fiscal, legal or
research value to warrant their further retention;
D. Establish, maintain and operate a center for storing and receiving records of the several city offices pending their
disposition in a manner prescribed by law;
E. Establish a unit to provide micrographics services to the several offices of the city;
F. Establish a program for the management of forms and files;
G. Establish a program for the protection of records essential for the continuation or reestablishment of governmental
operations in the event of natural or other disaster; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 37/640
H. Establish a program for the preservation and conservation of records designated by the state librarian or the division
as having a permanent value. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-4: RECORDS COMMITTEE:
A. Established: A records committee is hereby established to be known as the city records committee.
B. Composition: The city records committee shall be composed of:
1. The city attorney or city auditor;
2. The city clerk;
3. The city manager or assistant manager;
4. Accounts payable clerk;
5. Public works director. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-5: RECORDS COMMITTEE FUNCTIONS:
The records committee shall:
A. Approve all records retention and disposition schedules, requests for the purchase of filing equipment or the
creation of a new form, or an application for conversion to micrographics, word processing or data processing;
B. Review any request for access to information which was denied by an official to determine whether the denial was in
keeping with prevailing law; and
C. Review all proposals for the expansion or modification of the records management program and make
recommendations to the city council. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-6: CUSTODY AND CONTROL OF RECORDS:
A. Transferred Records: The right of custody and control of records transferred to the city records center shall remain
with the transferring office.
B. Accessions: The rights of custody and control of accessions to the City archives transfer to the city clerk at the time
the records are accepted as an accession. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-7: DISPOSAL OF RECORDS:
Records may be disposed of only in accordance with the schedules for the retention and disposition of records
prepared by the city clerk and approved by the records committee. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-8: SHREDDING OF RECORDS:
A. Authorized; Exception: Records to be destroyed must be shredded or burned (unless prohibited by local ordinance).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 38/640
B. Supervision Of Destruction: The records administrator or a representative of the office must supervise the
destruction of all records in their care and attest that such destruction was carried out in a method provided by law.
(Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-9: RETENTION SCHEDULE:
A. Established: The retention periods established by the retention schedule developed under the authority of Nevada
Revised Statutes section 239.125 by the Nevada state library division of archives and records shall be the minimum
retention schedule for records of the city and may be changed from time to time as new schedules are provided by
the division of archives and records.
B. Handbook: The Nevada local government records manual shall be the records management handbook for the
records management program of the city.
C. Schedules Superseded: The retention periods established in the regulations of the state library division of archives
and records shall supersede all record retention schedules adopted by the city council pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes section 239.125, except those schedules which are more stringent than the periods provided for in this
regulation. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall for any reason be held invalid or
unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section or subsection, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-11: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, sections, subsections, phrases, sentences, clauses or paragraphs contained in
this code in conflict herewith are repealed. (Ord. 378, 12-22-1987)
1-8-12: CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE RECORDS:
A. Specified: The following types of information, which are maintained by the city, are confidential:
1. Information relating to salaries paid in other than governmental employment which is furnished to the city on the
condition that the source remain confidential;
2. Any document which is used by the city in negotiations with employees or their representatives which has not
been made public by mutual agreement;
3. All information in the employee's application for employment, including, but not limited to, letters of reference and
resumes, or his/her status as an applicant for employment;
4. All information that the city receives or compiles concerning the qualifications of an applicant or an employee,
including, but not limited to, reports by employers, law enforcement officials, or other individuals concerning the
hiring, promotion, performance, conduct or background of applicants or employees;
5. The rating and remarks concerning an applicant by any city employees in relation to the decision to hire the
employee, to include the results of any testing or screening process for employment, or in relation to any
personnel action by the city affecting the employee;
6. Materials used in examinations, including answers on any written examination or suggested answers for oral
examinations;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 39/640
7. Reports by employers, appointing authorities or law enforcement officials concerning the hiring, promotion or
background of applicants or employees;
8. Information in an employee's file or record of employment which relates to his/her:
a. Performance;
b. Conduct, including any disciplinary actions taken against him/her;
c. Race, ethnic identity or affiliation, religious preference, sex, disability or date of birth;
d. Home telephone number, home facsimile number or personal electronic mail address;
e. All information concerning the voluntary or involuntary termination of an employee, excluding the dates of
employment; or
f. Social security number or any other identifying numbers.
9. If the employee has requested that his personal mailing address be listed as confidential, his/her file must be so
designated and his/her business address must be indicated.
10. The name of any beneficiary of an employee contained in the payroll document must not be released to anyone
unless:
a. The employee dies; or
b. The employee signs a release.
11. Medical information concerning an employee or applicant, including, but not limited to, preemployment and
postemployment medical and psychological examinations, and information concerning a disability and a resulting
reasonable accommodation, drug testing, pregnancy, a medical excuse, and any other medical information that
an employee or applicant voluntarily provides or the city requests.
12. The names or other identifying information pertaining to employees who are in sensitive law enforcement
positions where public access to the employee identities could jeopardize their personal safety or job
performance.
13. Information contained in an investigative file that has been determined to be confidential by the city.
B. Access: Access to confidential information is limited as follows:
1. Except as otherwise provided in this code, access to information relating to an applicant which is relevant to the
city's decision to hire that person, is limited to those persons, acting on behalf of the city, who are involved in the
hiring decision.
2. Except as provided in subsection B3 of this section, access to an employee's file of employment containing those
items listed in subsection A of this section as confidential is limited to:
a. The employee;
b. The employee's representative when a signed authorization from the employee is presented or is in his
employment file;
c. The city attorney and deputy city attorneys;
d. City human resources department employees;
e. Appointed officials, department heads, and council members within the employee's chain of command; and
f. Persons who are authorized pursuant to any applicable state or federal law, or an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
3. Upon request, the city will provide the personal mailing address of any employee on file with the city to the
internal revenue service.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 40/640
4. The city, or its designated representative, shall authorize the release of any confidential records under the control
of the city which are requested by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 573, 8-29-2001)
Chapter 9
CITY SEXTON
1-9-1: OFFICE CREATED:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city council in the city charter, there is hereby established the appointive office
of city sexton. The appointive office of city sexton is in addition to the existing appointive office of city clerk, city
attorney, chief of police, municipal judge, fire chief, city manager and city engineer. (Ord. 399, 4-10-1990)
1-9-2: QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES:
A. Qualifications: The city sexton shall be chosen by the mayor and city council on the basis of experience and
qualifications to act as a city sexton for the purpose of keeping records required by Nevada Revised Statutes. At
the time of the appointment, the city sexton need not be a resident of the city, but may reside outside the city while
in office with the approval of the city council. One or more persons may be appointed as sexton or cosextons.
B. Duties: The city sexton shall perform such administrative and record keeping duties as are required by Nevada
Revised Statutes and any other duties required by the city council. (Ord. 399, 4-10-1990)
1-9-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; METHOD OF REMOVAL:
The city council shall appoint the city sexton for an indefinite term or definite term to serve at the pleasure of the city
council. The city sexton may be removed from office by a majority vote of the members of the city council, with the
mayor having a vote. In removing a city sexton, the city council shall comply with all applicable state and city laws and
ordinances. (Ord. 399, 4-10-1990)
1-9-4: SALARY:
The salary of the city sexton shall be fixed by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 399, 4-10-1990)
Chapter 10
RESERVED
Chapter 11
COURT FACILITIES ADMINISTRATIVE FEE
1-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ELKO ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR COURT FACILITIES CODE.
(Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-2: DURATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 41/640
This chapter shall be in effect for twenty five (25) years after its effective date. The provisions of this chapter do not
apply to offenses committed before July 1, 1997. (Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-3: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSESSMENT:
Whenever a defendant pleads guilty or guilty but mentally ill, or no contest, or is found guilty of a misdemeanor or
violation of any municipal ordinance, the municipal judge shall include in the sentence the sum of ten dollars ($10.00)
for each such misdemeanor or violation as an administrative assessment for the provision of court facilities and render
a judgment against the defendant for the assessment. (Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of section 1-11-3 of this chapter do not apply to:
A. An ordinance regulating metered parking; or
B. An ordinance that is specifically designated as imposing a civil penalty or liability pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes section 244.3575 or 268.019. (Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-5: ADDITION TO FINE:
The money collected for an administrative assessment for the provision of court facilities must not be deducted from
the fine imposed by the justice or judge, but must be taxed against the defendant in addition to the fine. The money
collected for such an administrative assessment must be stated separately on the court's docket and must be included
in the amount posted for bail. If the defendant is found not guilty or the charges are dismissed, the money deposited
with the court must be returned to the defendant. If the judge cancels a fine because the fine has been determined to
be uncollectible, any balance of the fine and the administrative assessment remaining unpaid shall be deemed to be
uncollectible and the defendant is not required to pay it. If a fine is determined to be uncollectible, the defendant is not
entitled to a refund of the fine or administrative assessment he has not paid and the judge shall not recalculate the
administrative assessment. (Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-6: INSTALLMENTS:
If the judge permits the fine and administrative assessment for the provision of court facilities to be paid in installments,
the payments must be applied in the following order:
A. To pay the unpaid balance of an administrative assessment imposed pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section
176.059;
B. To pay the unpaid balance of an administrative assessment for the provision of court facilities pursuant to this
section; and
C. To pay the fine. (Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-7: SPECIAL REVENUE FUND:
A. The money collected for administrative assessments for the provision of court facilities in municipal courts must be
paid by the clerk of the court to the city treasurer on or before the fifth day of each month for the preceding month.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 42/640
The city treasurer shall deposit the money received in a special revenue fund. The city may use the money in the
special revenue fund only to:
1. Acquire land on which to construct additional facilities for the municipal courts or a regional justice center that
includes the municipal courts.
2. Construct or acquire additional facilities for the municipal courts or regional justice center that includes the
municipal courts.
3. Renovate or remodel existing facilities for the municipal courts.
4. Acquire furniture, fixtures and equipment necessitated by the construction or acquisition of additional facilities or
the renovation of an existing facility for the municipal courts or a regional justice center that includes the
municipal courts. This subsection does not authorize the expenditure of money from the fund for furniture, fixtures
or equipment for judicial chambers.
5. Acquire advanced technology for use in the additional or renovated facilities.
6. Pay debt service on any bonds issued pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 350.020(3) for the
acquisition of land or facilities, or the construction or renovation of facilities for the municipal courts or a regional
justice center that includes the municipal courts.
B. Any money remaining in the special revenue fund after five (5) fiscal years must be deposited in the municipal
general fund for the continued maintenance of court facilities if it has not been committed for expenditure pursuant
to a plan for the construction or acquisition or court facilities or improvements to court facilities. The city treasurer
shall provide, upon request by a municipal court, monthly reports of the revenue credited to and expenditures made
from the special revenue fund. (Ord. 498, 2-24-1998)
1-11-8: REGIONAL JUSTICE CENTER:
If money collected pursuant to this section is to be used to acquire land on which to construct a regional justice center,
to construct a regional justice center or to pay debt service on bonds issued for these purposes, the county and the
participating cities shall, by interlocal agreement, determine such issues as the size of the regional justice center, the
manner in which the center will be used and the apportionment of fiscal responsibility for the center. (Ord. 498, 2-24-
1998)
Chapter 12
ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER
1-12-1: OFFICE CREATED:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city council in the city charter, there is hereby established the appointive office
of assistant city manager. The appointive office of the assistant city manager is in addition to the existing appointive
offices of the city clerk, city attorney, chief of police, municipal judge, fire chief, city manager, city engineer, public works
director and city sexton. (Ord. 500, 3-24-1998)
1-12-2: QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES:
A. Qualifications: The assistant city manager shall be chosen by the mayor and city council on the basis of experience
and qualifications to act as the assistant city manager. At the time of the appointment, the assistant city manager
need not be a resident of the city and may reside outside the city while in office with the approval of the city council.
B. Duties: The assistant city manager shall perform such duties as the city council or city manager may designate from
time to time, including, but not limited to, the following duties:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 43/640
1. Perform complex supervisory, administrative and professional work in planning, organizing, directing and
supervising the public works department, including environmental, street, traffic control, storm water facilities
maintenance, parks, golf, recreation/latchkey, cemetery, swimming pool, landfill and fleet maintenance.
2. Perform supervisory and administrative work in connection with airport maintenance, including runways, taxiways
and airport terminal and other public works projects and programs.
3. Act as city manager during the absence of the city manager.
4. Provide leadership and direction in the development of short and long range plans.
5. Gather, interpret and coordinate operations activities ofthe city with other departments and agencies as needed.
6. Assure that assigned areas of responsibility are performed within budget, including performing cost control
functions; monitoring revenues and expenditures in assigned area to assure sound fiscal control; preparing
annual budget requests and assuring effective and efficient use of budgeted funds, personnel, materials, facilities
and time. (Ord. 500, 3-24-1998)
1-12-3: TERM OF OFFICE AND METHOD OF REMOVAL:
The city council shall appoint the assistant city manager for an indefinite term or definite term to serve at the pleasure
of the city council. The assistant city manager may be removed from office at the discretion of the council with or
without cause by a majority vote of the members of the city council, with the mayor having a vote. In removing the
assistant city manager, the city council shall comply with all applicable state and city laws and ordinances. (Ord. 500,
3-24-1998)
1-12-4: SALARY:
The salary of the assistant city manager shall be fixed by the city council. (Ord. 500, 3-24-1998)
Chapter 13
FINGERPRINT SUBMISSION
1-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as FINGERPRINT SUBMISSION CODE. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008)
1-13-2: INVESTIGATIONS REQUIRED:
The city council shall set forth by its policies in its employee handbook and/or by separate resolution the positions of
employment which require employment background investigations that include a fingerprint based background
investigation. As to such positions, the fingerprint based background investigation is a mandatory portion of the
background investigation. The council may further set forth in the appropriate portion of this code or by resolution any
other nonemployment required fingerprint based background investigation requirements as may be permissible under
applicable law. Without limitation, specific categories for federal fingerprint based investigations pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) include brothel licensing and armed security licensing. Wherever investigation
requirements are found they are deemed to be mandatory unless specifically waived by the council or, if so authorized,
the city manager. (Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
1-13-3: NATIONAL BACKGROUND CHECK AUTHORIZED:
In those instances of required fingerprint based investigations authorized by this chapter, a national criminal fingerprint
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 44/640
based background check by the federal bureau of investigation (FBI) is authorized hereby. In addition, the subject of
the fingerprint based check shall comply with any authorization or release required by the FBI in furtherance of any
continued application for employment with the city or other ground for such investigation. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008)
1-13-4: ENABLING STATE LAW:
Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) authorizes the city of Elko to request and receive from the federal bureau of
investigation information on the background and personal history of any person with whom it intends to enter a
relationship of employment, a contract for personal services or as may be required by local government law or
regulation. (Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
1-13-5: SETS OF PRINTS:
An applicant, employee, volunteer or other person seeking to engage in an activity or status requiring a fingerprint
based background investigation by any city code or resolution of the city council shall submit, if required, two (2) sets of
his/her fingerprints taken by the Elko police department or the Elko County sheriff's department to be delivered to the
requesting officer of the city or the Elko police department. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008; amd. Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
1-13-6: TRANSMISSION OF PRINTS:
Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the police department will transmit both sets of fingerprints
and appropriate fees to the department of public safety of the state of Nevada. The department of public safety of the
state of Nevada will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file for disqualifying conduct and, if
necessary, submit the fingerprints to the federal bureau of investigation for a comparison with nationwide records. The
results of the federal bureau of investigation check will be returned to the department of public safety of the state of
Nevada, which will disseminate the state and national results to the police department which shall then disseminate it
to the city. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008; amd. Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
1-13-7: PRIVATE AND PUBLIC ENTITY INVESTIGATIONS:
If an employer or organization is a private entity and this code or the city council permits or requires the police
department determinations, the police department will render a fitness determination based upon the results of the
criminal background check and communicate its fitness determination to such private employer or organization. If an
employer or organization is a public entity, the police department will: a) render a fitness determination based upon the
results of the criminal background check and communicate its fitness determination to such public entity or b)
disseminate the results of the criminal background check to the proper city department or entity for a fitness
determination. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008; amd. Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
1-13-8: FITNESS DETERMINATIONS:
In rendering a fitness determination, the police department or appropriate city department will decide whether the
record subject has been convicted of: a) a crime which bears upon his/her ability or fitness to serve in that capacity; b)
any felony or misdemeanor which involved force or the threat of force, controlled substances, or was a sex related
offense; or c) enumerated disqualifiers. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008; amd. Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
1-13-9: SUBJECT COPY:
A record investigation subject may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the
police department or appropriate city department. Should the record subject seek to amend or correct his/her record,
he/she must contact the department of public safety for a Nevada state record or the federal bureau of investigation for
records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. (Ord. 692, 3-11-2008; amd. Ord. 697, 6-24-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 45/640
Chapter 14
WHISTLE BLOWER PROTECTION
1-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION: Any action taken by a city of Elko officer or employee in the performance of
his official duties, whether or not the action is within the scope of his employment, which is:
A. In violation of any city, state law or regulation;
B. If the officer or employee is a local governmental officer or employee, in violation of an ordinance of the local
government;
C. An abuse of authority;
D. Of substantial and specific danger to the public health or safety; or
E. A gross waste of public money.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT: City of Elko.
LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL EMPLOYEE: Any person who performs public duties under the direction and control of the
local governmental officer for compensation paid by or through the local government.
LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL OFFICER: A person elected or appointed to a position with the local government that
involves the exercise of a local governmental power, trust or duty, including:
A. Actions taken in an official capacity which involve a substantial and material exercise of administrative discretion
in the formulation of local governmental policy;
B. The expenditure of money of a local government; and
C. The enforcement of laws and regulations of the state or a local government.
REPRISAL OR RETALIATORY ACTION: Includes, but is not limited to:
A. The denial of adequate personnel to perform duties;
B. Frequent replacement of members of the staff;
C. Frequent and undesirable change in the location of an office;
D. The refusal to assign meaningful work;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 46/640
E. The wrongful issuance of letters of reprimand or evaluations of poor performance;
F. A wrongful demotion;
G. A wrongful reduction in pay;
H. The wrongful denial of a promotion;
I. A wrongful suspension;
J. A wrongful dismissal;
K. A wrongful transfer; or
L. Frequent changes in working hours or workdays. (Ord. 706, 5-26-2009)
1-14-2: APPOINTMENT AND AUTHORITY OF HEARING OFFICER:
A. The city council will periodically appoint a hearing officer or a panel of hearing officers from recommendations made
by the city manager.
B. If the hearing officer determines that the action taken was a reprisal or retaliatory action, the hearing officer may
issue an order directing the proper person to desist and refrain from engaging in such action. (Ord. 706, 5-26-2009)
1-14-3: WRITTEN APPEALS:
A. A local government officer or employee who claims a reprisal or retaliatory action was taken against him for
disclosing information concerning improper governmental action may file a written appeal pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 281 with the city clerk. The appeal must be:
1. Filed within sixty (60) calendar days after the date the alleged reprisal or retaliatory action took place;
2. Filed within two (2) years of the disclosure of improper governmental action; and
3. Submitted on a form provided by the city clerk.
B. The hearing officer may reject a form that is incomplete or otherwise deficient as insufficient to commence the
appeal. (Ord. 706, 5-26-2009)
1-14-4: PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING ON WRITTEN APPEAL:
A. The provisions of this section govern the procedure for conducting a hearing for a written appeal filed pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 281 and this chapter.
B. A party may appear in person and may be represented by an attorney or another person of his choice, if the party
chooses not to represent himself.
C. All testimony must be under oath administered by the hearing officer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 47/640
D. The appeal must be heard in the following manner:
1. The opening statement for the officer or employee.
2. The opening statement for the employer, unless reserved.
3. Presentation of the officer's or employee's case, followed by cross examination. The city officer or employee
must establish that:
a. He was an officer or employee on the date of the alleged reprisal or retaliatory action;
b. He disclosed information concerning improper governmental action; and
c. The alleged reprisal or retaliatory action was taken against him within two (2) years after the date he disclosed
the information concerning improper governmental action.
d. If the officer or employee establishes the facts set forth in subsections D3a, D3b and D3c of this section,
presentation of the employer's case, followed by cross examination, to establish that the employer did not
engage in the alleged reprisal or retaliatory action or that the action was taken for a legitimate business
purpose and was not the result of the disclosure of information concerning improper governmental action by
the officer or employee.
e. If the employer establishes a legitimate business purpose for the alleged reprisal or retaliatory action, the
officer or employee may introduce evidence, followed by cross examination, to demonstrate that the stated
business purpose is a pretext for the reprisal or retaliatory action.
4. The parties may respectively offer rebutting testimony only, unless the hearing officer permits additional evidence
upon the original cause.
5. The closing argument for the city officer or employee.
6. The closing argument for the employer.
7. Submission of the appeal for a decision.
E. The hearing officer shall convene the hearing at the time and place specified for the purpose of hearing the appeal.
F. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing must be given to the parties at least ten (10) days in advance. The
notice must contain the information required for a party to request reasonable accommodation.
G. The hearing officer shall provide reasonable accommodation to a party with a disability who requests such
accommodation within the time sufficient to make the accommodation.
H. Hearings may be continued beyond the period originally scheduled or recessed until a future date which is
agreeable to the hearing officer and the parties if good cause is shown.
I. Except as otherwise provided in subsection J of this section, all hearings on appeals must be open to the public.
J. On the motion of either party, the hearing officer shall exclude from the hearing room witnesses in the matter not at
the time under examination except the parties to the proceeding. No hearing may be closed to the public except on
motion of either party for good cause shown.
K. A document or piece of physical evidence sought to be introduced during the hearing must first be identified for the
record and the hearing officer may request the production of such records and the appearance of such persons as
he requires.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 48/640
L. The hearing officer shall determine the evidence upon the charges and specifications as set forth by the appeal
document only, and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges.
M. An employer's or employee's past performance by way of an act or a failure to act may be shown by competent
evidence.
N. All testimony and exhibits offered at the hearing must be relevant and bear upon the matter in contention. Any
testimony or exhibits which are considered by the hearing officer as not meeting this criterion may properly be
excluded. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply and the hearing officer has full discretion to admit or preclude
evidence.
O. The hearing officer shall also consider the objection of either side to the introduction of evidence. Competence and
relevance must be the primary test in ruling on objections.
P. Decision must be based on evidence presented. The hearing officer shall be guided in his decision by the weight of
the evidence as it appears to him at the hearing.
Q. Any letter, paper or object offered in evidence must be properly authenticated. The representative for the opposing
party is entitled to examine the exhibit when it is offered. (Ord. 706, 5-26-2009)
1-14-5: PROHIBITIONS AND APPLICATIONS:
A. An officer or employee shall not directly or indirectly use or attempt to use the officers or employees official authority
or influence to intimidate, threaten, coerce, command, influence or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce,
command or influence another city officer or employee or another local governmental officer or employee, as
applicable, in an effort to interfere with or prevent the disclosure of information concerning improper governmental
action.
B. For the purposes of this section, use of "official authority or influence" including taking, directing others to take,
recommending, processing or approving any personnel action such as an appointment, promotion, transfer,
assignment, reassignment, reinstatement, restoration, reemployment, evaluation or other disciplinary action.
C. A city officer or employee shall not use these provisions to harass another city officer or employee.
D. These provisions do not prohibit an officer or employee from initiating proper disciplinary procedures against another
city officer or employee or another local governmental officer or employee, as applicable, who disclosed untruthful
information concerning improper governmental action.
E. These provisions are intended to be directory and preventive rather than punitive, and do not abrogate or decrease
the effect of any of the provisions of state statutes or city code which define or prescribe punishments with respect
to the conduct of officers or employees. (Ord. 706, 5-26-2009)
Chapter 15
COURT OF RECORD
1-15-1: COURT OF RECORD DESIGNATED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 49/640
The municipal court of the city of Elko, pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 5.010, is hereby designated as a court of
record and shall comply with the laws of the state of Nevada pertaining to such designation. (Ord. 719, 7-27-2010)
1-15-2: PRACTICE AND PROCEEDINGS:
The practice and proceedings in the municipal court, including appellate practice and proceedings, must conform, as
nearly as practicable, to the practice and proceedings of justice courts in similar cases, except as expressly provided
for by law. The municipal court must be treated and considered as a justice court whenever the proceedings thereof
are called into question. (Ord. 719, 7-27-2010)
Title 2
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING REGULATIONS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
2-1-1: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE CODE PROVISIONS:
A. Title: Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.570, et seq., this chapter shall be known as the BUILDING
REGULATIONS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO.
All activities subject to regulation by this title shall be performed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Certain model building and construction codes, such as the International Building Code, International Residential
Code, or other similar model codes, may be adopted by the City and incorporated by reference in the Elko City
Code. Those model codes may contain cross-references to other model codes, some of which have been adopted
by the City and some of which have not. However, only those model codes which have been expressly adopted by
the City contain requirements incorporated into this title. No permit or certificate for matters subject to regulation by
this title shall be required by the City unless the requirement is stated in this chapter.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the requirements for the administration and enforcement of this
title, to include the technical codes adopted by the City. This Code contains design and construction regulations
intended to safeguard life, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the permitting, design,
construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of buildings, structures, signs,
building service equipment and other improvements to real property within the City.
C. Scope: This chapter provides the mechanism used by the City to regulate this title, to include the technical codes
adopted by the City. This chapter regulates such matters as site preparation, construction, alteration, moving,
enlargement, replacement, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, signs, building service
equipment and other improvements to real property. No permit or certificate for the performance or completion of
work, or for the use or occupancy of a building, structure or building service equipment, shall be issued by the City
except as provided in this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, whenever the technical
codes refer to an appendix, the appendix shall not apply unless specifically adopted by the City.
D. Adoption Of Technical Codes: The following technical codes, together with any model codes therein adopted, are
subject to the requirements of this chapter:
1. Building Code1 Of The City Of Elko: The Building Code shall apply to the construction of, or the enlarging,
altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy of a building or structure, and the erection,
installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or replacement of any component, element, or
portion of a building or structure within the City.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 50/640
2. Residential Code2 Of The City Of Elko: The International Residential Code shall apply to the construction of or
the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy of all one- and two-family
dwellings of three (3) stories or less within the City.
3. Mechanical Code3 Of The City Of Elko: The Mechanical Code of the City of Elko shall apply to construction of or
the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy of a building or structure, and
to the erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or replacement of any
component, element or portion of a mechanical system in any building or structure within the City.
4. Plumbing Code4 Of The City Of Elko: The Plumbing Code of the City of Elko shall apply to the construction of or
the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy of a building or structure, and
the erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or replacement of any component,
element or portion of a plumbing system in a building or structure within the City.
5. Electrical Code5 Of The City Of Elko: The Electrical Code of the City of Elko applies to all new construction,
relocated buildings, and to any alterations, repairs, or reconstruction, except as otherwise provided in chapter 6
of this title. The Electrical Code applies to all electrical construction work, electrical alterations or repair,
installation and maintenance of overhead and underground electrical supply and communication lines and the
inspections thereof within the City.
6. Energy Conservation Code6 Of The City Of Elko: The Energy Conservation Code of the City of Elko applies to all
construction of or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy of a building
or structure, and the erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or replacement of
any component, element or portion of a building or structure within the City.
7. Swimming Pool And Spa Code7 Of The City Of Elko: The Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Elko
applies to all new construction, alterations, or reconstruction of swimming pools and spas in the City.
E. Limitations On Temporary Certificates And Permits; Waivers: The City, to include the City Council and the building
official, shall not issue any temporary or partial permit, temporary or partial Certificate of Occupancy, or temporary
or partial Certificate of Completion, or waive any requirement contained in this title, unless specifically authorized by
this Code. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. General:
1. In the event of a conflict between any provision contained in a technical code, and any other provision of this
Code, or State or Federal law, the other provision of this Code, or State or Federal law, shall prevail over the
conflicting provision in the technical code. Where model codes adopted by reference in the technical codes
conflict with this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. There is a presumption that any matter
regulated by this chapter is not regulated by a corresponding provision in a model code adopted by reference in
this title.
2. In the event any provision of this Code is held to be illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other
provisions in this Code not thereby rendered illegal or void shall remain in full force and effect.
3. In the event different sections of this title contain conflicting requirements for the use of materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall control.
4. In the event of a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement
shall control.
5. The building official may consider manufacturer's instructions, specifications and recommendations in interpreting
and applying the requirements of this title.
6. The context in which defined terms are used in this Code shall not affect their defined meanings, nor shall the
listing of defined terms with overlapping meanings reduce the scope of or otherwise affect the defined meanings
of those listed terms.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 51/640
B. Emergency Provisions: In the event of the declaration of a national, State, or local emergency by a governmental
entity with such authority, the building official may waive or augment the provisions of this title during the period of
emergency to the extent needed to protect public safety.
C. Definitions: For purposes of this title, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:
APPLICANT: A person who submits an application to the building official.
APPLICATION: A written request for a permit on a form approved by the City.
APPROVED INSPECTION AGENCY: A properly licensed person or business regularly engaged in conducting tests
or furnishing inspection services in relation to one (1) or more aspects of work regulated by this chapter that has
been approved to perform such tests or inspection services by the building official.
BUILDING: Any structure, regardless of whether it is affixed to real property that is used or intended for supporting
or sheltering any human use or occupancy.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designed authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
this title, or a duly authorized representative. The term "building official" is synonymous with the terms
"administrative authority", "responsible official", "Director", "chief inspector" and "authority having jurisdiction" as
those terms are used in the model codes adopted by the technical codes.
BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT SYSTEMS: Fuel-fired appliances and heating systems, emergency and standby
power systems, electrical systems and equipment, mechanical refrigeration systems, elevators, stationary storage
battery systems and commercial kitchen equipment incorporated into, connected to and/or affixed to buildings and
structures.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: A document issued by the building official upon completion of any work for which
a permit is required certifying that the completed work complies with the applicable provisions of this title. A
Certificate of Completion does not authorize use or occupancy of a building or structure.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A document issued by the building official certifying that work performed by a
permittee is in compliance with this title and is in a condition suitable for the indicated use or occupancy.
CODE: The Elko City Code.
CONTRACTOR CONTACT LIST: A form provided by the building official that must be submitted with an application.
The form requests the address where the work will be performed; the permit number; and the names of the design
professional in responsible charge, owner/developer, architect, structural engineer, civil engineer, general
contractor, electrical contractor, mechanical contractor and plumbing contractor, together with corresponding
contact and licensing information.
DEFERRED SUBMITTAL: One (1) or more portions of the submittal documents that are not submitted at the time of
the application, but which must be submitted to the building official between the time the permit is issued and the
work described in those portions of the submittal documents commences.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL: Unless specifically provided otherwise, a person who holds a professional license or
certificate issued pursuant to chapter 623, 623A or 625 of the Nevada Revised Statutes, or a person primarily
engaged in the practice of professional engineering, land surveying, architecture or landscape architecture.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE: A person who holds a professional license or certificate
issued pursuant to chapter 623, 623A or 625 of the Nevada Revised Statutes or a person primarily engaged in the
practice of professional engineering, land surveying, architecture or landscape architecture who is responsible for
reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including deferred submittal items, to ensure
compatibility with the design of the building or structure and compliance with this title.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY: A building that contains three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building that consists solely of one (1) dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building that consists solely of two (2) dwelling units.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 52/640
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete and independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work that must be performed immediately for the protection of the health or safety of
people, or for the prevention of imminent harm to property, before a permit can reasonably be issued by the City.
IMMINENT DANGER OR IMMINENTLY DANGEROUS: Any condition or practice within or in the vicinity of any
building or structure or other real property creating a danger which could reasonably be expected to cause a health
hazard, death or serious physical harm immediately or before the imminence of such danger can be eliminated
through the enforcement procedures otherwise provided by this Code. The following conditions must be met before
a danger becomes an imminent danger: 1) there must be a threat of death or serious physical harm, meaning that a
part of the body is damaged so severely that it cannot be used or cannot be used very well; or 2) there must be a
health hazard such that there is a reasonable expectation that toxic substances or other health hazards are present
and exposure to them will shorten life or cause substantial reduction in physical or mental efficiency; provided, the
harm caused by the health hazard does not have to happen immediately. To constitute an imminent danger, the
threat must be immediate or imminent, meaning that the building official has determined that death or serious
physical harm could occur within a short time, for example before City employees or other governmental officials
could investigate the problem.
MANMADE EARTHEN FEATURES: Improvements to real property not constituting buildings or structures that are
created through the movement, installation, removal, compaction or emplacement of soil, gravel, rock or other
natural materials, to include ditches, levees, dams, impoundments, slopes, artificial rock outcrops or gravity
retaining walls.
MODEL CODE: A Building Code or other code that is developed and maintained by a standards organization
independent of the City pertaining to the design, construction, installation, demolition or modification of any
improvement to a building, structure, building service equipment system, pool, spa, or other real property or
improvement to real property.
ORDINARY REPAIRS: Repairs to buildings and structures caused by day-to-day wear and tear that are required to
maintain the functionality of the building or structure. Ordinary repairs do not increase the value of capital assets,
but merely preserve utility and/or value.
PERMIT: An official document or certificate issued by the City which authorizes performance of specific work.
PERMIT FEE: An amount of money charged by the City in connection with the issuance, renewal, modification or
amendment of a permit, or any work performed by City personnel in connection with a permit, such as the review of
submittal documents.
PERMITTEE: A person who has been issued a permit.
PHASE: A portion of the work that must be completed, inspected and approved before additional work may be
performed by a permittee.
PLOT PLAN: A site plan.
PROJECT VALUE: The total cost to perform work authorized by a permit, including overhead and profit, but not to
include the cost of real property, as determined by resolution of the City Council.
RESEARCH REPORTS: Documents prepared by experts, academic institutions, professional associations or
others with generally-recognized credentials in the relevant field which explain or describe the requested alternative
and which support the use of the alternative in lieu of the requirement contained in the Code.
SITE PLAN: An architecture, engineering, and/or landscape architecture plan drawn to scale showing the physical
layout of the site, including the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances
from lot lines, the established street grades, the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas,
floodways, design flood elevations, and any other information pertaining to the physical layout of the site required
by the building official.
STOP WORK ORDER: A directive issued by the building official requiring a person or his or her contractors or
agents to immediately suspend work. A stop work order may be issued to a permittee or other person performing
work in violation of or without a permit.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 53/640
STORAGE RACK: A structure composed of two (2) or more upright frames, beams, and connectors for supporting
materials in storage.
STRUCTURAL CALCULATION: An accurate numeric determination of the amount of force that occur at specific
locations of a structure, which are dependent upon the type of material, the amount of material and the number of
members in a structure, and which are used, in part, to make the structure design safer and/or more efficient.
STRUCTURE: Something built or constructed that may be placed upon or affixed to real property for a purpose,
such as storage or protection from the elements. The term "structure" includes, without limitation, a building, a nonpermanentized
mobile home or an unattached shed placed on skids.
SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS: All documents specifically describing or pertaining to the work that must be submitted
to the City pursuant to this title in order to obtain a permit, to include all documents listed on the applicable submittal
requirement checklist.
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS CHECKLIST: A form prepared by the City identifying documents or categories of
documents that pertain to a particular type of work. Documents identified on a submittal requirement checklist may
include civil, architectural, structural, electrical, plumbing and mechanical drawings; plans; specifications; maps; site
drawings; construction documents, statements of special inspection and geotechnical reports relating to technical
aspects of the construction, demolition or other activity that must be permitted pursuant to this title.
TECHNICAL CODES: Those City of Elko and model codes adopted in this title. Technical codes currently subject to
this chapter include the City of Elko Building Code, Residential Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical
Code, Energy Conservation Code, and Swimming Pool and Spa Code, together with all model codes therein
adopted.
TESTS: Technical operations or procedures that determine one (1) or more characteristics of a given material,
design, method of construction or of a piece of equipment according to a specified procedure that complies with
industry standards.
TRUSS CALCULATION: An accurate numeric determination of the amounts of force that occur at specific locations
of a truss design, which are dependent upon the type of material, the amount of material and the number of
members in a truss, and which are used, in part, to make a building or structure design safer and/or more efficient.
UNSAFE CONDITION: A circumstance in which a building or structure, or any part thereof is structurally unsound,
fails to provide adequate means of egress, creates a fire hazard, reduces fire resistance below that which is
required by this title, causes a building service equipment system to become overloaded or exceed its rated
capacity, creates a health hazard, or otherwise creates an unreasonable risk of harm to human life and safety.
WORK: The construction, erection, installation, production, activity, manufacture, labor or operation that goes into
the making of any improvement to or alteration of real property, to include buildings, structures and building service
equipment systems. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-3: DUTIES AND POWERS:
A. General: The building official shall have the following duties and powers:
1. Maintain public office hours necessary to efficiently administer the provisions of this title.
2. Enforce the provisions of this title, including the technical codes.
3. Prepare, sign and serve misdemeanor citations on persons accused of violating this title in accordance with the
authorities granted under Nevada Revised Statutes 171.17751.
4. Render opinions concerning the interpretation and application of specific requirements contained in this title,
including the technical codes; provided, in no event shall opinions expressed by the building official be binding on
the City.
5. Review and comment on proposed projects and associated documents (to include plans, specifications,
drawings and calculations) and provide general information about this Code, including the technical codes, for the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 54/640
purpose of facilitating compliance; provided, in no event shall the building official's opinions about proposed
projects or associated documents be binding on the City, nor shall such opinions provide a basis for deviating
from all applicable requirements of this title, including requirements set forth in the technical codes.
6. Examine submittal documents to determine whether they have the appropriate official stamps, seals, signatures
and/or dates affixed thereto. In performing this examination, the building official may express an opinion as to
whether submittal documents subject to the owner/builder or contractor exemption are properly attested to on the
drawings and in the permit application.
7. Notify appropriate State boards, commissions, agencies and other authorities of suspected improper or illegal
conduct by any person engaged in an activity regulated by this title, to include any registered or licensed
professional, or other person performing professional services.
8. Notify licensing authorities of suspected professional incompetence, to include indications of professional
incompetence due to excessive errors in submittal documents or incomplete, inaccurate or otherwise defective
plans which have been rejected by the City at least three (3) times.
9. Issue permits pursuant to this title for construction and other work following approval of the submittal documents.
The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the
submittal documents.
10. Collect all applicable fees required by the City and issue receipts for the payment thereof in duplicate; provided,
the duplicate copy of the receipt shall be retained by the City as a public record in accordance with Nevada law.
11. Transfer all fees collected to the proper department, agency or authority as required by law.
12. Conduct, require or direct any inspections provided for in this title.
13. Issue notices of violation and/or order the correction of work performed contrary to this Code, to include work
performed without a valid permit.
14. Issue appropriate orders directing the stoppage of work being performed in violation of this Code.
15. Issue permanent Certificates of Occupancy for buildings or structures (including new or remodeled buildings or
structures, additions and existing buildings or structures that have changed occupancy classification) which have
been inspected and found to be in compliance with this Code and all conditions required by the City.
16. Order any person to cease and desist the use or occupancy of any building or structure that is being used
contrary to the provisions of this Code, or which creates or constitutes an unsafe condition.
17. Initiate abatement proceedings to cause unsafe conditions to be mitigated or remediated, to include causing
unsafe buildings and structures to be repaired, rehabilitated, demolished or otherwise removed in accordance
with the City of Elko Nuisance Code.
18. Retain official records of documents received pursuant to this title in accordance with the Nevada Public
Records Act, to include applications, plans, submittal documents, permits, certificates, fees, receipts, reports of
inspections, notices and orders.
19. Delegate duties to other City employees within the City of Elko Building Department.
B. Approved Materials And Equipment: Materials, equipment and devices approved in a permit shall be utilized and
installed in accordance with such permit.
C. Used Materials, Equipment And Devices: Used materials may be used in place of new materials if the used
materials satisfy the requirements of the technical codes. Used equipment or devices which have been affixed to
buildings or structures shall not be reused unless approved by the building official.
D. Waivers: Any applicant for a permit or approval under this title may obtain a waiver from the City Council, with or
without conditions, from any requirement contained in the technical codes by demonstrating to the City Council: 1)
that compliance is physically impractical or impossible under circumstances unique to that building, structure or
property; 2) that by granting the waiver, the intent and purpose of the requirement to be waived will nonetheless be
fulfilled; and 3) that the waiver will not adversely affect the health or safety of the public or persons entering upon or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 55/640
occupying the building, structure or property. Any request for a waiver pursuant to this paragraph shall be in writing
and signed by the owner of the building, structure or property affected. Any waiver granted by the City Council
pursuant to this paragraph shall be in writing and placed in the official records of the City, and shall state any
conditions upon which the waiver is granted, together with a deadline for satisfaction of each condition. The failure
of the applicant to satisfy the conditions stated in the waiver by the indicated deadline(s) shall result in the
automatic revocation of the waiver, together with any previously-issued permit or other approval dependent upon
the waiver. Under no circumstances shall the building official waive any requirement contained in this title unless
expressly authorized by this Code.
E. Alternative Materials, Designs, Methods Of Construction And Equipment: An applicant for a permit or other approval
under this title may use a material, design, method of construction or piece of equipment not specifically allowed
under this title, provided any such alternative shall first be approved by the building official and, further provided, the
building official shall only approve the use of an alternative material, design or method of construction upon a
determination that the proposed alternative fulfills the purpose of the applicable provision(s) of this Code, is
consistent with industry standards, and is at least equivalent in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety to the corresponding requirement of this title. In evaluating a request from a person seeking
the building official's approval for an alternative material, design, method of construction or piece of equipment, the
building official may consider research reports and tests.
F. Quality Of Design, Construction And Workmanship: The quality of the design, construction and workmanship of any
work or other matter subject to regulation by this title shall conform to industry standards and shall meet or exceed
the requirements of this title. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-4: PERMITS:
A. General Permit Requirements, Emergency Work And Temporary Permits:
1. General Permit Requirements: Except as otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter, any person who
performs work, to include any person who constructs, enlarges, alters, repairs, moves, demolishes or changes
the occupancy capacity of a building or structure, or who erects, installs, enlarges, alters, repairs, removes,
converts or replaces any building service equipment system, or who causes any such work to be done, shall first
make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.
2. Work Performed Without Permit, Increased Fee: If work on any activity regulated by this title is commenced
before the required permit has been issued and obtained, the person must immediately, upon notice by the
building official, cease all work until the required permit has been issued and obtained. In the event a person
commences work without the required permit and is ordered to cease work as a result, the person shall thereafter
pay an amount equal to two (2) times the fee for the required permit before the permit may be issued.
B. Violations Of Code Not Authorized By Permit; Authorities Not Waived: In no event shall the issuance of a permit
constitute consent or authorization to violate any provision of this Code, nor shall the issuance of a permit constitute
a waiver of any enforcement, regulatory or other authority held by a governmental entity.
C. Expiration Of Permit; Extensions:
1. Permit Expiration: Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, every permit issued by the building official
pursuant to this chapter shall automatically expire if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. The failure of a permittee to request an inspection from
the date of the last inspection requested by the permittee or, if no inspection has been requested, one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date the permit was issued, shall be deemed an abandonment of the work, whereupon
the permit shall automatically expire.
2. Permit Extensions: The building official may, on a case-by-case basis, grant one (1) or more extensions of time to
complete the work authorized by a permit; provided, only a single extension may be granted if, after the date the
permit was issued, there have been any amendments to those portions of the technical codes that are applicable
to the proposed work. Each extension shall be for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. To
apply for an extension, the permittee must submit a permit extension request on a form supplied by the City prior
to the expiration of the permit then in effect containing an explanation of why an extension is needed, describing
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 56/640
the diligent efforts the permittee has made to complete the work prior to the expiration of the permit and verifying
that no changes have been made to the work that was approved by the permit.
D. Suspension Or Revocation: The building official may suspend work through the issuance of a stop work order or
may revoke a permit: 1) if the permit was issued in error on the basis of false, misleading, incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information; 2) if the work authorized by the permit is being conducted in an unsafe manner so as to
create an unreasonable risk of imminent harm to people; or 3) if the work authorized by the permit fails to comply
with applicable Federal laws, State laws, to include all licensing requirements set forth in chapter 624 of the Nevada
Revised Statutes, or this Code.
E. Placement Of Permit: The permit or a copy of the permit shall be kept at the site of the work until completion of the
work.
F. Persons To Whom Permits May Be Issued, Waivers, Penalties: A permit may be issued to a contractor or
homeowner performing work, provided the following corresponding criteria are satisfied:
1. Permit Issued To Contractor: A permit may be issued to a contractor who performs the work, provided the
contractor holds an appropriate State contractor's license with the correct classification and, if applicable, subclassification,
and a City business license.
2. Permit Issued To Homeowner: A permit may be issued to a homeowner for work on a single-family dwelling used
exclusively by the homeowner for his or her occupancy, provided:
a. The homeowner has been granted an exemption to State contractor licensing requirements pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes 624.031(4);
b. The homeowner is the owner of the real property on which the building or structure is to be built or improved;
c. The homeowner applies for and obtains the required permits for the installation of any equipment affixed to the
building or structure;
d. The homeowner signs the application and the "owner/builder" statement pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
278.573 acknowledging the homeowner's responsibilities as the applicant to supervise the work and to comply
with all applicable laws, ordinances, building codes and zoning regulations; and
e. The homeowner agrees, in writing, that the residential building or structure will not be leased or sold within one
(1) year after the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion, whichever is later.
3. Partial Work Waiver: Prior to the issuance of a permit by the building official, the City Manager may, upon
submission of a request for a partial work waiver by a person proposing to perform work requiring a permit under
this title, issue a partial work waiver allowing the commencement of the work. The application for partial work
waiver shall describe the reason(s) why a partial work waiver is needed prior to issuance of the applicable permit,
state the scope of work to be performed, state that the applicant has or will immediately apply for the permit
required under this title and confirm that the applicant will, within ten (10) business days, correct any work
performed under the partial work waiver that is determined by the building official to be in violation of this title or
any approved plans. A partial work waiver issued under this section will specify the work that may be performed
prior to the issuance of the required permit and will automatically expire within a specified number of business
days from the date of issuance. If the person who is issued the partial work waiver fails to apply for a required
permit or correct work as required by the building official to comply with the partial work waiver, the fee for the
required permit shall automatically increase to an amount equal to two (2) times the fee for the required permit
before the permit may be issued, together with any additional fees or penalties associated therewith.
4. Correction Of Non-Permitted Work: In the event any work is performed without a permit that was, at the time the
work was performed, required by this title, the building official may at any time thereafter issue a notice of
correction to the owner of the property describing the violation, stating any conditions that must be satisfied prior
to the issuance of the required permit, listing any documents that must be submitted and stating the deadline for
correction of the non-permitted work. The foregoing notice of correction shall be served on the owner of the
property without regard to whether the owner actually performed the work. The requirement to correct
noncompliant work shall apply to the present owner of the property upon which the work was performed without
regard to whether the violation existed at the time the owner acquired the property or whether the work was
performed by a contractor or other third party.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 57/640
G. Permit Exemptions: The following buildings, structures and other improvements to property are exempt from any
permit requirements contained in this title:
1. Buildings And Structures: Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no permit shall be required for the
construction or installation of any of the following:
a. A single one-story detached accessory structure used as a tool or storage shed, playhouse or similar use, or a
patio cover, carport, garage or similar use, provided the floor area does not exceed two hundred (200) square
feet and further provided the structure is not occupied, except as follows:
(1) Permits are required for the following:
(A) Additional detached accessory buildings or structures of any size when built in conjunction with a building
or structure that is classified as a Group R, Division 3 one-family or two-family dwelling; or
(B) Any one-story detached accessory structure located on any parcel used or zoned for any purpose other
than single-family residential.
Notwithstanding the foregoing exceptions, accessory structures shall meet all setback requirements set forth
in the Zoning Code.
b. Temporary storage sheds and offices for specific construction projects, including construction trailers on active
construction projects.
c. Fences not over six feet six inches (6'6") in height constructed of wood, vinyl or composite that are not part of a
pool barrier.
d. Fences not over four feet (4') in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the fence
constructed of block, brick, stone, rock or similar materials.
e. Fences supported by a retaining wall (see subsection G1f of this section) when the overall height is less than
six feet six inches (6'6") from the bottom of the retaining wall footing to the top of the fence.
f. Retaining walls not over four feet (4') in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge or tiered system, or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
g. Oil derricks.
h. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons and the
ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one (2:1).
i. Platforms, decks and similar structures not more than thirty inches (30") measured vertically to the grade below
at any point within thirty six inches (36") horizontally from any open edge and not permanently attached to any
other structure. This applies only when built in conjunction with a structure that is classified as a Group R,
Division 3 one-family or two-family dwelling.
j. Walks and driveways located not more than thirty inches (30") above grade, not over any basement or story
below and not part of an accessible route or means of egress.
k. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work.
l. Temporary structures, booths, sets, and scenery used for producing motion pictures, television shows, theater
shows, stage shows and special events. These temporary uses may require permits under other codes, such
as the International Fire Code or other adopted regulations or ordinances.
m. On-ground storable pools (as defined in the Swimming Pool and Spa Code) which are accessory to a singlefamily
dwelling and in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade. Electrical and plumbing
permits are required when any pool is permanently attached to electrical or plumbing services.
n. Portable spas that are accessory to a single-family dwelling if all heating and circulating equipment is integral
to the manufactured product.
o. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 58/640
p. Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, if supported by an exterior wall that does not project more
than fifty four inches (54") from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. Awnings shall meet all
setback requirements stated in the Zoning Code.
q. Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (5'9") in
height and not containing electrical branch circuits.
Notwithstanding the foregoing exemptions, permits are required for the following:
(1) Storage racks over five feet nine inches (5'9") in height.
(2) Storage racks over eight feet (8') in height. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, structural
calculations shall be provided for all such storage racks.
(3) Storage racks over twelve feet (12') in height measured to the top of any materials placed on the storage
racks. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, structural calculations shall be provided and a
Fire Department "high piled" permit shall be issued for the storage racks.
(4) Storage racks over six feet (6') in height which contain high hazard commodities require a Fire Department
"high piled" permit, including, but not limited to, storage racks, storage pallet racks, movable shelf racks and
stacker racks in commercial and industrial buildings.
r. Construction directly relating to the delivery of a utility service, built by a public utility company regulated by the
Public Utilities Commission of Nevada or another State agency, or operating pursuant to a franchise or other
agreement with the City. This exemption applies only to buildings, structures, or building service equipment
systems directly used in utility generation or distribution and installed on recorded utility easements belonging
to gas, power, telephone or other utility companies. This exemption does not apply to office buildings, grading,
occupied support buildings or general site development.
s. Construction work on property owned by any governmental entity to the extent State law specifically prohibits
the City from requiring a permit.
t. Improvements, such as traffic lights, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities and bus stops,
constructed on public property or in a public easement or right-of-way.
u. Minor repairs of interior or exterior lath or drywall, provided:
(1) No framing needs replacement or repair;
(2) The repaired area of lath or drywall does not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area; and
(3) The area of repair is not a fire-resistance-rated assembly comprised of more than one (1) layer of wall
board on each side or any special material(s) necessary to maintain the required fire-resistance rating of the
assembly (i.e., fire-stopping of penetrations).
v. Replacement of exterior or interior doors, hinges, hardware or decorative trim, provided the following conditions
are met:
(1) The replacement door is of the same size and type;
(2) The replacement door does not require any modification to existing wall framing;
(3) The existing door is not a component of a fire-resistive rated construction element; and
(4) The existing door is not a required means of egress.
w. Replacement of exterior or interior window glazing, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The replacement window glazing is of the same size, type and thickness;
(2) The replacement glazing does not require any modification to existing wall framing or window frames;
(3) The existing glazing is not a component of a fire-resistive rated construction element; and
(4) The existing glazing is not required to be safety-glazed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 59/640
x. Repair of less than thirty two (32) square feet of stone or brick veneer if the damage is less than six feet (6')
above the adjacent grade.
y. Work required to render a building or structure stable following damage from fire, wind, water, vehicle impact,
or other causes and to clear the site of damaged materials to allow inspection to ascertain the scope of
required repairs, when authorized by the building official.
z. Replacement of roof covering materials and re-roofing materials, other than tile roofing, so long as no structural
components are repaired and no more than sixty four (64) square feet of roof covering material is replaced.
2. Signs: No permit shall be required for any of the following work with respect to signs:
a. One (1) painted or printed non-illuminated sign per street address, placed on the exterior wall of a structure,
not projecting out more than three inches (3") and not exceeding three (3) square feet in area.
b. Real estate signs, provided: 1) the signs are removed within seven (7) days of the sale, rental or lease of the
property upon which the signs are placed; 2) the signs do not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area; 3) the
signs are not higher than eight feet (8') above the adjacent grade; 4) the signs are not illuminated; and 5) the
signs are set back at least ten feet (10') from all property lines.
c. Government-owned signs for traffic control, direction to public facilities, regulatory notice, warning or any other
public purpose.
d. The changing of movable parts of a sign that is designed to be changed in that manner.
e. The following maintenance activities: repainting, repositioning or recovering of display matter; exact or
functionally equivalent replacement of flashers, lamps, bulbs, ballasts, neon tubing, starters, neon
transformers, wires or computer components; and cleaning or changing a part, so long as there is no structural
change to the sign.
f. Construction signs having an area forty eight (48) square feet or less, or a height eight feet (8') or less above
the adjacent grade, provided such signs are erected no more than sixty (60) days prior to construction, are
confined to the site of construction, and are removed not more than thirty (30) days after the suspension or
abandonment of work or completion of construction and prior to occupancy.
g. Political signs; provided, nothing herein shall be interpreted as a limitation on any requirement to remove a
political sign under Federal, State or local law.
3. Mechanical: No permit shall be required for the following mechanical work:
a. Portable heating appliances.
b. Portable ventilation appliances.
c. Portable cooling unit.
d. Portable evaporative cooler.
e. A closed system of steam, hot, or chilled water piping within heating or cooling equipment regulated by this
Code.
f. Replacement of any component part or assembly of an appliance that does not alter its original approval and
complies with other applicable requirements of this Code.
g. Refrigerating equipment that is part of the equipment for which a permit has been previously issued pursuant
to this Code.
h. A unit refrigerating system as defined in the Mechanical Code.
i. Replacement of compressors of the same rating.
4. Plumbing: No permit shall be required for the following plumbing work:
a. The stopping of leaks in drains, soil pipes, waste pipes, or vent pipes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 60/640
b. The clearing of stoppages, including the removal and reinstallation of water closets.
c. The repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or fixtures, provided such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures.
d. Work pertaining to fuel tanks, either buried or above ground that is regulated by the Fire Code or the State of
Nevada.
e. Work pertaining to landscape water sprinkler systems, except for the backflow prevention device at the point of
connection to any potable water supply.
f. Installation or replacement of water softeners where pre-plumbing for the softener has already been installed.
g. Replacement of plumbing fixtures in the same location with a similar fixture and materials, provided no work is
done other than the replacement of the fixture, the tail piece and/or the trap, and further provided the work
does not penetrate the fire-resistive rated construction, including a fire-resistive rated concrete slab.
5. Electrical: No permit shall be required for the following electrical work:
a. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable motors or other
portable appliances having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved one hundred twenty (120)
volt receptacle, when that cord or cable is permitted by the Electrical Code.
b. Installation of electrical equipment used solely for radio and television transmissions, but not to include
equipment and wiring for a power supply or the installation of towers and antennas.
c. Repair or replacement of motors, transformers and controls within fixed approved appliances, provided
replacements must be of the same type and rating, and in the same location.
d. Installation and removal of temporary decorative lighting.
e. Repair or replacement of current carrying parts of any switch, contactor or control device.
f. Replacement of attachment plug receptacles, but not replacement of an outlet box.
g. Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location.
h. Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube
systems.
i. Taping or wrapping of joints and splices.
j. Removal of electrical wiring.
k. Installation of temporary wiring for experimental purposes in laboratories.
l. Installation of wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.
m. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than twenty five (25) volts and
not capable of supplying more than fifty (50) watts of energy.
n. Installation of low energy power, control and signal circuits of Classes II and III (as defined in the Electrical
Code) that are not part of a fire warning system, control wiring for emergency power systems, or smoke control
system.
o. Installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment, or the generation, transmission,
distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a
public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.
p. Installation of wiring outside of buildings and structures by licensed cable television, telephone, or buried cable
installers.
q. Replacement of lighting fixtures in dwelling units (to include one-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings),
guest rooms and guest suites.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 61/640
6. Grading Permit Exemptions: No permit shall be required for the following grading and similar work:
a. Grading associated with agriculture within districts approved for agriculture.
b. Grading, excavating or filling cemetery graves.
c. Grading, excavating or filling refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
d. Excavating for wells or trenches for utilities.
e. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay to the extent the
activity is regulated by Federal, State or other local governmental entities, provided such activities do not affect
the lateral support of or significantly increase stresses in soil on adjoining properties.
f. Performing exploratory excavations.
7. Repairs:
a. Repairs Not Requiring Permit: No permit shall be required for the following ordinary repairs to buildings and
structures:
(1) Replacement of lamps.
(2) Connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
b. Repairs Requiring Permit: Notwithstanding the foregoing exceptions, a permit shall be required for the
following repairs:
(1) Addition to or removal, cutting away, rearrangement, modification or relocation of: a) any wall, partition or
portion thereof; b) any structural beam or load bearing support; c) any required means of egress or d) parts
of a building or structure affecting egress.
(2) Addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation of any standpipe; water supply; sewer, drainage, drain
leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping; or
(3) Addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation of any electric wiring, mechanical system or other
work creating a risk of an unsafe condition.
8. Other Laws: No exemption from the permitting requirements of this chapter shall be construed as authorization to
engage in or refrain from any activity in violation of any other provision in this Code, or any applicable Federal,
State or local law or ordinance. All exemptions from the permitting requirements of this chapter shall be strictly
construed.
H. Emergency Work: Where emergency work must be performed without a permit, the permit application shall be
submitted to the building official the next business day. Any emergency work performed before the permit is issued
shall comply with the technical codes.
I. Manufactured Structures: The City does not regulate the installation of manufactured houses, commercial coaches,
travel trailers or recreational vehicles. Notwithstanding the foregoing, permits are required for the installation of all
permanent exterior footings, foundations and elements outside the exterior perimeter of any building or structure.
J. Application For Permit:
1. Any person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this title shall first file an application on a form furnished by
the City, together with the following documents and other information:
a. A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be performed, to include the street address (if any)
and the assessor's parcel number.
b. If the building or structure is occupied by a tenant, the tenant's name and contact phone number.
c. The property owner's name and contact phone number.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 62/640
d. If the work is to be performed by a contractor, the contractor's name, address, contact telephone number, fax
number, email address, State contractor's license number, State contractor's license type and City business
license number.
e. If a design professional is involved in the work, the design professional's name, address, email address,
contact phone number, and fax number.
f. The type of permit(s) requested.
g. A detailed description of the work for which the permit is requested.
h. An estimate or calculation of the cost to perform the proposed work, including materials and labor.
i. A description of the planned use or occupancy of the building or structure.
j. The occupant load of the building or structure.
k. The square footage of the building or structure.
l. A description of the type of construction that will be used to perform the work.
m. The signature and printed name of the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
n. A fully completed contractor contact list.
o. All submittal documents.
2. Applications (to include submittal documents and other required information) must be filed with the building
official.
3. If the application and submittal documents satisfy the requirements of this title, upon payment of all applicable
fees, the building official shall issue the permit to the applicant.
4. The permit, when issued, shall be for the work described in the application and no deviation shall be made from
that work without the written approval of the building official, except as otherwise provided in this Code.
K. Action On Application:
1. The building official will approve or reject applications submitted pursuant to this chapter within ninety (90) days.
If the building official rejects an application, the building official will specify the reason(s) for the rejection.
2. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall only be for the work described in the application. Except as
otherwise provided and subject to any other limitations or restrictions in this chapter, no work beyond the scope of
the work described in application shall be performed unless revised submittal documents are submitted to and
approved by the building official.
L. Contracting For Services: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from contracting with third parties for plan
review, engineering and other services related to reviewing and processing the application; provided, in no event
shall the City delegate to a third party the authority to issue a permit or any other governmental function.
M. Expiration Of Application; Extensions:
1. Application Expiration: In the event a person submits an incomplete application for any permit pursuant to this
title, to include incomplete submittal documents, and thereafter fails to provide a complete application for a period
of one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing the initial application, the application will thereupon
automatically expire unless an extension has been granted in accordance with subsection M2 of this section.
2. Application Extension: Provided there have been no amendments to those portions of the technical code that are
applicable to the proposed work since the date of the initial application, the building official may, on a case-bycase
basis, grant one (1) or more extensions of time to submit a complete application. Each extension shall be
for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. To apply for an extension, the applicant must submit
a written statement prior to the expiration of the application then in effect containing an explanation of why an
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 63/640
extension is needed and describing the diligent efforts the applicant has made to submit a complete application
prior to its expiration. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-5: SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS:
A. Required Documents: All submittal documents shall be submitted in two (2) or more sets of physical hardcopies or
in electronic file format with each application.
B. Electronic File Submissions: Any submittal documents that are filed electronically shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. All digital files shall be submitted using only City-approved file transfer methods.
2. All digital documents shall be in searchable portable document format (PDF).
3. Security settings shall be set to allow reviewers to make redline/strikeout or tracked changes to, create notes and
comments on, and insert and remove pages from digital documents.
4. All pages containing drawings, diagrams or other graphic representations (unless inserted into a page that
primarily contains text) shall be oriented in landscape format and positioned so that the top of the page is at the
top of the computer screen.
5. All pages shall be indexed and bookmarked. The index must indicate the sheet number, and corresponding title
and description for each sheet.
6. The title block of each sheet shall include a three inch (3") by three inch (3") space for the placement of the
building official's approval stamp. This space shall be provided at the same location on each plan sheet.
7. All plans (to include building plans) shall be fully dimensioned and drawn to an appropriate scale.
8. All text shall be in sans-serif font that is easily readable when set to print. Clarity shall be equivalent to or better
than arial, gill sans or tahoma, with a minimum 10-point font size.
9. All PDF documents, including documents produced from scans, must be legible in both electronic and printed
formats. Scanned documents must be scanned at a minimum of two hundred (200) dpi clarity.
10. Submittal packages must be compressed to the maximum extent practical to reduce file size.
C. Electronic Stamps And Signatures: All submittal documents which must be sealed or stamped by a professional
pursuant to Nevada law shall be submitted in final form and in accordance with all applicable professional licensing
requirements.
D. Plans: To the extent required by law, all plans included in the submittal documents shall be prepared by a contractor,
architect, engineer, registered interior designer or registered residential designer licensed to perform such work in
the State of Nevada, or an owner/builder permitted to prepare plans pursuant to the exemption contained in Nevada
Revised Statutes 624.031(4) or any other applicable statute.
E. Standards For Submittal Documents: The submittal documents shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Construction documents shall be dimensioned, drawn to scale (minimum 1/4 inch per foot), drawn on a material
consistent with industry practices and of sufficient quality to permit repeated use and handling by City personnel
throughout the work, and on sheets of uniform size.
2. The location, nature and extent of the work proposed shall be clearly indicated in the submittal documents,
regardless of the type of work.
3. Submittal documents containing stamps or other markings indicating that the documents are not final, such as
"preliminary", "for review only" and/or "not for construction", will be rejected by the building official.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 64/640
4. Plans drawn in pencil, pen ink or colored highlighting will be rejected.
5. Plans shall contain sufficient detail to determine compliance with the technical codes and the applicable submittal
requirements checklist(s) during field inspections.
F. Design Professional In Responsible Charge: For any multidisciplinary projects submitted to the building official for
review prior to issuance of any permit required under this title, all submittal documents shall first be reviewed and
approved by a design professional in responsible charge. The term "multidisciplinary project" shall mean any project
for which more than one (1) component must be prepared or approved by a professional with a different license
required by the State of Nevada, such as a project requiring submittal documents prepared by both an architect and
an engineer. The design professional in responsible charge must be a person who is licensed to review and
approve the submittal documents. The design professional in responsible charge shall perform the following duties:
1. Act as point of contact for City staff, clients, contractors, developers, engineers, architects, registered interior
designers, residential designers, landscape architects, government bodies and other project participants during
the design phase.
2. Ensure that all elements of the submittal documents are mutually compatible and coordinated, and that the
submittal documents are logical and comprehensive.
3. Verify that all elements of the design submitted are complete, and that all calculations and specifications are
complete and accurately delineated on plans and related documents.
4. Act as the point of contact with the building official during the application review process and be responsible for
filing proper applications and submittal documents.
5. Timely response to the building official's questions, requests for corrections or requests for additional information
on any element of the design package.
6. Act as point of contact for communications between the building official and the design team following permit
issuance, to include responding to any requests for changes, clarifications or additional information from the
building official.
G. Change Of Design Professional In Responsible Charge: The applicant or permittee shall promptly notify the building
official in writing if a design professional in responsible charge is replaced or terminated, or is unable to continue to
serve in that capacity.
H. Deferred Submittals: A request for a deferred submittal shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City. The
deferred submittal request shall contain a statement of the reasons why that portion of the submittal documents
cannot be provided prior to issuance of the permit and a statement by the design professional in responsible charge
(if any) that the items requested for deferred submittal conform to the requirements of this title. Deferral of any
portion of the submittal documents must be approved by the building official.
I. Stamping, Signing, Sealing And Dating Of Submittal Documents:
1. Required Information: Where required by State law, submittal documents shall be stamped, signed, sealed
and/or dated by the professional who prepared or certified them in accordance with all applicable statutes and
regulations. In the event any submittal documents are submitted to the building official without the required
professional stamps, signatures, seals and/or dates, all submittal documents for the proposed work will be
rejected and returned to the applicant without approval.
2. Signature, Seal, Stamp, Date: Any plan, specification, report (including a technical or soils report), map,
calculation, survey, record of survey or other document issued by a registered architect, engineer, surveyor or
other professional licensed by the State of Nevada that is submitted to the City with the submittal documents
must be signed, sealed, stamped and/or dated by him or her in the manner required by State law, to include any
applicable regulations adopted by State licensing agencies. Notwithstanding the foregoing, every document
issued by a person subject to a professional license shall contain: the signature of the licensed professional, the
stamp or seal of the licensed professional, the date of signature and the expiration date of the applicable license
held by the licensed professional.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 65/640
3. Drawings Submitted By Licensed Contractor For Own Construction Activities: A licensed contractor who provides
his or her own drawings for his or her own construction activities shall, in a prominent location on the front sheet
of each set of drawings, state the contractor's name, license number, license classification, license limit and the
name of person who prepared the drawings. The original or electronic signature of the responsible contractor
shall accompany this information. In the case of electrical, plumbing, refrigeration and air conditioning, or fire
protection work, the original or electronic signature shall be of the master or qualified employee.
4. Plans, Drawings Or Specifications Prepared By Residential Owner/Builder: Any person who prepares plans,
drawings or specifications for buildings or structures for his or her own private residential use shall, in a
prominent location on the front sheet of each set of plans, drawings or specifications, state the name of the owner
who prepared the plans.
5. Product Information: Product details, shop drawings, product descriptions and other product information prepared
by manufacturers, suppliers or installers of specific products or systems may be included in the submittal
documents, provided shop drawings shall be stamped, sealed, signed and dated by a design professional in
accordance with NAC 625.610. Design professionals are responsible for the sufficiency of the content of product
information included in the submittal documents.
6. Electronic Stamps, Seals, Signatures And Dates: Design professionals may submit stamps, seals, signatures
and dates in electronic format, so long as the stamps, seals, signatures and dates satisfy all applicable
requirements contained in NAC 625.610.
7. Landscape Architects: Landscape architects may use electronic stamps and seals on final, original drawings,
provided: a) a handwritten or electronic signature shall be placed across the stamp or seal and b) the expiration
date of the license of the landscape architect and the date signed shall be written below the stamp or seal.
J. Review And Approval Or Rejection Of Submittal Documents; Permits: The building official shall review, and approve
or reject the submittal documents in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Rejection Of Nonconforming Submittal Documents: Following review of the submittal documents, the building
official shall reject any submittal documents that fails to materially satisfy the corresponding requirements of this
title, to include requirements contained in the technical codes.
2. Approval Of Submittal Documents: Upon approval of the submittal documents, the building official shall place the
statement "reviewed for code compliance" on the first page of the submittal documents.
3. Issuance Of Permit Upon Approval Of Application And Submittal Documents: Following review and approval of
the application and submittal documents and payment of all applicable fees, and execution of the permit by the
applicant and contractor (if applicable), the building official shall within ten (10) days issue the permit requested in
the application.
K. Retention Of Submittal Documents: Following issuance of a permit, the City shall retain one (1) set of submittal
documents and shall return the other set of submittal documents to the permittee.
L. Work To Comply With Permit And Applicable Code Requirements: All work subject to the permitting requirements of
this chapter shall be performed in accordance with: 1) the permit and the approved submittal documents, unless a
permit modification is approved by the building official in accordance with this chapter, and 2) all applicable
provisions of this Code, to include the technical codes.
M. Permit Modifications: Approved permits and/or submittal documents shall not be materially changed, modified, or
altered without an approved permit modification. To apply for a permit modification, the permittee must submit a
request for permit modification prior to the expiration of the permit containing an explanation of why a modification
is needed and providing a detailed description of the requested modification. The building official will approve or
reject the request for permit modification based on the same criteria as are applicable to the approval or rejection of
permits.
N. Revisions Identified On Modified Submittal Documents: Each revision to a submittal document approved through a
permit modification shall be identified on the modified document with a corresponding delta symbol, letter or
number; the date of the change; and the name or initials of the person making the change. Revisions of the same
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 66/640
date shall have the same delta symbol, letter or number. Any revised portions of drawings shall be clouded in a
manner that clearly indicates the location of the change and tagged with the corresponding delta symbol, letter or
number.
O. Previously Issued Permits: Any permit issued under a previous version of this chapter shall not be modified or
invalidated by the adoption of amended requirements, so long as the work authorized by the permit is diligently
pursued within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the enactment of the amended requirements that
would otherwise render the permit noncompliant.
P. Amended Submittal Documents: Work authorized by a permit shall be performed in accordance with the approved
submittal documents. In the event of any changes during construction that are not in compliance with or reflected in
the approved submittal documents, work shall be suspended and revised submittal documents (or portions thereof)
shall be submitted to the building official by the design professional in responsible charge, for approval as an
amended set of construction documents. Construction shall not continue in the areas affected by the changes nor
shall those areas be covered or otherwise concealed from view until the revised submittal documents have been
approved by the building official and additional plan review fees, if any, have been paid. "As built" documents will
not be accepted in lieu of revised plans.
Q. Retention Of Construction Documents: The City shall retain one (1) set of approved submittal documents for a
period of not less than one hundred eighty (180) days from date of final completion of the work allowed under the
permit, unless a longer retention period is required by State law. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-6: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES OF STRUCTURES:
A. General: The building official may issue a permit for a temporary structure or temporary use of a structure, such as a
tent or membrane structure, or a reviewing stand used in connection with a carnival or sporting event of limited
duration. A permit for a temporary structure or use of a structure shall expire on the date stated in the permit, but in
all cases no later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance; provided, the building official may
grant one (1) extension if the permittee demonstrates that the temporary structure or use of a structure is required
for a longer period of time due to reasons beyond the control of the permittee.
B. Conformance: Temporary structures and uses of structures shall conform, without limitation, to the requirements of
this title applicable to health and safety, to include structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility,
light, ventilation, cleanliness and sanitation.
C. Termination Of Approval: The building official may terminate a permit for a temporary structure or use of a structure
upon determining that the temporary use or structure is in violation of the permit or this title, to include the technical
codes. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-7: FEES:
A. Payment Of Fees: No permit or modification or amendment shall be valid until all associated fees have been paid by
or on behalf of the applicant to the City.
B. Calculation Of Permit Fees: The City Council may, by resolution, establish separate fees for specific types of
permits, such as mechanical, plumbing and electrical permits. To calculate permit fees for work not specifically
established by resolution, the City Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of permit fees based on the
value of the work subject to a permit, not to include the existing value of the real property upon which the work will
be performed. Permit fees shall be based on valuation ranges. Additional fees may be established by resolution for
such other related matters as permit renewals, modifications and amendments, and submittal document reviews. To
assist in establishing permit fees, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a schedule of valuation data, to include
categories based on proposed uses (such as single-family residential, storage and commercial retail) and types of
construction defined in the International Building Code (such as IA through VB), with each category corresponding
to a specific fee amount.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 67/640
C. Building Permit Valuations: Valuation data is only intended to assist in calculating permit fees that are not otherwise
established for specific types of permits. If a permit fee is not specifically established by resolution, valuation data
will be considered in calculating permit fees. Valuation data shall include relevant information contained in any
schedule of permit fees adopted by the City Council, as well as overhead and profit, the value of finish work,
painting, roofing, electrical work, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire suppression systems and other
permanent fixtures and equipment. The valuation used to calculate the permit fee shall not include the existing
value of the real property upon which the work will be performed. In the event the valuation shown on the
application is lower than the valuation calculated by the building official, the building official shall increase the
valuation on the application to reflect the corrected valuation calculated by the building official and promptly notify
the applicant of the revised fee.
D. Plan Review Fees: In addition to any other fee required in connection with an application or permit, the City shall
charge a plan review fee to compensate the City for resources expended in the review of submittal documents.
Except for projects limited to mechanical, plumbing or electrical work, when submittal documents are required prior
to issuance of a permit, a plan review fee, equal to sixty five percent (65%) of the permit fee, shall be paid at the
time of filing the submittal documents with the City. The plan review fee includes the initial plan review and one (1)
subsequent plan review in the event any corrections to the submittal documents are required. Additional plan
review necessitated by further changes, additions or revisions to submittal documents will be charged to the
applicant at an hourly rate and subject to any minimum charge established by resolution of the City Council.
E. Fee Refunds: Upon written application filed by the applicant or permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180)
days after the date the fee was paid, the building official may authorize the refunding of any fee imposed by this
Code which was erroneously paid to or collected by the City; provided:
1. A permit fee refund shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the fee if no work has been done under the
corresponding permit;
2. A plan review fee refund shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee if an application is
withdrawn or canceled before the City has commenced reviewing the submittal documents; and
3. A plan review fee is non-refundable once the City commences reviewing the submittal documents. (Ord. 820, 7-
11-2017)
2-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
A. General: Work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official, and such work
shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection until approved by the building official. In addition, certain types
of work may be subject to successive inspections at predetermined phases as set forth in this Code. Upon
completion of a phase, the permittee shall not proceed with the work without the approval of the building official. It
shall be the duty of the applicant or permittee to provide access to and means for proper inspection of the work by
the building official. Neither an approval as a result of an inspection nor the issuance of a permit shall constitute
approval of a violation of this title or any other provision of this Code. Except as specifically provided in this Code,
the building official is not authorized to waive any requirement set forth in this title, this Code or any Federal, State
or local law, and any such waiver shall be void.
B. Subcontractor Of Record: Prior to the first inspection by the building official, if construction plans have been
prepared by a registered design professional or mechanical, electrical, or plumbing subcontractor, the subcontractor
shall complete and submit to the Building Department a "Subcontractor of Record" document on a form supplied by
the City containing the following information: date, permit number, work location and subcontractor's name; Nevada
contractor's license number; City of Elko business license number; telephone number(s) and email address.
C. Right Of Entry:
1. The building official may enter a building, structure or other property, provided the building official complies with
the requirements of this section, except in the case of an emergency or when consent to the entry has been
obtained from an owner or occupant of the property.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 68/640
2. The following constitute purposes for which the building official may enter a building, structure or other property
pursuant to this section:
a. To inspect, observe, measure, sample, test or investigate the building, structure or other property in connection
with the review of an application or permit;
b. To inspect, observe, measure, sample, test or investigate any condition relating to, or to operate, maintain, or
repair any City utility or facility;
c. To inspect reported conditions related to compliance with this title;
d. To perform periodic inspections required by any provision of this title;
e. To assess compliance with any approval, application or permit;
f. To inspect or to otherwise enforce any provision of this title;
g. When cause exists to believe that a violation of this title was or is being committed; or
h. For any other reason required by this title.
3. The building official may enter any building, structure or other property during regular City business hours and at
other reasonable times for the purposes set forth in this section, subject to the following:
a. If the building, structure or other property to be inspected is occupied, the building official shall present official
City credentials, including photo identification, to the owner or other person having charge or control of the
building, structure or other property, state the reason for the inspection and request entry.
b. If the building, structure or other property to be inspected is unoccupied, the building official shall make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or other
property and request entry.
c. Consent to enter buildings, structures or other property may be obtained by any means, including but not
limited to written, facsimile, telephonic, email or in-person consent. In addition, a property owner's application
for any permit or approval with respect to an activity in or on a building, structure or other property shall be
deemed to be consent for the building official or his or her designee to enter the building, structure or other
property to perform any inspections, measurements, sampling, or other action required to review and process
the application; provided, that if the building official intends to enter a building or structure, the building official
shall first contact the owner or occupant and arrange a mutually convenient time for the entry. The owner's or
occupant's failure to consent to entry or to arrange a mutually convenient time for entry shall be grounds for the
City to deny the application for the permit or approval.
d. If, for any reason allowed under this Code, entry to a building, structure or other property is refused or if the
building official is unable to obtain such consent, the City shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law
to secure entry, including but not limited to application to a court of competent jurisdiction for an administrative
search warrant or other remedy.
e. Nothing in this Code requires a City officer, official or employee to obtain the property owner's consent: 1) to an
inspection that is conducted while the officer, official or employee remains on adjacent public property, such as
a public right-of-way, or on other adjacent property, or 2) to enter property in which the City has a written
easement, license or other property right for purposes authorized in the applicable instrument.
f. Notwithstanding the provisions above, whenever it appears to the City that conditions exist requiring immediate
inspection or other action to prevent harm due to an imminent danger, a City officer, official or employee is
authorized to enter in or upon any building, structure or other property, public or private to the extent permitted
by law without first obtaining the owner's consent, or when any other circumstance exists making such entry
lawful under the common law.
D. Inspection Access: In the event the building official is unable to inspect work subject to this title due to the presence
of a covering, earth or any other material that obscures visibility, the applicant or permittee shall, at his or her own
risk and expense, remove the material that obscures visibility, and the failure of the applicant or permittee to do so
shall be grounds for denying or revoking the permit. An inspection may include the operation of any installed
mechanical system, to include a life safety system.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 69/640
E. Inspection Requests: The permittee shall, as appropriate, submit a written or verbal inspection request to the
building official stating that work or phase of work is ready for inspection. Inspection requests shall be requested
before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on the day for which the inspection is requested. Inspections requested after eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. will be scheduled for the next business day. The City Council may, by resolution, impose
additional fees for expedited or same-day inspections. The building official will inspect the work or phase of work as
soon as is reasonably practicable following the inspection request, depending upon the availability of personnel and
resources. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as a guarantee that an inspection will take place on the date
requested by the permittee.
F. Inspection Record Card, Permit, And Approved Plans: Work shall not commence until the applicant has obtained an
inspection record card on a form provided by the City, the appropriate permit and approved submittal documents, all
of which shall be present on the property where the work is performed and at a location readily accessible to the
building official, until issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy.
G. Inspection Results: Following an inspection by the building official, the building official will determine whether the
work or phase of work has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this title. In the event the work
or phase of work has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this title, the building official will
authorize the permittee to proceed to the next phase of work or apply for a Certificate of Completion or Certificate of
Occupancy, as appropriate. In the event the work or phase of work has not been completed in accordance with the
requirements of this title, the building official will inform the permittee of the deficiencies in writing. Upon correction
of any deficiencies identified by the building official, the permittee shall leave the corrected work exposed in such a
manner as to permit inspection and shall thereafter request an inspection of the corrected work.
H. Inspection Of Phases And Verification Of Compliance: The building official, upon receipt of an inspection request
from a permittee, shall perform the following inspections (where applicable) and/or require the following verification
of compliance with the submittal documents:
1. Footing And Foundation Inspection: A footing and foundation inspection after excavations for footings are
complete and any required reinforcing steel, structural embeds, grounding electrodes, piping, and other integral
materials and equipment are in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to
inspection. Upon completion of the excavation of the footing and prior to the footing and foundation inspection, a
Structure Placement Certificate on a form provided by the City, completed and signed by a registered design
professional or the applicant stating that the structure is properly placed on the parcel as per the approved site
plans, shall be submitted to the building official.
2. Concrete Slab And Under-Floor Inspection: A concrete slab and under-floor inspection after in-slab or under-floor
reinforcing steel and building service equipment systems, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the
subfloor.
3. Building Elevation Inspection: In special flood hazard areas, the elevations of the bottom floor, including crawl
space and basement, the next higher floor, the attached garage floor, the lowest machinery or equipment serving
the building or structure, the lowest adjacent grade and the highest adjacent grade shall be certified by an
engineer, land surveyor or architect on a FEMA Elevation Certification. The completed certifications shall be
submitted to the City of Elko Floodplain Manager for review and approval prior to the final inspection.
4. Frame Inspection: The following frame inspections will be performed:
a. Frame Inspection For Wood And Light Gauge Metal Construction: Frame inspections for wood and light gauge
metal construction shall be performed after all roof sheathing and components of braced wall or shear systems,
framing, fireblocking, bracing, windows, pipes, chimneys, vents, rough mechanical, rough plumbing, and rough
electrical, are complete. All applicable truss calculations shall be submitted to the building official no less than
two (2) weeks prior to submission of an inspection request for a frame inspection for wood and light gauge
metal construction. The failure of a permittee to comply with the foregoing requirement may result in the delay
of the requested inspection or the return of the inspection request to the permittee, at the discretion of the
building official.
b. Frame Inspection For Concrete, Steel And Masonry Construction: Frame inspections for concrete, steel (other
than light gauge metal) and masonry construction shall be performed after all structural elements required by
the approved construction documents and this title (including the technical codes) are in place and structural
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 70/640
connections completed. This inspection includes an examination of all reinforcing steel, structural steel,
concrete, masonry, grout, mortar, and structural connections. All applicable truss calculations shall be
submitted to the building official no less than two (2) weeks prior to submission of an inspection request for a
frame inspection for concrete, steel and/or masonry construction. The failure of a permittee to comply with the
foregoing requirement may result in the delay of the requested inspection or the return of the inspection
request to the permittee, at the discretion of the building official.
c. Finished Floor Elevation Certificate: Upon completion of the lowest habitable finished floor, a Finished Floor
Elevation Certificate, prepared and signed by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in accordance
with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 625, the contractor or developer performing the work, or the applicant
stating that the finished floor elevation is in compliance with the approved plans, shall be submitted to the
building official.
5. Lath And Gypsum Board Inspection: Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum
board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners
are taped and finished.
6. Fire And Smoke Resistant Penetrations: Protection of joints and penetrations in fire resistant rated assemblies,
smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.
7. Energy Efficiency Inspections: Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the City Energy
Conservation Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R-values,
fenestration U-value, duct system R-value, and HVAC and water heating equipment efficiency.
8. Required Mechanical Inspections: The following mechanical inspections will be performed:
a. Mechanical Rough Inspection: A mechanical rough inspection will be performed after all HVAC and exhaust
duct systems are installed, securely fastened and supported in place, and all fire and smoke dampers have
been installed in accordance with the applicable manufacturer's requirements.
b. Mechanical Final Inspection: A mechanical final inspection will be performed after all HVAC equipment is in
place, and ductwork, gas lines, freon lines and register grills have been installed.
9. Required Plumbing Inspections: The building official will perform the following plumbing inspections:
a. Sewer Inspection: A sewer inspection will be performed to the point of connection to the public sewer system
or the furthest extend of the septic system, whichever is applicable, after all underground sewer piping is
installed, including manholes and cleanouts. Sewer pipes shall be tested in the presence of the building official
by filling them with water and determining whether they hold water from the lowest point to the highest point in
the sewer pipes.
b. Water Line Inspection: The building official will perform a water line inspection to the point of connection with
the public water system after all underground on-site water piping is installed. Water pipes shall be tested in
accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code if joints or unions are installed in the water piping.
c. Plumbing Underground Inspection: A plumbing underground inspection will be performed of all underground
drain, waste, vent and water piping within the boundaries of the exterior walls and foundation of the building or
structure after it has been installed and tested.
d. Plumbing Rough Inspection: After all portions of the above-floor drain, waste, vent and water piping systems
have been installed and tested, but while all pipes and other components of the plumbing are still exposed prior
to covering, the building official will perform a plumbing rough inspection in accordance with this title (to include
the technical codes) and the applicable manufacturer's specifications by running water through the system and
making visual observations.
e. Plumbing Final Inspection: The building inspector will perform a plumbing final inspection after all fixtures are
in place and connected to the drain, waste, vent and potable water systems.
10. Electrical Inspections: The building official will perform the following electrical inspections:
a. Site Electrical Inspection: A site electrical inspection of the electrical system shall be performed up to the point
of connection to the public electric utility (if applicable) after all underground electrical conduit and associated
devices are installed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 71/640
b. Ufer Ground (Concrete Encased Electrode) Inspection: An ufer ground inspection shall be completed
concurrently with the footing or foundation inspection (as applicable). The ufer ground must comply with the
National Electrical Code.
c. Underground Electrical Inspection: An underground electrical inspection shall be performed before the
concrete slab and under-floor inspection. The underground electrical inspection must be performed after all in
slab or under-floor building service equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is poured or floor
sheathing is installed, including the subfloor.
d. Rough Electrical Inspection: A rough electrical inspection shall be performed concurrently with the frame
inspection but after the initial installation of the electrical equipment and conduit or wiring.
e. Additional Electrical Inspections: Additional inspections of electrical installations to the extent such inspections
are needed to determine compliance with this title, to include the technical codes.
f. Final Electrical Inspection: A final electrical inspection shall be performed upon completion of all work requiring
any type of electrical inspection.
11. Pool/Spa Inspection:
a. Concrete Pools And Spas: The building official will perform the following inspections of concrete pools and
spas:
(1) Initial Pool/Spa Inspection: An initial pool/spa inspection will be performed upon completion of excavation
and installation (and stubbing out, where applicable) of reinforcing steel, shell bonding, piping, electrical
conduit and light shells. Piping will be subjected to a pressure test in accordance with the City Swimming
Pool and Spa Code.
(2) Pre-Plaster Pool/Spa Inspection: A pre-plaster pool/spa inspection will be performed when: a) all
underground and rough inspections are completed and the associated work is approved, b) bonding is
complete, c) plumbing is complete, d) the final plumbing inspection has been completed and the associated
work has been approved, e) all electrical equipment has been installed and all electrical conductors have
been terminated, f) all dead fronts have been labeled, g) the access barrier has been completed and h) for
private pools and spas, all applicable safety requirements set forth in this title and the manufacturer's
specifications, instructions and recommendations have been satisfied.
(3) Final Pool/Spa Inspection: A final pool/spa inspection will be performed following: a) the installation of all
pool and site drainage, piping and other apparatus and b) completion of all electrical work; provided, the
ground fault circuit interrupter or residual current device shall be accessible and operational at the time of the
final pool/spa inspection. The pool/spa shall not be used until completion of the final pool/spa inspection and
approval of all associated work.
b. Manufactured Pools And Spas: The building official will perform the following inspections of manufactured
pools and spas:
(1) Initial Manufactured Pool/Spa Inspection: An initial manufactured pool/spa inspection will be performed
upon: a) completion of excavation, b) placement of the pool/spa, c) completion of bonding, d) completion of
the access barrier, e) installation of all plumbing and related piping (including gas piping, if applicable), and f)
for private pools and spas, all applicable safety requirements set forth in this title and the manufacturer's
specifications, instructions and recommendations have been satisfied. Piping will be subjected to a pressure
test in accordance with the City Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
(2) Manufactured Pool/Spa Pre-Deck Inspection: A manufactured pool/spa pre-deck inspection will be
performed after installation of deck reinforcing steel and before placing pavers, concrete or other material for
the pool/spa deck. Prior to the pre-deck pool/spa inspection: a) all deck steel or wire mesh reinforcement
must be installed and bonded, b) all geotechnical work must be completed in accordance with all applicable
standards, to include geotechnical or engineering soils reports, c) all plumbing and electrical equipment, to
including piping and conduit, must be installed, d) all conductors must be terminated, and e) all dead fronts
must be labeled.
(3) Manufactured Pool/Spa Final Inspection: A manufactured pool/spa final inspection will be performed after:
a) completion of all pool/spa and site drainage work, b) completion of all electrical work and c) all other
required inspections have been completed and approved by the building official. The ground fault circuit
interrupter shall be accessible and operational at the time of the final manufactured pool/spa final inspection.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 72/640
The pool/spa shall not be used until a final inspection has been completed and approved by the building
official.
12. Other Inspections: In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or
require other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and other laws that
are enforced by the building official.
13. Special Inspections: For special inspections, see chapter 17 of the International Building Code.
14. Final Inspection: The final inspection shall be conducted after all work required by the permit is completed in
accordance with all applicable requirements of this title, to include the technical codes, and a drainage
compliance report (if applicable) has been approved by the building official.
15. Approved Inspection Agencies: The building official may, in the building official's discretion, accept inspection
reports prepared by approved inspection agencies; provided, prior to acceptance of any inspection report, the
inspector or the company that employs the inspector, as appropriate, must be approved by the building official. In
determining whether to approve an inspector or a company that employs an inspector, the building official will
consider whether the person or company is qualified, properly licensed and reliable. The building official may
require the inspector or employing company to submit the information needed to make an approval decision on a
form supplied by the City.
16. Re-Inspections:
a. Re-Inspection Fee: A re-inspection fee will be charged for each inspection or re-inspection of work pursuant to
a schedule adopted by the City Council if any one (1) of the following conditions occurs:
(1) Work is not completed at the time of a scheduled inspection, necessitating a re-inspection;
(2) Corrections identified in a previous inspection are not completed at the time of a re-inspection;
(3) The inspection record card, permit, or approved plans are not available on-site at the time of a scheduled
inspection, necessitating a re-inspection;
(4) Access to work is not provided or is restricted at the time of a scheduled inspection, necessitating a reinspection;
(5) Work for which inspection has been requested has been covered and is therefore not visible at the time of
the inspection, necessitating a re-inspection; or
(6) Work which requires inspection prior to the scheduled inspection was not approved by the time of the
scheduled inspection.
Except as otherwise provided above, there shall be no fee charged for a re-inspection.
b. Requesting A Re-Inspection: To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall request a re-inspection for a specific
phase of work covered by the requested permit and pay any required re-inspection fee in accordance with the
adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-9: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Use And Occupancy:
1. General Requirements: No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing
occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has
approved the building or structure for use or occupancy by means of a Certification of Occupancy. A Certificate of
Occupancy does not approve or waive a violation of any provision of this Code. A Certificate of Occupancy
creates no warranty or guarantee, either expressed or implied. A final inspection shall be equivalent to a
Certificate of Occupancy for any building classified in Occupancy Group U. A Certificate of Completion may be
issued for a building or structure which is constructed as a "shell" and not intended for occupancy until a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
2. Suspension Or Revocation: The building official may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a Certificate of
Occupancy or a Certificate of Completion issued under the provisions of this Code whenever the certificate is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 73/640
issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when written conditions are not completed
within the required time, or when the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of this Code.
3. Use And Occupancy Of Existing Buildings And Structures: Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this
Code, the owner or occupant of any building or structure, or any portion thereof, which was constructed and
thereafter used or occupied in compliance with the version of this Code then in effect, but which was thereafter
rendered noncompliant by reason of an amendment to this title, shall not be required to obtain a Certificate of
Occupancy to continue the use or occupancy to which the building or structure, or portion thereof, was placed at
the time of adoption of the amendment to this title rendering it noncompliant; provided, in the event the use or
occupancy is thereafter discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months or more, a Certificate of Occupancy
certifying compliance with the current requirements of this title shall be required for any subsequent use or
occupancy.
B. Certificate Issued:
1. If, after a final inspection, the building official determines that all applicable requirements of this title have been
satisfied, the building official shall thereupon issue a Certificate of Completion if the building or structure may not
be used or occupied or a Certificate of Occupancy if the building or structure may be used or occupied. The
Certificate of Completion or Certificate of Occupancy shall contain the following information:
a. The permit number.
b. The address of the building or structure.
c. The name and address of the owner of the building or structure.
d. The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the building or structure is located (if
different).
e. A description of that portion of the building or structure for which the certificate is issued.
f. A statement that the described portion of the building or structure has been inspected for compliance with the
requirements of this title for the proposed use and/or occupancy.
g. The name and signature of the building official.
h. The edition of the Code under which the permit was issued.
i. A description of the permitted use and/or occupancy (if applicable).
j. A description of the type of construction.
k. The design occupant load (if applicable).
l. The date of issuance of the certificate.
m. The floor area of the building or structure indicated in square feet.
n. The Land Use Zoning Code. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-10: SERVICE UTILITIES:
A. Permanent Connection Of Service Utilities: No person shall permanently connect or reconnect any water, sewer,
electrical or gas utility, or source of energy, fuel or power to any building, structure or building service equipment
system, or any system connected to a building, structure or building service equipment system that is regulated by
this Code, without the prior written approval of the building official. No such connection or reconnection to a source
of energy, fuel or power shall be permitted if the use will likely result in an unsafe condition or imminent danger.
B. Temporary Connection: Upon written request, the building official may authorize the temporary connection of a
building or structure, or a building service equipment system connected to a building or structure to a utility that
provides a source of energy, fuel or power for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. No such temporary
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 74/640
connection to a source of energy, fuel or power shall be permitted if the use will likely result in an unsafe condition
or imminent danger.
C. Authority To Order Disconnection Of Utilities And Other Energy Sources:
1. Imminent Danger:
a. Scope Of Authority: The building official may order the disconnection of any utility service or energy supplied to
any building, structure or building service equipment system regulated by this Code in the event the building
official determines such disconnection is needed to eliminate or mitigate an imminent danger.
b. Duration: A disconnection order issued because of an imminent danger shall be for only such period as the risk
of imminent danger remains.
c. Notice: The building official shall, as soon as reasonably practicable: 1) use any reasonable means of
communication to notify the serving utility, the owner and the occupant of the building, structure or building
service equipment system of a decision to order a disconnection due to an imminent danger, and 2) post an
appropriate placard warning of the imminent danger at or near the entrance of the affected building or
structure.
d. Posting At Entrance Of Building Or Structure: Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, if the building
official is unable to notify the owner or occupant of an order issued pursuant to this subsection, posting a
placard in a visible location at or near the entrance of the affected building or structure shall satisfy the notice
requirements of this subsection.
e. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a disconnection due to an imminent danger shall have the right to
immediately appeal the decision of the building official to the City Manager or the City Manager's designee,
which appeal may be communicated to the City Manager or the City Manager's designee in writing, verbally, by
electronic mail or by telephone. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee, upon receiving actual
knowledge of the appeal from the person aggrieved and the grounds therefor may affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the building official. An aggrieved person may only appeal a disconnection order of the building
official pursuant to this subsection while the disconnection order is in effect; provided, nothing herein shall in
any way limit an aggrieved person's right to appeal a decision of the building official pursuant to any other
applicable provision of this Code.
2. Unsafe Condition:
a. Scope Of Authority: The building official may order the disconnection of any utility service to a building,
structure or building service equipment system if the connection has not been approved in the manner required
by this Code or is otherwise in actual violation of this Code, or if the connection creates an unsafe condition.
b. Connections Prohibited By Order To Disconnect: No person shall connect or reconnect a building, structure or
building service equipment system to any public utility or energy supply if prohibited by a disconnection order
issued by the building official pursuant to this subsection without prior authorization from the building official.
c. Notification:
(1) Order To Disconnect: If a utility service or energy supply to a building, structure or building service
equipment system must be disconnected due to an immediate hazard in accordance with this section, a
disconnection order and basis therefor shall be provided as soon as reasonably practicable to the serving
utility, the owner of such building, structure, or building service equipment system and any occupants of the
building or structure as soon as reasonably practicable. Except as otherwise provided herein, whenever the
building official issues a disconnection order pursuant to this subsection, the order shall be in writing and
directed to the owner of the affected building, structure or building service equipment system, and any
occupants of the building or structure by:
(A) Personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested; and
(B) Posting a placard at or near the entrance of the affected building or structure.
(2) Posting At Entrance Of Building Or Structure: Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, if the
building official is unable to notify the owner or occupant of a disconnection order by personal service or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 75/640
certified mail, posting a placard in a visible location at or near the entrance of the affected building or
structure shall satisfy the notice requirements of this subsection.
d. Contents Of Order: Any order issued by the building official pursuant to this subsection due to an unsafe
condition shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The street address and a location description sufficient for identification of the real property upon which the
building, structure or building service equipment system is located;
(2) A statement identifying the specific Code provisions being violated and explaining the reason for the notice
and/or order; and
(3) A directive ordering the person in violation make the repairs, improvements or other corrections required to
bring the building, structure or building service equipment system into compliance with the applicable
provisions of this Code within a specified period of time.
e. Cessation Of Use Or Occupancy: The building official may order the owner or occupant of a building or
structure to cease use or occupancy based on an unsafe condition until the unsafe condition no longer
presents a threat to human health or safety. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-11: APPEALS:
A. Notice Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official made pursuant to or in relation to
matters subject to this title may appeal the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30)
days of receiving notice of the building official's decision. The notice of appeal shall contain the following
information: the name of the appellant, the address of the property to which the decision relates, the date on which
the appellant was notified of the decision, a summary of the decision being appealed and a statement of reason
why the decision is being appealed. The failure of the aggrieved person to file a notice of appeal in the manner
stated in this section shall result in a waiver of the aggrieved person's right to appeal. The filing of a notice of appeal
shall not stay the action of the building official pending the outcome of the appeal.
B. Investigation By City Council: Following the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Council may, in its discretion, appoint
a committee of the City Council or an independent hearing officer to investigate the notice of appeal, report findings
of fact and make a recommendation for disposition to the City Council.
C. Hearing Before City Council: The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within forty five (45) days from
the date the notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
D. Hearing Procedures: The procedures pursuant to which the City Council shall hear an appeal pursuant to this
section are as follows:
1. The appellant shall first describe the decision being challenged, state the grounds for the appeal and present a
summary of the appellant's argument.
2. The appellant may then testify, submit documents and/or call witnesses in support of the appeal.
3. The City shall then state the grounds for opposing the appeal.
4. The City may submit documents and/or call witnesses in opposition to the appeal.
5. The appellant may then present a rebuttal argument, witnesses and/or documents. The failure of an appellant to
provide argument, witnesses and/or documents on rebuttal shall not be considered by the City Council in
deciding the appeal.
6. The appellant and the City, respectively, may present closing arguments.
7. Appellant and the City are entitled to be represented by counsel, and present testimony, evidence and argument
on all issues raised on appeal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 76/640
8. The City Council may, if it appears helpful to a clear understanding of the issues, consider matters not raised at
the hearing.
9. All testimony by the appellant and the parties' witnesses shall be under oath.
10. The rules of evidence shall not apply.
11. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem may limit testimony or other proffered evidence that is duplicative, unnecessarily
argumentative or not reasonably related to the matter being appealed.
12. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem may terminate the hearing upon finding that sufficient testimony, documents and
arguments have been presented to enable the City Council to fully deliberate and decide the appeal; provided,
the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall first request from the appellant a summary of all remaining matters he or she
intends to present at the hearing.
E. Decision By City Council: At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final decision that is
consistent with the requirements of this title (to include the technical codes) to affirm, deny, condition or modify the
decision of the building official and shall within thirty (30) days thereafter file a notice of decision with the City Clerk
stating the decision.
F. Judicial Review: Any person who has appealed a decision to the City Council in accordance with this section and is
aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal that decision to the Fourth Judicial District Court in and for
the County of Elko, State of Nevada, by filing with that court a petition for judicial review within twenty five (25) days
from the date the notice of decision is filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or
occupy any building, structure or other improvement to real property regulated by this title, or cause same to be
done, in conflict with or in violation of any provision in this title.
B. Notice Of Violation: The building official may issue a notice of violation ordering any person responsible for the
erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of a building,
structure, building service equipment system or other improvement in violation of the provisions of this title, or in
violation of a permit or certificate issued pursuant to this Code. The notice of violation shall: 1) order the person
responsible to communicate to the building official a plan to eliminate the violation within a specified period of time
and 2) order the person to cease and abate the violation within a specified period of time. In the event the violation
results in an unsafe condition or imminent danger, the building official may order the person upon whom the person
to whom the notice of violation was issued to discontinue the use and/or occupancy until the unsafe condition or
imminent danger has been eliminated.
C. Service Of Notice: Except as otherwise provided herein, whenever the building official issues a notice of violation
pursuant to this section, the notice of violation shall be directed to the owner of the affected building, structure,
building service equipment system or other improvement, and (if applicable) the occupant of the building or
structure by:
1. Personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested and posting a placard at or near the entrance of the
affected building or structure.
2. If the building official is unable to notify the owner or occupant of a notice of violation by personal service or
certified mail, return receipt requested, after attempting to effect notice in both such manners, posting a placard in
a visible location at or near the entrance of the affected building, structure or, if there is no building or structure, in
a visible location on the real property containing the improvement, shall satisfy the notice requirements of this
section.
D. Contents Of Order: Any notice of violation issued by the building official pursuant to this section shall be in writing
and contain, at a minimum, the following information:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 77/640
1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the real property upon which the building,
structure, building service equipment system or other improvement is located;
2. A statement identifying the specific provisions of this title being violated and explaining the reason for the notice
of violation; and
3. A directive ordering the person in violation make the repairs, improvements or other corrections required to bring
the building, structure, building service equipment system or other improvement into compliance with the
applicable provisions of this title within a specified period of time consistent with this section.
E. Violation; Penalties: Failure to comply with any requirement of this Code, subject to any appeal rights, shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in section 1-3-1 of this Code.
F. Equitable Relief: Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Code, the City may seek equitable relief in a
court of competent jurisdiction to the extent necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this title (including
unsafe conditions or imminent dangers) or to enforce any order issued by the building official pursuant to this title,
to include a notice of violation issued pursuant to this section. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-13: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Authority: In the event the building official determines that work regulated by this Code is being performed in a
manner that is contrary to the provisions of this Code or that creates an unsafe condition or imminent danger, the
building official may issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: Notification of a stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property upon which the work is being
performed, the property owner's agent, or the person(s) performing the work. The stop work order shall: 1) state the
reason for issuing the stop work order; 2) state the conditions under which the work will be permitted to resume; 3)
be in writing; and 4) be posted on the property upon which the work is being performed. Upon issuance, notice and
posting of a stop work order, the work described in the stop work order shall immediately cease.
C. Penalties For Violation Of Stop Work Order: Any person who continues to perform any work after having been
directed to cease performing the work with a stop work order shall be subject to penalties and be punished as
provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this Code. Each calendar day or portion thereof during which work proceeds in
violation of a stop work order shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this Code.
D. Removal Or Repair Of Building Service Equipment System That Create Unsafe Conditions:
1. In the event the building official determines that a building service equipment system regulated by the technical
codes creates an unsafe condition, the building official shall issue a written order to the owner thereof directing
that such building service equipment system must either be removed, or repaired or modified within a specified
time in such a manner that it no longer creates an unsafe condition. No person shall use or operate a building
service equipment system that is described in an order issued pursuant to this section until the building official
issues a written determination that the building service equipment system no longer creates an unsafe condition.
Any person who disconnects a building service equipment system from a utility shall notify the utility, the owner of
the building or structure, and all occupants of the building or structure at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
disconnection.
2. In the event a building service equipment system is used or operated in violation of an order issued pursuant to
this section, the City may seek equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the unsafe condition
described in the order. The foregoing equitable relief is without prejudice to any other remedy available to the
City.
3. Any person who shall knowingly occupy or use any building or structure in violation of any order issued by the
building official pursuant to this section shall be subject to penalties and be punished as provided in title 1,
chapter 3 of this Code. Each calendar day or portion thereof during which use or operation of the building service
equipment systems continues in violation of an order issued by the building official shall be deemed to constitute
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 78/640
a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this Code.
(Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
2-1-14: UNSAFE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, NATURAL OR MANMADE EARTHEN FEATURES,
OR BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT SYSTEMS:
A. Description Of Unsafe Conditions With Respect To Buildings, Structures, Manmade Earthen Features, Building
Appendages, Uses And Occupancies: Buildings, structures, or manmade earthen features which are regulated by
this title and which endanger human safety or health, the environment, or property are unsafe conditions. A
building, structure or manmade earthen feature may constitute an unsafe condition because it is structurally
inadequate, is geotechnically unstable, has inadequate egress, creates a fire hazard, or threatens the City
stormwater and/or sewer system. A building service equipment system regulated by this title which constitutes a fire
or electrical hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human safety or health is, for the purpose of this title, also
considered an unsafe condition. Any use or occupancy of buildings, structures or building service equipment
systems endangering the safety or health of any person or the public by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this title, an unsafe
condition. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members
which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building or structure and which are in deteriorated condition or
otherwise unable or reasonably unlikely to sustain the design loads which are specified in this title are hereby
considered to be unsafe conditions.
B. Specific Unsafe Conditions With Respect To Buildings And Structures: For the purpose of this title, any building or
structure that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered unsafe conditions:
1. Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress does not conform to this title, to include the
standards set forth in the technical codes.
2. The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose,
torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress.
3. Any portion of a building or structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or any other cause to such an extent that it is reasonably likely to partially or completely
collapse, or to become detached or dislodged.
4. Any portion of a building or structure, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is
not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of
resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half (11/2) the original designed value.
5. The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty
construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other
reason, is reasonably likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning
of the building or structure is reasonably likely to fail or give way.
6. The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is visibly unsafe for use or occupancy.
7. The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an
attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure and thus place themselves in danger; or
it becomes a harbor for vagrants or criminals; or it enables persons to use or occupy the building or structure for
committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.
8. The building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of this title, to include the
technical codes, in such a manner to present a substantial risk of fire, collapse or danger to human health or
safety.
9. The building or structure, if used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation,
mechanical or plumbing systems, or otherwise, is unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that
is reasonably likely to cause sickness or disease.
10. The building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire resistance rated construction, fire
protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical systems, plumbing systems or other causes,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 79/640
presents a substantial risk of harm to human safety or health.
11. All or part of a building or structure remains on a site after demolition, destruction or abandonment in such a
condition as to create an unreasonable risk of harm to persons or the public.
C. Abatement Of Unsafe Conditions: No approval, permit or certificate may be granted pursuant to this title if the
building official determines that the building, structure, phase, work, building service equipment system or other
matter described therein constitutes or creates an unsafe condition. In addition to any other authorities set forth in
this title, an unsafe condition may, where appropriate, be subject to abatement under the Nuisance Code.
D. Imminent Dangers:
1. Abatement Of Imminent Dangers: In the event the building official determines that there is imminent danger due
to the potential failure or collapse of all or part of a building or structure, or when a building or structure or part
thereof has fallen and as a result presents an imminent danger, or when there is actual or potential danger to the
occupants of a building or structure or those in proximity to a building or structure due to the presence of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or the operation of
defective or dangerous equipment thus creating an imminent danger, the building official is hereby authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the building or structure forthwith. The building official
shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building or structure a notice reading as follows: "This
Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the City of Elko." It shall be unlawful for any
person to enter a building or structure posted with the foregoing notice except for the purpose of securing the
building or structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or demolishing the building
or structure.
2. Notice: If an imminent danger is found with respect to a building or structure, the building official shall serve on
the owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure a written notice describing the imminent danger
and specifying the required repair to render the building or structure safe, or requiring the imminently dangerous
building or structure or portion thereof to be demolished within a specified time. If the notice directs the person to
demolish the building or structure, or any portion thereof, the notice shall require the person thus notified to
declare immediately to the building official acceptance or rejection of the terms of an order to demolish.
3. Verbal Orders: Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, where the building official determines that a
condition exists which creates an imminent danger requiring immediate action, a verbal order shall have the full
effect of a written order.
4. Posting Notice: Regardless of whether the person addressed with a notice of imminent danger receives service
as provided herein, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building or structure, or as
close thereto on the premises as is reasonably possible, and such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of
personal notice.
5. Disregard Of Notice; Emergency Repairs And Other Measures; Recovery Of Cost: Where the order to eliminate
an imminent danger is rejected or not obeyed, or when, in the opinion of the building official, immediate action is
required to protect the public safety, the building official shall cause the necessary work to be done to demolish
the building or structure or to render the building or structure temporarily safe. Nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to limit in any way the right, under any existing law or ordinance, of any department of the City to correct
or remove any condition deemed to be an imminent danger. When the City proceeds to demolish any building or
structure, whether by contract or by its own employees, the City may provide for the installation of a fence or
other protective device and implement such other measures as are reasonable under the circumstances in order
to secure the perimeter of the premises, protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and deter the
illegal dumping of trash and debris. Where the City incurs costs of emergency repairs, whether by itself or by
contract, such costs shall be charged to the owner of the property. The City shall, with the approval of the City
Attorney, collect such costs from the owner and may place a lien upon the property in the amount of the cost of
the emergency repairs, together with all attorney fees and costs incurred in the enforcement thereof.
6. Closing Streets And Other Public Areas: The building official may temporarily close public sidewalks, streets,
ways and places adjacent to an imminent danger, and prohibit the public from entering those areas. (Ord. 820, 7-
11-2017)
2-1-15: EXEMPTIONS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND BUILDING SERVICE
EQUIPMENT SYSTEMS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 80/640
A. Additions, Alterations Or Repairs:
1. General: Additions, alterations and repairs to existing buildings, structures and building service equipment
systems that were in compliance with the City of Elko Building Code in effect at the time of construction are not
required to comply with the requirements of this title, except as specifically provided in this section.
2. Scope Of Exemption: Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this section, additions, alterations or
repairs to any building, structure or building service equipment system, regardless of the date of construction or
installation, shall not create an unsafe condition or imminent danger.
3. Limitations On Additions, Alterations And Repairs: Any addition, alteration or repair to an existing building or
structure which involves a change in use or occupancy shall not cause the building or structure to exceed the
height, number of stories or area permitted for that building or structure by this title. Additions and/or alterations
shall not be made to an existing building or structure that was not in full compliance with the City of Elko Building
Code in effect at the time of construction, unless the addition and/or alteration causes the building or structure to
be in compliance with the requirements of this title currently in effect.
4. Waiver For Use Of Original Materials In Making Certain Nonstructural Alterations And Repairs: The building
official may grant a waiver from the requirements of this title to allow alterations or repairs to an existing building
or structure to be made with the same materials from which the building or structure was originally constructed,
provided the alterations or repairs are nonstructural, do not adversely affect a structural member, do not cause
any part of the building or structure to fall below the currently required level of fire resistance and do not create an
unsafe condition.
5. Waiver For Additions, Alterations Or Repairs To Existing Building Service Equipment Systems: The building
official may grant a waiver from the requirements of this title for minor additions, alterations and repairs to existing
building service equipment systems that complied with the Building Code in effect at the time of the original
installation, provided such additions, alterations and repairs shall not cause the building service equipment
system to become an unsafe condition, or become unsanitary or overloaded.
6. Glass: Notwithstanding any provision contained in this section, the installation or replacement of glass shall
conform to the current requirements of this title, to include the technical codes.
B. Existing Building Service Equipment Systems: Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, building service
equipment systems that complied with the City of Elko Building Code at the time of installation but that no longer
comply with this title may remain in use so long as their continued use, maintenance and repair comply with the
requirements of this title and the manufacturer recommendations in effect at time of installation, and further
provided that the building service equipment system shall not create an unsafe condition. Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence, in the event polyvinyl chloride (PVC) gas conveyance material is damaged, altered or repaired,
the material shall be completely replaced with gas piping which complies with the technical codes currently in effect.
C. Existing Use Or Occupancy Of Building Or Structure:
1. General: A legal use or occupancy of any building or structure that complied with the City of Elko Building Code
in effect on the date the use or occupancy commenced, but that no longer complies with the requirements of this
title shall be permitted to continue without change; provided, the foregoing exception for existing uses and
occupancies shall not apply a use or occupancy that creates a public nuisance, is an unsafe condition or violates
the latest version of the Fire Code adopted by the City.
2. Change In Use Or Occupancy: Any change of use or occupancy of a building or structure shall automatically
render the building or structure subject to the current requirements of this title, to include the requirement for a
Certificate of Occupancy.
D. Maintenance: Without regard to whether a waiver has been granted or the use or occupancy is otherwise allowed to
continue as an existing use, all buildings, structures, and other improvements and parts thereof which are subject to
regulation under this title, whether existing or new, shall be maintained by the owner of the property in such a
manner as to not create an unsafe condition or imminent danger. (Ord. 820, 7-11-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 81/640
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
2-2-1: BUILDING CODE PROVISIONS:
A. Title: This chapter will be known as the INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO, hereinafter
"code", including the adoption of the 2009 international building code with appendices C, E, F, G, H, I and J. Certain
sections of the international building code and appendices may be added or deleted.
B. Applicability: All construction of, or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the
occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
component, element, or portion of a building or structure within the city must be in compliance with, in addition to,
the other applicable codes or amendments set forth by the city council and the latest edition of the international
building code. (Ord. 723, 2-8-2011)
2-2-2: BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
All building construction work and the inspections thereof must be in conformity with the provisions of this code and
with the latest edition of the international building code, which is hereby adopted by the city, with the following specific
deletions and additions:
Chapter 1 - Scope And Administration
Chapter 1 Scope And Administration is deleted in its entirety and replaced by city of Elko ordinance no. 722, title
2, chapter 1, "Building Regulations Administrative Code", of the city code.
Chapter 2 - Definitions
Section 202 - Definitions.
Revise section 202 to include the following new definitions:
Fire Code Official. The fire chief or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement
of the international fire code, or a duly authorized representative.
High Rise Building. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest
level of fire department vehicle access in accordance with NAC 477.283.2(b).
Sleeping Room. Any sleeping room, bedroom, basement, loft, mezzanine or other room that is ordinarily used
or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. The term is deemed to include any room that contains a closet
and that provides for occupant privacy.
Chapter 3 - Use And Occupancy
Section 303 - Assembly Group A.
303.1 Assembly Group A.
Revise section 303.1 subsection A-2 as follows:
A-2 Assembly uses intended for food and/or drink consumption including, but not limited to:
Banquet halls
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 82/640
Night clubs
Restaurants
Taverns and bars
Casinos
The remainder of this section remains unchanged.
Section 308 - Institutional Group I.
Revise sections 308.3.1, 308.5, 308.5.2 to read as follows:
308.3.1 Definitions.
The following words and terms will, for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code, have
the meanings shown herein.
Child Care Facilities. Facilities that provide care on a 24-hour basis to more than six children, 21/2 years of
age or less.
Other definitions remain unchanged.
308.5 Group I-4, Day Care Facilities.
This group includes buildings and structures occupied by persons of any age who receive custodial care for
less than 24 hours by individuals other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood, marriage or adoption, and
in a place other than the home of the person cared for. A facility such as the above with six or fewer persons
must be classified as a group R-3 or must comply with the international residential code in accordance with
section 101.2. Places of worship during religious functions are not included.
Section 308.5.1 remains unchanged.
308.5.2 Child Care Facility.
A facility that provides supervision and personal care on less than a 24-hour basis for more than six children
21/2 years of age or less must be classified as a group I-4.
Exception:
A child day care facility that provides care for more than six but no more than 100 children 21/2 years or less
of age, where the rooms in which the children are cared for are located on a level of exit discharge serving
such rooms and each of these child care rooms has an exit door directly to the exterior, must be classified as
group E.
Section 310 - Residential Group R.
Revise section 310 as follows:
310.1 Residential Group R.
Revise as follows:
Residential group R includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for
sleeping purposes when not classified as an institutional group I or when not regulated by the international
residential code in accordance with section 101.2. Residential occupancies must include the following:
R-1 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units where the occupants are primarily transient in
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 83/640
nature, including:
Boarding houses (transient)
Hotels (transient)
Motels (transient)
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants are permitted to comply with the
construction requirements for group R-3.
R-2
Revise as follows:
Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the occupants
are primarily permanent in nature, including:
Apartment houses
Boarding houses (non-transient)
Condominiums (non-transient)
Convents
Dormitories
Fraternities and sororities
Hotels (non-transient)
Live/work units
Monasteries
Motels (non-transient)
Vacation timeshare properties
R-3
Revise as follows:
R-3 Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified
as group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including:
1) Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units.
2) Adult care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons of any age for less than 24
hours.
3) Child care facilities that provide accommodations for six or fewer persons of any age for less than 24
hours.
4) Congregate living facilities with 16 or fewer persons.
5) Adult care and child care facilities that are within a single-family home are permitted to comply with
the international residential code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 84/640
Remainder of section 310.1 to remain unchanged.
Section 311 - Storage Group S.
Revise section 311.2 to add one item to read as follows:
311.2 Moderate-Hazard Storage, Group S-1.
Buildings occupied for storage uses that are not classified as group S-2, including, but not limited to, storage of
the following:
Add self-service storage facility
Chapter 4 - Special Detailed Requirements Based On Use And Occupancy
Section 403 - High-Rise Buildings.
Revise section 403 as follows:
403.1 Applicability.
High-rise buildings having occupied floors located more than fifty five feet (55') above the lowest level of fire
department vehicle access must comply with sections 403.2 through 403.6.
Exception:
The provisions of sections 403.2 through 403.6 must not apply to the following buildings and structures:
1. Airport traffic control towers in accordance with section 412.3.
2. Open parking garages in accordance with section 406.3.
3. Special industrial occupancies in accordance with section 503.1.1.
Section 404 - Atriums.
Revise section 404.3 to read as follows, deleting exception nos. 1 and 2:
[F] 404.3 Automatic Sprinkler Protection.
An approved automatic sprinkler system must be installed throughout the entire building.
Section 406 - Motor-Vehicle-Related Occupancies.
Revise as follows:
406.1 Area Increase (Private Garages And Carports).
Add a new exception after last paragraph of section 406.1.2 to read as follows:
406.1.2 Area Increase.
Group U occupancies used for the storage of private or pleasure-type motor vehicles where no repair work is
completed or fuel is dispensed are permitted to be 3,000 square feet (279 m2) when the following provisions are
met:
1. For a mixed occupancy building, the exterior wall and opening protection for the group U portion of the
building must be as required for the major occupancy of the building. For such a mixed occupancy building, the
allowable floor area of the building must be as permitted for the major occupancy contained therein.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 85/640
2. For a building containing only a group U occupancy, the exterior wall must not be required to have a fireresistance
rating and the area of openings must not be limited when the fire separation distance is 5 feet
(1524 mm) or more.
More than one 3,000-square-foot (279 m2) group U occupancy must be permitted to be in the same building,
provided each 3,000-square-foot (279 m2) area is separated by fire walls complying with section 705.
Exception: Noncombustible carports may be of unlimited area when they are open on all sides, not over
twelve feet (3658 mm) in height, and located a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) from any property line or
assumed property line, measured from the roof edge.
406.1.4 Separation (Private Garages And Carports).
Revise section 406.1.4 by adding item nos. 4 and 5 as follows:
406.1.4 Separation.
Separations must comply with the following:
1. Unchanged.
2. Unchanged.
3. Unchanged.
4. Noncombustible carports do not require exterior wall and opening protection when they are open on all
sides, not over twelve feet (3658 mm) in height, and located a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) from any
property line or assumed property line, as measured from the roof edge.
5. When a group B, F, M, R, or S occupancy structure and a noncombustible carport are located on the same
property with a minimum separation of ten feet (3048 mm) between the structure and the carport, as
measured from the roof edges, exterior wall and opening protection is not required for either structure.
406.4.2 Ventilation (Enclosed Parking Garages).
Revise section 406.4.2 as follows:
406.4.2 Ventilation.
A mechanical ventilation system must be provided in accordance with the uniform mechanical code.
Exceptions:
(1) A mechanical ventilation system must not be required in an enclosed parking garage when openings
complying with section 406.3.3.1 are provided.
(2) A mechanical ventilation system must not be required in an enclosed parking garage having a floor area
of 1,000 ft2 or less and used for the storage of five (5) or less private motor vehicles.
406.4.2.1 Minimum Ventilation.
The mechanical ventilation system must be capable of producing a ventilation rate of 0.75 cfm per square foot
(0.0038 m3/s.m2) of floor area.
Exception:
When approved by the city of Elko, the mechanical ventilation system may be designed to exhaust a minimum
of 14,000 cfm (6.61 m3/s) for each operating vehicle. Such system must be based on the anticipated
instantaneous movement rate of vehicles, but not less than 2.5 percent of the garage capacity, or one vehicle,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 86/640
whichever is greater.
406.4.2.2 Intermittent Operation.
The mechanical ventilation system is not required to operate continuously where approved automatic carbon
monoxide sensing devices are provided to operate the system automatically to maintain a maximum average
concentration of carbon monoxide of 50 parts per million during any eight-hour period, with a maximum
concentration not greater than 200 parts per million for a period not exceeding one hour.
406.4.2.3 Occupied Spaces Accessory To Public Garages.
Connecting offices, waiting rooms, ticket booths and similar uses that are accessory to a public garage must be
supplied with conditioned air and maintained at a positive pressure.
406.6.3 Ventilation (Repair Garages).
Revise section 406.6.3 as follows:
406.6.3 Ventilation.
Repair garages must be mechanically ventilated in accordance with the uniform mechanical code. The ventilation
system must be controlled at the entrance to the garage.
406.6.3.1 Minimum Ventilation.
The mechanical ventilation system must be capable of producing a ventilation rate of 1.5 cfm per square foot
(0.0076 m3/s.m2) of floor area. Each engine repair stall must be equipped with an exhaust pipe extension duct,
extending to the outside of the building, which, if over 10 feet (3048 mm) in length, must mechanically exhaust
300 cfm (0.142 m3/s).
406.6.3.2 Occupied Spaces Accessory To Repair Garages.
Connecting offices, waiting rooms and similar uses that are accessory to a repair garage must be supplied with
conditioned air and maintained at a positive pressure.
Section 419 - Live/Work Units.
Revise section 419.5 as follows:
419.5 Fire Protection.
The live/work unit must be provided with a monitored fire alarm system where required by section 907.2.9 and an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
Chapter 5 - General Building Heights And Areas
Section [F] 501.2 Address Identification.
Revise section [F] 501.2 as follows:
[F] 501.2 Address Identification.
New and existing buildings must be provided with approved address numbers or letters. Each character must
be a minimum 6 inches (152 mm) high and a minimum of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) wide. They must be installed on a
contrasting background and be plainly visible from the street or road fronting the property. Where access is by
means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or
other approved sign or means must be used to identify the structure.
Section 507 - Unlimited Area Buildings.
507.2 Non-Sprinklered, One Story (Unlimited Area Buildings).
Revise section 507.2 as follows:
507.2 Nonsprinklered, Group F-2 Or S-2, One Story.
The area of a group F-2 or S-2 building no more than one story in height must not be limited when the building is
surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width and the building is
provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout when required by section 903.2 or the international fire
code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 87/640
Chapter 6 - Types Of Construction
Section 603 - Combustible Material In Type I And II Construction.
603.1.2 Piping (Buildings Of Type I/II Construction).
Revise section 603.1.2 as follows:
603.1.2 Piping.
The use of combustible piping materials must be permitted when installed in accordance with the following:
603.1.2.1 Equipment Rooms.
Combustible piping must be permitted to be installed in an equipment room that is enclosed by 2-hour fireresistance
rated construction and protected throughout by automatic sprinklers. The combustible piping must be
permitted to be extended from the equipment room to other rooms provided the piping is encased in an
approved, dedicated 2-hour fire-resistance rated assembly. Where such combustible piping penetrates a fireresistance
rated wall and/or floor/ceiling assembly, the penetration must be protected by a through-penetration
firestop system that is listed for the specific piping material and that has F and T ratings not less than the required
fire-resistance rating of the penetrated assembly. The combustible piping must not penetrate more than a single
floor.
603.1.2.2 Chemical Waste Systems.
Combustible piping must be permitted to be installed for chemical waste and vent systems when the chemical
waste would otherwise react with noncombustible piping. Combustible piping serving such systems must be
protected as required in section 603.1.2.1.
603.1.2.3 Medical Water Systems.
Combustible piping is permitted to be installed for purified water systems that are used in conjunction with
medical treatment systems, such as dialysis. Combustible piping serving such systems must be protected as
required in section 603.1.2.1.
603.1.2.4 Bars And Soda Fountains.
Combustible piping is permitted to be installed for distribution/process systems that serve bars and soda
fountains. Combustible piping serving such systems must either be installed below a fire-resistance rated slabon-
grade, protected as required in section 603.1.2.1, or sleeved within noncombustible EMT conduit or metal
piping from the room of origin to the area of end use. Where combustible piping serving bars and soda fountains
is sleeved within noncombustible EMT conduit or metal piping, the end points of the conduit or pipe must be
sealed in accordance with Nevada state health division requirements.
603.1.2.5 Fire Sprinkler Systems.
CPVC piping that is specifically listed and labeled for fire protection use is permitted to be installed for fire
sprinkler system piping provided that it is installed in accordance with its listing, the manufacturer's installation
requirements, and the international building code.
603.1.2.6 Under Slab-On-Grade.
Combustible piping is permitted to be installed under a fire-resistance rated slab-on-grade provided the transition
from combustible to noncombustible piping occurs entirely below the slab-on-grade. The transition from
combustible to noncombustible piping is permitted to occur within an equipment room directly above the slab-ongrade
when the room is protected as required in section 603.1.2.1.
Chapter 9 - Fire Protection Systems
Section 903.2.7 Group M.
Revise section 903.2.7 as follows:
[F] 903.2.7 Group M.
An automatic sprinkler system must be provided throughout buildings containing a group M occupancy where
one of the following conditions exists:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 88/640
1. A group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).
2. A group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000
square feet (2230 m2).
4. A group M occupancy which primary purpose is used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture,
mattresses or box springs.
Chapter 10 - Means Of Egress
Section 1006 - Means Of Egress Illumination.
1006.3 Illumination Emergency Power.
Revise section 1006.3 as follows:
1006.3 Illumination Emergency Power.
The power supply for means of egress illumination must normally be provided by the premises' electrical supply.
In the event of power failure, an emergency electrical system must automatically illuminate all of the following
areas:
1. Aisles and unenclosed egress stairways in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress.
2. Corridors, exit enclosures and exit passageways in buildings required to have two or more exits.
3. Exterior egress components at other than their levels of exit discharge until exit discharge is accomplished
for buildings required to have two or more exits.
4. Interior exit discharge elements, as permitted in section 1027.1, in buildings required to have two or more
exits.
5. Exterior landings as required by section 1008.1.6 for exit discharge doorways in buildings required to have
two or more exits.
6. Electrical equipment rooms, fire command centers, fire pump rooms, PBX rooms, and generator rooms.
7. Public restrooms which are greater than 64 square feet (5.9 square meters) and accessed by means of
egress components which are required to have emergency illumination.
The emergency power system must provide power for a duration of not less than 90 minutes and must consist
of storage batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system
must be in accordance with chapter 27.
Section 1007 - Accessible Means Of Egress.
Revise section 1007.1 as follows:
1007.1 Accessible Means Of Egress Required.
Accessible means of egress must comply with this section. Accessible spaces must be provided with not less
than one accessible means of egress. Where more than one means of egress are required by section 1015.1
or 1021.1 from any accessible space, each accessible portion of the space must be served by not less than
two accessible means of egress.
Exceptions:
1. Accessible means of egress are not required in alterations to existing facilities.
2. One accessible means of egress is required from an accessible mezzanine level in accordance with
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 89/640
section 1007.3, 1007.4 or 1007.5.
3. In assembly areas with sloped or stepped aisles, one accessible means of egress is permitted where the
common path of travel from the wheelchair space is accessible and meets the requirements in section
1028.8.
Section 1008 - Doors, Gates And Turnstiles.
1008.1.5 Floor Elevation (Doors).
Revise section 1008.1.5 as follows:
1008.1.5 Floor Elevation.
There must be a floor or landing on each side of a door. Such floor or landing must be at the same elevation on
each side of the door. Landings must be level except for exterior landings, which are permitted to have a slope
not to exceed 0.25 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).
Exceptions:
1. Unchanged.
2. Unchanged.
3. Unchanged.
4. Unchanged.
5. Unchanged.
6. A single step with a maximum height of 7 inches (178 mm) is permitted for doors serving building equipment
rooms that are not normally occupied and are not required to be accessible by chapter 11.
1008.1.8 Door Arrangement.
Revise section 1008.1.8 by adding exception 4 as follows:
1008.1.8 Door Arrangement.
Space between two doors in a series must be 48 inches (1219 mm) minimum plus the width of a door swinging
into the space. Doors in a series must swing either in the same direction or away from the space between the
doors.
Exceptions:
1. The minimum distance between horizontal sliding power-operated doors in a series must be 48 inches
(1219 mm).
2. Storm and screen doors serving individual dwelling units in groups R-2 and R-3 need not be spaced 48
inches (1219 mm) from the other door.
3. Doors within individual dwelling units in groups R-2 and R-3 other than within type A dwelling units.
4. The space between doors serving access vestibules of smokeproof enclosures must be permitted to be in
accordance with section 909.20.1.
1008.1.9.10 Stairway Doors.
Revise section 1008.1.9.10 as follows:
1008.1.9.10 Stairway Doors.
Interior stairway means of egress doors must be operable from both sides without the use of a key or special
knowledge or effort.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 90/640
Exceptions:
1. Stairway discharge doors must be openable from the egress side and must only be locked from the opposite
side.
2. This section does not apply to doors arranged in accordance with section 403.5.3.
3. In stairways serving buildings other than high-rise buildings, doors are permitted to be locked from the side
opposite the egress side, provided they are openable from the egress side. Except for exit discharge doors, the
stairway doors must be automatically unlocked simultaneously without unlatching upon any of the following: a
signal from the fire command center, if present, or a signal by emergency personnel from an approved location
inside the building; activation of a fire alarm system or a fire sprinkler system in an area served by the stairway;
or failure of the power supply.
4. Upon approval of the city of Elko, stairway doors opening directly into privately owned residential units or
leased tenant spaces are permitted to be locked from the side opposite the egress side, provided they are
openable from the egress side. The doors are permitted to unlock without unlatching only upon signal from the
fire command center, if present, or a signal by emergency personnel from an approved location inside the
building.
Section 1015 - Exit And Exit Access Doorways.
Revise section 1015.2.2 as follows:
1015.2.2 Three Or More Exits Or Exit Access Doorways.
Where access to three or more exits is required, at least two exit doors or exit access doorways must be
arranged in accordance with the provisions of section 1015.2.1. Additional exits or exit access doorways must
be distributed so that if one becomes blocked, the others will be available.
Section 1022 - Exit Enclosures.
Revise section 1022.9 as follows:
1022.9 Smokeproof Enclosures And Pressurized Stairways.
In buildings required to comply with section 403 or 405, each of the exit enclosures serving a story with a floor
surface located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access or
more than 30 feet (9144 mm) below the finished floor of a level of exit discharge serving such stories must be a
smokeproof enclosure or pressurized stairway in accordance with section 909.20. Pressurization must occur
automatically upon activation of an approved fire alarm system.
Section 1024 - Luminous Egress Path Markings.
Revise section 1024.1 as follows:
1024.1 General.
Approved luminous egress path markings delineating the exit path must be provided in exit enclosures in
buildings of groups A, B, E, I, M and R-1 having occupied floors located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above
the lowest level of fire department vehicle access in accordance with sections 1024.1 through 1024.5.
Exceptions:
1. Luminous egress path markings are not required on the level of exit discharge in lobbies that serve as part
of the exit path in accordance with section 1027.1, exception 1.
2. Luminous egress path markings are not required in areas of open parking garages that serve as part of
the exit path in accordance with section 1027.1, exception 3.
3. Luminous egress path markings are not required in exit enclosures that do not serve a story located more
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 91/640
than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Section 1026 - Exterior Exit Ramps And Stairways.
Revise section 1026.2 as follows:
1026.2 Use As A Means Of Egress.
Exterior exit stairways must not be used as an element of a required means of egress for group I-2
occupancies. For occupancies in other than group I-2, exterior exit ramps and stairways must be permitted as
an element of a required means of egress for buildings not exceeding six stories above grade plane or having
occupied floors more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Chapter 11 - Accessibility
Section 1102 - Definitions.
Revise section 1102.1, "Self-Service Storage Facility" definition as follows:
Section 1102.1, Self-Service Storage Facility.
Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for
the purpose of storing and removing property on a self-service basis.
Section 1107 - Dwelling Units And Sleeping Units.
Revise section 1107.6.2.1 as follows:
1107.6.2.1 Apartment Houses, Condominiums, Monasteries And Convents.
Type A units and type B units must be provided in apartment houses, condominiums, monasteries and
convents in accordance with sections 1107.6.2.1.1 and 1107.6.2.1.2.
Chapter 12 - Interior Environment
Section 1203 - Ventilation.
1203.1 General.
Revise section 1203.1 as follows:
1203.1 General.
Buildings must be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with section 1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in
accordance with the uniform mechanical code or section 1203.6.
1203.4.1.3 Guest Rooms And Habitable Rooms.
Add new sections 1203.4.1.3, 1203.4.1.4, and 1203.4.1.5 as follows:
1203.4.1.3 Guest Rooms And Habitable Rooms.
Guest rooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or congregate residence in R occupancies, when
provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings, must be provided with a minimum
ventilation area of 5 square feet (0.46 m2).
1203.4.1.4 Bathrooms, Water Closets, Laundry Rooms And Similar Rooms In R Occupancies.
Bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms in R occupancies, when provided
with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings, must be provided with a minimum ventilation
area of 1.5 square feet (0.14 m2).
1203.4.1.5 Toilet Rooms.
Toilet rooms, when provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings, must be provided
with a minimum ventilation area of 3 square feet (0.28 m2), or a vertical duct not less than 100 square inches
(64 516 mm2) in area for the first water closet plus 50 square inches (32 258 mm2) of additional area for each
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 92/640
additional water closet.
1203.4.2.1 Bathrooms.
Delete section 1203.4.2.1 in its entirety without replacement.
1203.6 Mechanical Ventilation.
Add new section 1203.6 through 1203.6.5.2 as follows:
1203.6 Mechanical Ventilation.
Mechanically operated ventilation systems must be in accordance with the uniform mechanical code or
sections 1203.6.1 through 1203.6.5.
1203.6.1 General.
In all enclosed portions of groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M and S occupancies customarily occupied by human beings,
when mechanically operated ventilation systems are provided in lieu of required exterior openings for natural
ventilation, such system must be capable of supplying a minimum of 15 cubic feet per minute (7 L/s) of outside
air per occupant in all portions of the building during such time as the building is occupied. If the velocity of the
air at a register exceeds 10 feet per second (3 m/s), the register must be placed more than 8 feet (2438 mm)
above the floor directly beneath. Such exterior openings must open directly onto a public way or a yard or court
as set forth in section 1206.
In toilet rooms, if mechanically operated systems are to be utilized for required ventilation, such systems must
be capable of providing a complete change of air every 15 minutes. Such mechanically operated exhaust
systems must be connected directly to the outside, and the point of discharge must be at least 3 feet (914 mm)
from any opening that allows air entry into occupied portions of the building.
1203.6.2 Groups B, F, M And S Occupancies.
In all buildings classified as groups B, F, M and S occupancies or portions thereof where class I, II or III-A
liquids are used, a mechanically operated exhaust ventilation system must be provided that is sufficient to
produce a minimum of six air changes per hour. Such exhaust ventilation must be taken from a point at or near
the floor level.
1203.6.3 Group H Occupancies.
All group H occupancies must comply with the international fire code, uniform mechanical code and section
415. In group H, division 5 occupancies, mechanical exhaust ventilation must be provided in accordance with
415.8.2.6, 415.8.4.3, 415.8.5.7, 415.8.10.2 and other appropriate sections of this code. Rooms, areas or
spaces of group H occupancies in which explosive, corrosive, combustible, flammable or highly toxic dusts,
mists, fumes, vapors or gases are or may be emitted due to the processing, use, handling or storage of
materials must be mechanically ventilated as required by section 414.3, the international fire code, and the
uniform mechanical code.
1203.6.4 Group R Occupancies.
In group R occupancies, in lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanically operated
ventilation system may be provided. Such system must be capable of providing two air changes per hour in
guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms and in public corridors with a minimum of 15 cubic feet per minute
(7 L/s) of outside air per occupant during such time as the building is occupied.
In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation in bathrooms containing a bathtub, shower or
combination thereof, laundry rooms, and similar rooms, a mechanically operated ventilation system capable of
providing a minimum of five air changes per hour must be provided. Such systems must be connected directly
to the outside, and the point of discharge must be at least 3 feet (914 mm) from any opening that allows air
entry into occupied portions of the building. Bathrooms that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination
thereof and similar rooms may be ventilated with an approved mechanical re-circulating fan or similar device
designed to remove odors from the air.
1203.6.5 Motor Vehicle Related Occupancies.
1203.6.5.1 Repair Garage.
Ventilation in repair garages must be in accordance with section 406.6.3.
1203.6.5.2 Enclosed Parking Garages.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 93/640
Ventilation in enclosed parking garages must be in accordance with section 406.4.2.
Chapter 16 - Structural Design
Section 1603 - Construction Documents.
1603.1 General.
Add exception #7 to section 1603.1 as follows:
7. Average dead loads for roofing and flooring materials.
Table 1607 - Live Loads.
Table 1607.1 Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads And Minimum
Concentrated Live Loads.
Add footnote "m" for item #27 in table 1607.1 as follows:
(Remainder of table and footnotes remain unchanged.)
Occupancy Or Use
Uniform
(psf)
Concentrated
(lbs)
27 Residential
One- and two- family dwellings
Uninhabitable attics without storagei,m 10
Uninhabitable attics with limited storagei,j,k,m 20
Habitable attics and sleeping areas 40
All other areas 40 ------
Hotels and multiple-family dwellings
Private rooms and corridors serving them 40
Public rooms and corridors serving them 100
m. Attics, designed per uniform loads described for uninhabitable attics, are not required to be designed for the
additional concentrated load of item 31.
Section 1609 - Wind Loads.
1609.1.1 Determination Of Wind Loads.
Add a new exception #7 to subsection 1609.1.1 as follows:
Exceptions:
7. Solid and freestanding walls up to and including 10'-0" above the highest adjacent grade and designed using
the provisions of ASCE 7 section 6.5.14 need only consider CASE A of figure 6-20 with a Cf factor equal to
1.40 and the resultant applied at the mid-height of the wall.
Section 1612 - Flood Loads.
Revise section 1612.3 as follows:
1612.3 Establishment Of Flood Hazard Areas.
To establish flood hazard areas, the city must adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 94/640
map must include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the federal emergency
management agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study For Elko County, Nevada
And Incorporated Areas," most current edition, as amended or revised with the accompanying flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) and flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any
revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this section.
Chapter 17 - Structural Tests And Special Inspections
Section 1704 - Special Inspections.
1704.1.2 Report Requirement.
Revise subsection 1704.1.2 as follows:
1704.1.2 Report Requirement.
Special inspectors must keep records of required special inspections. The special inspector must furnish
inspection reports to the city of Elko, and to the registered design professional in responsible charge. Reports
must indicate that work inspected was or was not completed in conformance to approved construction
documents. Discrepancies must be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for correction. If they
are not corrected, the discrepancies must be brought to the attention of the city of Elko and to the registered
design professional in responsible charge in writing prior to the completion of that phase of the work. A final
report documenting required special inspections and correction of any discrepancies noted in the inspections
must be submitted to the city of Elko prior to the final inspection.
1704.5 Masonry Construction.
Revise the exceptions in section 1704.5 as follows:
1704.5 Masonry Construction.
Masonry construction must be inspected and verified in accordance with the requirement of section 1704.5.1
through 1704.5.3, depending on the occupancy category of the building or structure.
Exception: Special inspections will not be required for:
1. Empirically designed masonry, glass unit masonry or masonry veneer designed by section 2109, 2110, or
chapter 14, respectively, or by chapter 5, 6, or 7 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, respectively, when they are
part of structures classified as occupancy category I, II, or III in accordance with section 1604.5.
2. Masonry fireplaces, masonry heaters or masonry chimneys installed or constructed in accordance with
section 2111, 2112, or 2113, respectively.
3. Masonry fences less than or equal to 8'-0" in height, retaining walls less than or equal to 6'-0" in height or
combined masonry fences and retaining walls less than or equal to 14'-0" in overall height with the retaining
wall portion less than or equal to 6'-0" in height and the fence portion less than or equal to 8'-0" in height
provided that the walls are designed in accordance with chapter 2 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 with
allowable stresses for masonry reduced by one half and f'm does not exceed 1500 psi. Wall heights must be
measured from the top of footing to top of wall.
1704.7 Soils.
Revise the exception in section 1704.7 as follows:
Exception:
Where section 1803 does not require reporting of materials and procedures for fill placement, the in-place dry
density of the compacted fill must not be less than 90% of the maximum dry density at optimum moisture
content determined in accordance with ASTM D 1557.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 95/640
Table 1704.7 Required Verification And Inspection Of Soils.
Revise table 1704.7 as follows:
TABLE 1704.7
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF SOILS
Verification And Inspection Task
Continuous
During
Task Listed
Periodically
During
Task Listed
1. Verify materials below shallow foundations are adequate to achieve the design
bearing capacity.
__ X
2. Verify excavations are extended to proper depth and have reached proper
material.
__ X
3. Perform classification and testing of compacted fill materials. __ X
4. Verify use of proper materials, densities and lift thicknesses during placement and
compaction of compacted fill and other grading activities requiring special inspection.
__ X
a. All soils not meeting the requirements of category b. __ X
b. Moderately, highly or critically expansive soils, hydrocollapsible soils, soluble
soils, and/or soils requiring chemical or mechanical (geosynthetics) stabilization
are encountered. Construction or stabilization of cut or fill slopes exceeding 5 feet
in height, or any site requiring that fill be placed on a natural slope, an existing cut
slope, or an existing fill slope steeper than 5:1.
X __
5. Prior to placement of compacted fill, observe subgrade and verify that site has
been prepared properly.
__ X
Chapter 18 - Soils And Foundations
Section 1803 - Geotechnical Investigations.
1803.2 Investigations Required.
Revise section 1803.2 as follows:
1803.2 Investigations Required.
Geotechnical investigations must be conducted in accordance with sections 1803.3 through 1803.5.
Geotechnical investigations must be prepared by a registered design professional. Recommendations included
in the report and approved by the city of Elko must be incorporated in the construction documents.
Geotechnical investigations must be required for all projects that require new foundations.
Exemptions. At the option of the city of Elko, the following projects may be exempted from having a
geotechnical investigation:
1. Single story structures, additions, or remodels with a footprint less than 600 square feet.
2. Fences.
3. Site retaining walls less than 4 feet in retained height.
4. Mobile homes, trailers, modular buildings that do not have concrete or masonry foundations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 96/640
5. Pre-engineered carports.
6. Signs, light poles, and communication towers less than 40 feet in height.
1803.3.2 Minimum Exploration Requirements.
Add a new subsection 1803.3.2, Minimum Exploration Requirements, as follows:
1803.3.2 Minimum Exploration Requirements.
The minimum exploration requirements are as follows:
1. For areas less than or equal to one acre, a minimum of two explorations.
2. For areas greater than one acre, but less than five acres, a minimum of one exploration for the first acre and
one for each additional two acres, or portion thereof.
3. For areas greater than five acres, but less than twenty acres, a minimum of three explorations plus one
additional exploration for each three acres or fraction thereof above five.
4. For areas greater than twenty acres, a minimum of eight explorations plus one additional exploration for
each five acres or fraction thereof above twenty.
5. Building additions of less than 2,000 square feet require a minimum of one exploration.
6. For signs, light poles, and communication towers whose locations are known and only that area of the site is
to be developed, a minimum of one exploration is required.
7. The minimum depth of the exploration must be fifteen feet. Exploration depth must be increased as
necessary to evaluate the suitability of the material within the foundation's depth of influence as determined by
the registered design professional. The explorations can be terminated should refusal be encountered.
However, at least three-fourths of the required explorations must be to the minimum depth. The geotechnical
report must clearly state the refusal criteria. When information regarding the proposed structure and the final
grades is made available, the registered design professional must determine if the explorations originally
documented in the geotechnical report meet the depth requirements.
1803.5.8 Compacted Fill Material.
Add new items #8 and #9 to subsection 1803.5.8 as follows:
8. Flooding or jetting must not be used to compact fill material that will support footings or foundation systems.
9. Placement Procedures For Oversized Fill/Backfill Material.
No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches must be buried or
placed in fills/backfills within five feet measured vertically, from the bottom of the footing or lowest finished floor
elevation, whichever is lower, nor three feet measured horizontally from any footing, stemwall, basement wall
or structural element, within the building pad. Oversized fill material must be placed so as to assure the filling of
all voids with well-graded soil. Specific placement and inspection criteria must be stated in the geotechnical
investigation. Continuous special inspection will be required during placement of any oversized fill material.
1803.6 Reporting.
Revise section 1803.6 and add new items 5, 7, 13 through 22 as follows:
1803.6 Reporting.
Where geotechnical investigations are required, a written report of the investigation must be submitted to the
city of Elko by the owner or authorized agent at the time of permit application. The geotechnical report must
include, but need not be limited to, the following information:
1. A plot showing the location of the test borings, excavations, and/or investigations. The plot must be
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 97/640
dimensioned and must show the approximate location of all existing and proposed structures.
2. A complete record of the soil boring and penetration test logs and soil samples.
3. A record of the soil profile.
4. Depth to the water table, if encountered.
5. Anticipated approximate cut and fill depths.
6. Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria, including but not limited to: bearing capacity of
natural or compacted soil; provisions to mitigate the effects of expansive soils; mitigation of the effects of
liquefaction, differential settlement, and varying soil strength; and the effects of adjacent loads. Provide
provisions to mitigate the effects of collapsible soils, soluble soils, uncontrolled fill, chemical heave, and
corrosive soils. Provide supporting test data.
7. Caliche and cemented soils considerations, if encountered. Recommendations for the removal of caliche
and cemented soils and/or the preparation and grading for foundations on caliche and cemented soils.
8. Expected total and differential settlement.
9. Deep foundation information in accordance with section 1803.5.5.
10. Special design and construction provisions for foundations of structures founded on expansive soils, as
necessary.
11. Compacted fill material properties and testing in accordance with section 1803.5.8. Provide provisions to
mitigate the effects of collapsible soils, soluble soils, uncontrolled fill, chemical heave, and corrosive soils.
12. Controlled low-strength material properties and testing in accordance with section 1803.5.9.
13. Soil classification by the unified soil classification system (ASTM D 2487). As an alternative, classification
may be performed on a visual-manual basis (ASTM D 2488) in the field by an individual with a degree in civil
engineering, engineering geology, geologic engineering, or geology. Backup data must be included for at least
one sample for every two (2) excavations and/or borings distributed among the prominent horizons in the soil
profile.
14. Classify the expansion level of the soil and specify the minimum embedment depth per table 1808.6.1.1.
15. Address, if applicable, the possible impacts on adjoining properties and mitigating measures to be
undertaken.
16. Suitability of onsite soils for use as fill material.
17. Provide grading requirements for onsite and import soils (where applicable) including, but not limited to,
swell, solubility, and sulfates.
18. Geotechnical design considerations for drainage structures, as applicable.
19. Erosion control requirements, as applicable.
20. Anticipated structural loads and type of proposed structure.
21. Site class per table 1613.5.5, including all test data and supporting calculations.
22. All geotechnical reports must be current within the last 12 months. Any report older than 12 months must
be accompanied by a wet sealed update letter addressing the current site conditions based on a recent site
visit.
Section 1804 - Excavation, Grading And Fill.
1804.3 Site Grading.
Revise section 1804.3 as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 98/640
1804.3 Site Grading.
The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation must be sloped away from the building at a slope of not less
than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) for a minimum distance of 10 feet (3048 mm)
measured perpendicular to the face of the wall. If physical obstructions or lot lines prohibit 10 feet (3048 mm) of
horizontal distance, a 5-percent slope must be provided to an approved alternative method of diverting water
away from the foundation. Swales used for this purpose must be sloped a minimum of 1 percent along the flow
line where located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet
(3048 mm) of the building foundation must be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the building.
Exception:
Where low expansive, low collapsible, low soluble soil conditions occur or where an exterior asphalt or
concrete surface abuts a building, the slope of the ground away from the building foundation is permitted to be
reduced to not less than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).
The procedure used to establish the final ground level adjacent to the foundation must account for additional
settlement of the backfill.
Section 1805 - Damp-Proofing And Waterproofing.
1805.2.1 Floors.
Revise subsection 1805.2.1 as follows:
1805.2.1 Floors.
Damp-proofing materials for floors must be installed between the floor and the base course required by section
1805.4.1, except where a separate floor is provided above a concrete slab. Where installed beneath the slab,
damp-proofing must consist of not less than 10-mil (.010 inch; 0.254 mm) polyethylene with joints lapped not
less than 6 inches (152 mm) or other approved methods or materials. Where permitted to be installed on top of
the slab, damp-proofing must consist of mopped-on bitumen, not less than 4-mil (.004 inch; 0.012 mm)
polyethylene, or other approved methods or materials. Joints in the membrane must be lapped and sealed in
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Section 1807 - Foundation Walls, Retaining Walls And Embedded Posts And Poles.
1807.2.4 Slope Stability Analysis.
Add a new subsection 1807.2.4 Slope Stability Analysis as follows:
1807.2.4 Slope Stability Analysis.
Retaining walls greater than ten feet in height must be required to submit a slope stability analysis performed
by a registered design professional. Multiple terraced (also sometimes referred to as stacked or tiered)
retaining walls with a total height of sixteen feet or more must require a slope stability analysis. Total height
must be measured from the bottom of the foundation to the top of the retaining wall(s). The minimum factor of
safety of 1.5 is required for all failure modes under static loading conditions.
Chapter 19 - Concrete
Section 1910 - Minimum Slab Provisions.
1910.1 General.
Revise section 1910.1 as follows:
1910.1 General.
The thickness of concrete floor slabs supported directly on the ground must not be less than 31/2 inches
(89 mm). A 10-mil (.010 inch; 0.254 mm) polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches
(152 mm) must be placed between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or other approved
equivalent methods must be used to retard vapor transmission through the floor slab.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 99/640
Exception:
The vapor retarder is not required:
1. For detached structures accessory to occupancies in group R-3, such as garages, utility buildings, or other
unheated facilities.
2. For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports attached to
occupancies in group R-3.
3. For buildings of other occupancies where migration of moisture through the slab from below will not be
detrimental to the intended occupancy of the building.
4. From driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork which will not be enclosed at a later date.
5. Where approved based on local site conditions.
Chapter 23 - Wood
Section 2308 - Conventional Light-Frame Construction.
2308.9.8 Pipes In Walls.
Revise subsection 2308.9.8 as follows:
2308.9.8 Pipes In Walls.
Stud partitions containing plumbing, heating, or other pipes must be so framed and the joists underneath so
spaced as to give proper clearance for the piping. Where a partition containing such piping runs parallel to the
floor joists, the joists underneath such partitions must be doubled and spaced to permit the passage of such
pipes and must be bridged. Where plumbing, heating, or other pipes are placed in or partly in a partition,
necessitating the cutting of the soles or plates, a metal tie not less than 0.058 inch (1.47 mm) (16 galvanized
gage) and 11/2 inches (38 mm) wide must be fastened to each plate across and to each side of the opening
with not less than six 11/2" x 0.148" minimum nails.
Chapter 29 - Plumbing Systems
Table 2902.1 Minimum Number Of Required Plumbing Fixtures.
Revise table 2902.1 by adding A-2 Casinos, revising the column titles and footnote "f", and by adding new footnotes "g"
and "h", as follows:
[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
(See Sections 2902.2 And 2902.3)
No.
Classification
Occupancy
Description
Water Closets
(Urinalsh) Lavatories
Bathtubs/
Showers
Drinking
Fountains
e,f,g
Otherf
Male Female
Male
Female
1 Assembly A-2d Casinos 1:1-
100
3:1-50
1:1-200 1
service
sink
------ 4:51-
100
2:201-400
2:101-
200
6:101-
200
3:401-750
3:201- 8:201- Over 750, add
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 100/640
400 400 one fixture for
each
additional 500
persons
Over 400, add
one fixture each
additional 250
males, and one
for each 150
females
Remainder of rows 1 though 8 to remain unchanged.
a. The fixtures are based on one fixture being the minimum required for the number of persons indicated or any
fraction of the number of persons indicated. The number of occupants must be determined by this code.
b. Toilet facilities for employees must be separate from facilities for inmates or patients.
c. A single-occupant toilet room with one water closet and one lavatory serving not more than two adjacent
patient sleeping units must be permitted where such room is provided with direct access from each patient
sleeping unit and with provisions for privacy.
d. The occupant load for seasonal outdoor seating and entertainment areas must be included when
determining the minimum number of facilities required.
e. The minimum number of required drinking fountains must comply with table 2902.1 and chapter 11.
f. Drinking fountains and service sinks are not required for an occupant load of 30 or fewer.
g. Where water is served in restaurants and similar occupancies, drinking fountains must not be required. In
other occupancies, where drinking fountains are required, water coolers or bottled water dispensers that
provide water to occupants free of charge must be permitted to be substituted for not more than 50 percent of
the required drinking fountains.
h. In each bathroom or toilet room, urinals must not be substituted for more than 67 percent of the required
water closets in assembly and educational occupancies. Urinals must not be substituted for more than 50
percent of the required water closets in all other occupancies.
Chapter 34 - Existing Structures
Section 3403 - Additions.
3403.1 General.
Revise section 3403.1 as follows:
3403.1 General.
Additions to any building or structure must comply with the requirements of this code for new construction.
Alterations to the existing building or structure must be made to ensure that the existing building or structure
together with the addition are no less conforming with the provisions of this code than the existing building or
structure was prior to the addition. An existing building together with its additions must comply with the height
and area provisions of chapter 5. The portions of the building or structure not altered and not affected by the
alterations are not required to comply with the height provisions for a new structure.
Section 3404 - Alterations.
3404.1 General.
Revise section 3404.1 as follows:
3404.1 General.
Except as provided by section 3401.4 or this section, alterations to any building or structure must comply with
the requirements of the code for new construction. Alterations must be such that the existing building or
structure is no less complying with the provisions of this code than the existing building or structure was prior to
the alteration.
Exceptions:
1. An existing stairway must not be required to comply with the requirements of section 1009 where the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 101/640
existing space and construction does not allow a reduction in pitch or slope.
2. Handrails otherwise required to comply with section 1009.12 must not be required to comply with the
requirements of section 1012.6 regarding full extension of the handrails where such extensions would be
hazardous due to plan configuration.
3. The building or structure must not be required to comply with the height and area provisions of chapter 5
for a new structure.
Section 3411 - Accessibility For Existing Buildings.
3411.8.15 Check-Out Aisles.
Add new section 3411.8.15 as follows:
3411.8.15 Check-Out Aisles.
Where check-out aisles are altered, at least one of each check-out aisle serving each function must be made
accessible until the number of accessible check-out aisles complies with section 1109.11.2.
Appendix J - Grading
Section J102 - Definitions.
J102.1 Definitions.
Revise section J102.1 Definitions to read as follows:
Grading. An excavation, clearing and grubbing of vegetation, or fill or combination thereof.
Building Pad. The soil, cut or fill site, outlined by the area of the footprint of the building plus a minimum of 5
additional feet (1529 mm) to the exterior. This includes any type of foundation system for the structure.
Certify. Use of the word "certify" or "certification" constitutes an expression of professional opinion regarding
those facts or findings which are the subject of the certification.
Fault. A fracture or zone of fracturing in geologic materials (soil or rock) along which there has been
displacement of the sides relative to one another parallel to the fracture.
Final Grading Report. A grading report stamped and signed by a registered design professional certifying that
the building pad was constructed in conformance with the recommendations set forth in the geotechnical
report. This report contains explicit information and data that verifies compliance with the geotechnical report of
record including any approved supplements or addendums.
Geotechnical Report (Soils Report). Data and engineering recommendations resulting from site exploration
which evaluates the soil conditions and general site characteristics and suitability of the site for the proposed
construction. A registered design professional must prepare and seal the report.
Pad Certification Report. An interim grading report stamped and signed by a registered design professional
certifying that the building pad currently is in conformance with the recommendations set forth in the
geotechnical report of record.
Pad Recertification Report. A report stamped and signed by a registered design professional certifying that the
building pad currently is in conformance with the recommendations set forth in the geotechnical report of
record. This report contains explicit information and data that verifies compliance to the geotechnical report of
record including any approved supplements or addendums.
Refusal. Refusal while advancing an exploration is recognized as defined by ASTM D 1586-08a.
Section J103 - Permits Required.
J103.2 Permit Exemptions.
Delete exemption #1 in section J103.2 and re-number the remaining exemptions sequentially as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 102/640
J103.2 Exemptions.
A grading permit must not be required for the following:
1. Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.
2. Cemetery graves.
3. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
4. Excavations for wells or trenches for utilities.
5. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay controlled by
other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase
stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.
6. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix must not be deemed to grant authorization for any
work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the
city.
J103.3 Hazards.
Add a new section J103.3 Hazards as follows:
J103.3 Hazards.
Whenever the city of Elko determines that any existing excavation, embankment, or fill on private property has
become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a
public way, easement, storm sewer system, or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the
excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing
from the city of Elko, must, within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment
to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this code.
Section J104 - Permit Application And Submittals.
J104.1 Submittal Requirements.
Revise section J104.1 as follows:
J104.1 Submittal Requirements.
In addition to the provisions of section 105.3, the applicant must state the estimated quantities of excavation
and fill. All projects that require grading must have a grading plan prepared, stamped, and signed by a
registered design professional.
Exception:
At the option of the city of Elko, if the structure is located outside of a flood hazard area the following projects
may be exempted from having a grading plan. Projects exempted from a grading plan must still comply with
the grading and drainage requirements in the IBC.
1. Single story structures or additions with a footprint less than 600 square feet.
2. Patio covers, decks, and canopies associated with a single family residence.
3. Mobile homes, trailers, modular buildings that do not have concrete or masonry foundations.
4. Pre-engineered carports.
5. Signs, light poles, and communication towers.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 103/640
J104.2 Grading Plan Requirements.
Revise section J104.2 in its entirety, as follows:
J104.2 Grading Plan Requirements.
All grading plans must be prepared, stamped, and signed by a registered design professional. The following
items must be included on all grading plan submittals.
1. General vicinity of the proposed site.
2. Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage.
3. Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, proposed drainage
channels, and related construction.
4. Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of
any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 100 feet of the property or that may be
affected by the proposed grading operations.
5. Recommendations included in the geotechnical report must be incorporated in the grading plans or
specifications as follows:
a. Locations and dimensions of all cut and fill slopes,
b. Locations of all cross sections presented in the geotechnical report,
c. Locations and sizes of all recommended remedial measures such as buttress fills, stability fills, deep
foundation systems, reinforced earth, retaining walls, etc.,
d. Location and layout of proposed subdrainage system.
6. A statement that the site must be graded in accordance with the approved geotechnical report. This
statement must include the firm name that prepared the geotechnical report, the report number, and the date of
the geotechnical report.
7. Locations of other existing topographic features either natural or man-made such as streets, drainage
structures, pavements, walls, mining pits, etc.
8. The cut to fill transition line.
9. Positive drainage away from the foundation per section 1804.3.
10. Details and cross sections at property lines, fence walls, retaining walls, berms, etc.
11. Elevation datum and benchmarks (NAVD 88).
12. Existing contours at least 100 feet beyond the property lines.
13. Proposed finish contours or spot elevations at the property corners, building pad, and at swale flow lines.
14. Elevations of curbs or centerlines of roads or streets.
15. Earthwork quantities in cubic yards.
16. Finish floor elevations.
17. Details and cross sections of typical fill slopes and cut slopes.
18. Typical details of fill-over-natural slopes and fill-over-cut slopes where fill is to be placed on natural or cut
slopes steeper than 5H:1V in accordance with section J107.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 104/640
19. Setback dimensions of cut and fill slopes from site boundaries per section J108.
20. The placement of buildings and structures on and/or adjacent to slopes steeper than 3H:1V (33.3% slope)
must be in accordance with section 1808.7.
21. Provide terracing in accordance with section J109 for slopes steeper than 3H:1V (33.3% slope).
22. Provide the locations and dimensions of all terrace drains for all slopes steeper than 3H:1V in accordance
with section J109.
23. The standard notes specified in the city of Elko Construction Site Best Management Practice Guidance
Manual (most current edition).
24. Registered design professional original seal (wet seal), signature and date or a records stamp and
signature stating, "This is a true and exact copy of the original document on file in this office."
J104.3 Geotechnical Report.
Revise section J104.3 as follows:
J104.3 Geotechnical Report.
A geotechnical report prepared by a registered design professional must be provided. The report must comply
with section 1803.6.
Section J105 - Inspections.
Revise section J105 in its entirety, as follows:
J105.1 General.
Inspection of grading operations must comply with the provisions of this section. The permittee must be
responsible for the work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in
conformance with the provisions of this code. The permittee must engage an approved agency, if required by the
city of Elko.
J105.1.1 Completion Of Work And Final Reports.
Report submittal must be in compliance with section 1704.1.2.
J105.1.2 Final Grading Report.
Upon completion of pad grading (or foundation excavation) and prior to a footing or foundation inspection, a final
grading report must be provided by an approved agency. Grading (or foundation excavation) must be observed
and tested by an approved agency. The approved agency must prepare the report, signed by a registered design
professional certifying that the grading and earthwork are complete and substantially comply with the
requirements of the geotechnical report of record including any approved supplements or addenda. At the option
of the city of Elko, a pad certification report submitted in accordance with section J105.1.3 may be accepted as
an interim report prior to a footing or foundation inspection. A final grading report will then be required prior to
receiving a final inspection.
The final grading report itself will contain all applicable test data and analysis of the data. Specific project
information is also required if there were any changes to the geotechnical report of record or unusual
circumstances encountered during grading. The report must also include the following information:
1. Compaction test results, requirements, locations, depth of backfill at test locations and names of technicians
conducting the tests.
2. Moisture density values and curves that include classifications for all soils used in the grading operation.
3. Description of structure or pad including the proposed use.
4. Grading plan showing approximate locations of tests, dates and depths of over-excavation observations,
original contours and finish pad elevations.
5. Swell and solubility test requirements and results. This information must be provided if required by the
geotechnical report of record, elsewhere in the code, or if imported soils were utilized.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 105/640
6. Type of foundation system applicable to work being certified (i.e., spread footings, strip footings, combination
footings, drilled shafts, etc.).
7. Import material used, source of import, and tests indicating compliance with the geotechnical report of record
recommendations, and classification in relation to ACI 318-08 section 4.3.
8. A statement describing the process of pad grading. Where applicable, this must include, but not be limited to
the minimum depth of over-excavation, blending operations, the use of import soils, nested aggregate,
organics encountered, and removal of unsuitable soils.
9. The preceding requirements must be presented for each pad or structure being certified.
The final grading report remains valid for a maximum of six months after the completion of grading. The six
month period begins at the first test date of the final test of the final lift of the structural pad. Once expired, a
pad re-certification report is required.
J105.1.3 Pad Certification Report.
This letter/report is used as an interim document until a final grading report is completed (i.e., a final grading
report for the entire project or a particular phase(s) of a project). The approved agency must prepare this report
signed by a registered design professional and certifying that the grading and earthwork are complete and
substantially comply with the requirements of the geotechnical report of record including any approved
supplements or addenda. Specific project information is also required if there were any changes to the
geotechnical report of record or unusual circumstances encountered during grading.
This report must include the following information for each pad or structure:
1. The first test date of the final test of the final lift.
2. Permit number and pad or structure description.
3. Classification of foundation soils in relation to ACI 318-08 section 4.3.
4. Classification of foundation soil for expansive properties (i.e., non-expansive or results from standard 60
pounds per square foot swell test).
5. The name(s) of the approved special inspector(s) and any technicians that observed grading or foundation
improvements.
6. This report remains valid for no longer than six months after the completion of grading. The six month period
begins at the first test date of the final test of the final lift of the structural pad. Upon expiration, a final grading
report and pad recertification report will be required.
J105.1.4 Pad Recertification Report.
This report is required when a final grading report or pad certification report has expired or if required by the city
of Elko. The approved agency must prepare this report signed by a registered design professional certifying the
current suitability of the pad(s). The condition of the pad(s) is discussed, tests performed and their results are
presented and discussed, and any additional grading or reworking is discussed. The conclusions are stated and
based upon the current condition of the pad(s) compared to completion at original grading and a statement that
the current condition of the pad(s) substantially complies with the requirements of the geotechnical report of
record including any approved supplements or addenda.
As a minimum, pad moisture data and standard sixty pounds per square foot swell test results, if applicable, are
included in this report. The tests must be conducted on a representative number of pads.
The report remains valid for no longer than six months after the latest test date. Once expired, the pad(s)
recertification will require an evaluation by a registered design professional to confirm the applicability of current
site conditions.
J105.1.5 Finished Floor Elevation Certificate.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 106/640
A registered design professional must certify the lowest habitable finished floor elevation to the elevation on the
approved plans upon completion of the slab inspection and placement or the placement of the final construction
form for the finished floor.
All certifications required by this section must be provided to and accepted by the city of Elko prior to
performance of any additional inspections.
The minimum finished floor elevation must comply with the approved plans and the allowable tolerance must be
minus (-) 0.0 feet to plus (+) 0.3 feet of the finished floor elevation detailed on the approved plans.
J105.1.6 Drainage Compliance Report.
Upon completion of final grading, and prior to the final building inspection, a statement of compliance for drainage
must be provided by the registered design professional of record or the developer when approved by the city of
Elko.
This report must state that site conditions at the time of final construction provide positive drainage in compliance
with the approved drainage plan or the plot and grading plan.
When engineered drainage features, facilities, or structures are required by the approved plans, the registered
design professional of record must verify that installed and constructed elements are in compliance with the
approved plans. This includes site detention, lot to lot drainage, and drainage conveyance devices.
J105.1.7 Notification Of Noncompliance.
If in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this appendix, the registered design professional or the
approved agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this appendix or the approved plans
the discrepancies must be immediately reported in writing to the contractor, the permittee, and to the city of Elko.
J105.2 Special Inspections.
The special inspection requirements of section 1704 must apply to work performed under a grading permit where
required by the city of Elko.
Appendix L - Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
Add a new appendix L Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls, as follows:
Appendix L - Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
Section L101 - General.
L101.1 General.
It will be unlawful for any person, contractor, firm or corporation to erect, install, construct or replace any fence,
wall or retaining wall contrary to the provisions of this code.
L101.2 Applicable Regulations.
All regulations and requirements of the building code and any amendments, deletions and additions thereto must
apply to the erection, installation or construction of any fence, wall and/or retaining wall except that which may be
inconsistent with this chapter.
Section L102 - Definitions.
L102.1 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
Cut. See Excavation.
Excavation. The removal of earth material by artificial means, also referred to as a cut.
Fence. A structure of temporary or semi-permanent material such as wrought iron, wire, wood, screen, vinyl,
plastic, etc., erected for purposes of enclosure, division of property or decoration.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 107/640
Fill. The deposition placement of earth materials by artificial means.
Retaining Wall. Any wall that is used to resist the lateral displacement of earth or any other material with a
difference in elevation of the material from one side to the other exceeding 24 inches (610 mm) in height.
Rockery Wall. A system of stacked rocks constructed to retain soil.
Wall. A structure of stone, brick, masonry, concrete or other similar permanent material, raised to some height
and erected for purposes of enclosure, division of property or decoration.
Section L103 - Permits.
L103.1 Permits Required.
No fence, wall or retaining wall regulated by this code, for which a permit is required, must be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate
permit for each fence, wall or retaining wall is obtained from the city of Elko.
L103.2 Separate Permits Required.
A separate permit is required for each parcel of land upon which a fence, wall or retaining wall is to be located.
Exception: Only one permit is required for multiple fence(s), wall(s) and/or retaining wall(s) constructed along
property lines in connection with the development of a subdivision, provided that a legal description of the
property is submitted together with a dimensioned plot plan showing the exact location of the fence, wall and/or
retaining wall and all other recorded lot and easement lines.
L103.3 Application For A Fence, Wall Or Retaining Wall Permit.
To obtain a permit, the applicant must first file an application on a form furnished by the city of Elko for that
purpose. The application must include the following:
1. The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the fence, wall and/or retaining wall is to
be located.
2. The type of material to be used for construction of the fence, wall, and/or retaining wall.
3. The total length, height and square footage of each fence, wall and/or retaining wall.
4. The authorized agent to perform construction.
5. A dimensioned drawing that identifies the location of each fence, wall and/or retaining wall with respect to
the property or lot lines, easements, streets, other rights-of-way. Existing construction and drainage features
must be clearly identified on the drawings.
6. The location of all light standards, gas and water meters, and fire hydrants.
Other information deemed pertinent by the city.
L103.4 Drawings And Specifications.
Drawings and specifications required for retaining walls must be prepared by a registered design professional.
The design must be in accordance with the applicable chapters of the IBC. Rockery walls must be designed in
accordance with the IBC and must be prepared by a registered design professional. Specifications for fences and
walls need not be submitted unless required by the city. Drawings and specifications must be submitted for
retaining walls showing that the retaining wall is designed in accordance with this code.
Section L104 - General Requirements And Limitations.
L104.1 General. General requirements and limitations must be as follows:
1. No fence, wall and/or retaining wall must be placed within a right-of-way unless granted permission by the
city of Elko.
2. The height and location of a fence, wall and/or retaining wall must comply with all zoning ordinances and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 108/640
regulations of the city.
L104.2 Required Inspections.
1. All footings must be inspected to verify location to property line, structures, and compliance to the approved
plans and permit. Footings must be excavated and cast against the earth.
2. Concrete foundations must not be placed until footings have been inspected and approved by the city.
3. No wall and/or retaining wall must be grouted until the reinforcing required has been inspected and approved
by the city.
4. Retaining wall must not be backfilled until verification of the required damp-proofing, when required, and
drainage has been inspected and approved by the city.
L104.3 Natural Drainage.
Permits must not be issued for fences, walls and/or retaining walls, which would block any natural flow path.
L104.4 Prohibited Materials.
Walls, fences and retaining walls must not be constructed of materials which impose a direct safety hazard, such
as pointed posts, stakes or pickets, components intended for electrocution, embedded glass, nails, barbed or
razor type wire, or other sharp, cutting objects.
Exception: Manufactured barbed or razor wire may be used when its detailed use, location, and construction
requirements are approved by the city.
L104.5 Minimum Requirements For The Structural Analysis And Construction Of Rockery Walls.
1. A dimensioned drawing that identifies the location of each rockery wall with respect to the property lines,
easement, streets, and other rights-of-way. Existing construction, required setbacks as noted below, and
drainage features must clearly be identified on drawings.
2. Cross section of wall showing the approximate rock size for each lift, maximum height, backfill, drainage,
slope of ground, embedment, cuts, and required face inclination.
3. All rockery walls five feet (5') high and greater require engineering analysis.
4. All rockery walls five feet (5') high and greater require a geotechnical report.
5. The base rock must be embedded at least 12" into the soil. Placement of base rocks at grade followed by
subsequent backfilling of the "toe area" must not be permitted unless specific recommendations are provided
by the geotechnical and/or structural engineer(s). The base should be level and must not have a slope greater
than 1 unit vertical to 10 units horizontal (10-percent); otherwise a stepped base is required.
6. The wall must have a face inclination ratio of at least 1 unit horizontal to 6 units vertical (1:6) measured at
the exposed face of wall. The ratio may be greater than 1:6.
7. The surrounding site must be graded such that water cannot flow over the top of the wall.
8. Landscape materials, if used, must not have detrimental effect on the wall. The use of landscape materials in
close proximity to rockery walls must be specifically addressed in the structural analysis.
9. Walls greater than ten feet high (10') must have a slope stability analysis performed by the geotechnical
engineer.
10. Caliches and other "cemented soils" formed by precipitation must not be used in rockery wall construction
unless special design considerations are provided to address their suitability for use.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 109/640
11. The height of any single story rockery wall must not exceed 16 feet.
12. Rockery walls must not be constructed as the sole means of repair to provide stability to any unstable
slope. In this case a rockery wall may only be used after the slope is first stabilized by MSE, soil nailing or
some other approved engineered repair.
13. Multiple terraced (also sometimes referred to as stacked or tiered) rockery walls with a total height of 16
feet or more require a slope stability analysis performed by the geotechnical engineer. Total height must be
measured from the bottom of the base rock at the lowest wall to the top of the highest wall.
14. Rockery walls five feet (5') high and greater: Rocks sized as "two man" (approximately 200-700 pounds
and 18-28 inch nominal diameter) or greater must be tightly fitted and interlock with neighboring rocks. Smaller
rocks may be intermittently used for "structural chinking" which allows large rocks to rest in a stable movement
free position. Void spaces between larger rocks must be tightly filled or "aesthetically chinked" such that large
gaps between rocks in the exposed face are reasonably well filled. There must be no loose rocks or scree
present at any point in the exposed face or top of a rockery wall.
15. Rockery walls five feet (5') high and greater: No rocks smaller than the nominal "two man" size
(approximately 200-700 pounds and 18-28 inch nominal diameter) will be permitted to be exposed in the front
face or top rock layer. Tightly fitted smaller rocks used for the purpose of filling voids or "chinking" must not be
subject to this limitation.
16. The setback from a rockery wall to a building or structure must be not less than the height of the retained
earth. The distance must be measured from the outside of the foundation of the structure to the exposed face
of the rockery wall. This provision applies to buildings or structures (except other site walls or fences) on either
the height side or slow side of the rockery walls. Exception: Where rockery walls are less than five feet (5') in
height this requirement may be waived at the option of the city of Elko.
17. Multiple rockery walls, designed as terraced (stacked or tiered) retaining walls, must be minimum distance
of 1/2 the height of the lower rockery wall to another rockery wall. Surcharge loading from one wall to another
must be considered in the design.
18. Ornamental fences, guards, or screen walls must be a minimum of four feet (4') from the front face at the
top of the rockery wall. Ornamental fences, guards, or screen walls must have their own foundations and not
rely on the rockery wall for structural support.
19. Rockery walls must be set back the required distances from fire hydrants, light standards, gas meters,
water meters, electrical transformers, utility boxes or similar features. These distances must be established and
enforced by the city of Elko. Where permitted, rockery walls located within a utility or other easement must be
in accordance with the published standards of the city.
20. All structural analysis must be in accordance with adopted building codes, and local amendment adopted
by the city of Elko, and this document.
21. The minimum factor of safety for sliding and overturning in a rockery wall must be in accordance with the
adopted codes and regulations of the city of Elko.
22. The following analysis provisions apply:
a. The maximum unit weight of the rocks used in the design of a rockery wall must be 155 pcf unless field
verified by special inspection or preconstruction lab analysis of samples from the source rock materials.
b. The maximum coefficient of friction between rocks in a rockery wall is 0.5.
c. Applied loads from adjacent foundations, surcharge materials, or dynamic/transient loads must be taken
into consideration in the analysis.
d. Specifications must be provided to clearly define acceptance criteria for rock materials.
e. Design documents must clearly address the need (or lack thereof) for drainage provisions behind the wall.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 110/640
Items to be addressed are a gravel/cobble drainage blanket, filter fabric and drainage pipes. Specific
requirements may be implemented by the city of Elko based upon prevailing geologic and climate conditions.
f. The structural and/or geotechnical engineer(s) of record must provide specific acceptance criteria to
address special inspection details. Specific information must be provided regarding how the special inspector
should determine compliance with embedment requirements outlined in items 5 through 10.
23. Inspections must be performed as required by the city of Elko.
24. Special inspection of rockery wall construction will be required for all walls five feet (5') tall and greater.
25. A final report must be submitted by the special inspector to the city of Elko.
Section L105 - Implementation.
L105.1 Implementation.
The city is empowered to formulate procedural guidelines to be used in implementing this chapter.
(Ord. 723, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 3
RESIDENTIAL CODE
2-3-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE PROVISIONS:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO,
hereinafter "code", including the adoption of the 2009 international residential code with the exception of chapters
11 through 42 but with appendices H and K and necessary administrative provisions. Certain sections of the
international residential code and appendices may be added or deleted.
B. Applicability: All construction of or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy
of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any component,
element or portion of a building or structure within the city must be in compliance with, in addition to, the other
applicable codes or amendments set forth by the city council and the latest edition of the international residential
code.
C. Frost Line: References in the international residential code to the frost line mean a minimum of thirty inches (30")
below finish grade.
D. Supplements: All supplements to the international residential code, issued by the International Code Council Inc.,
between editions are hereby not made a part of the then current edition of the international residential code.
E. Conflict: In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the international residential code conflict with
any provision of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter must govern and be controlling. (Ord. 724, 2-8-2011)
2-3-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
All building construction work and the inspections thereof must be in conformity with the provisions of this code and
with the latest edition of the international residential code, which is hereby adopted by the city, with the following
specific deletions and additions:
Chapter 1 - Scope And Administration
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 111/640
Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety and replaced by title 2 chapter 1, "Building Regulations Administrative Code",
of the city code.
Chapter 2 - Definitions
Section R202 - Definitions.
Revise and/or add the following definitions to section R202 as follows:
Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached units completely
independent of all other such units in the building by reason of separation therefrom by un-pierced party walls in
which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides, and as recorded on a
final parcel map or final subdivision map.
Sleeping Area. Any area that includes one or more sleeping rooms that are located on the same floor and are not
separated by another habitable room, such as a living room, dining room or kitchen (but not a bathroom, hallway
or closet).
Sleeping Room. Any sleeping room, bedroom, basement, loft, mezzanine or other room that is ordinarily used or
intended to be used for sleeping purposes. The term is deemed to include any room that contains a closet and
that provides for occupant privacy.
Temporary. A defined time set by the city not to exceed 90 days. Extension of time may be granted upon written
request.
Chapter 3 - Building Planning
Section R301 - Design Criteria.
Revise section R301 as follows:
R301.1.2 Construction Systems.
The requirements of this code are based on platform and balloon-frame construction for light-frame buildings.
The requirements for concrete and masonry buildings are based on a balloon framing system. Other framing
systems must have equivalent detailing to ensure force transfer, continuity and compatible deformations. All
structural plain (unreinforced) concrete must be designed in accordance with the 2009 IBC. All plain
(unreinforced) masonry, and rubble stone masonry construction is prohibited. All tables, figures and references
for these unreinforced systems are deleted.
Table R301.2(1) Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria.
Amend table R301.2(1) as follows:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground Snow
Load
Wind Design
Seismic Design
Categoryf
Subject To Damage From
Speedd
(mph)
Topographic
effectsk
Weatheringa
Frost Line
Depthb Termitec
30 lb/ft2 90 No D0 Severe 30" Slight to
moderate
Winter Design
Tempe
Ice Barrier Underlayment
Requiredh
Flood
Hazardsg
Air Freezing
Indexi
Mean Annual
Tempj
-2 Yes (l, m, n, o) 2000 46F
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 112/640
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the
structural requirements of this code. The weathering column must be filled in with the weathering index (i.e.,
"negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the weathering probability map [figure
R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units must be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129,
C 145, C 216 or C 652.
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction must fill
in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c. The jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether
there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.
d. The jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [figure
R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category must be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with section
R301.2.1.4.
e. The temperature must be permitted to reflect local climate or local weather experience as determined by the
city of Elko.
f. The jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from section
R301.2.2.1.
g. The jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the national
flood insurance program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard
areas), (b) the date(s) of the flood insurance study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently
effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the city of Elko, as amended.
h. In accordance with sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1,
where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction must fill in this
part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with "NO."
i. The jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days)
from figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air
Freezing Index - USA Method (Base 32F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
j. The jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic
Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index - USA Method (Base 32F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
k. In accordance with section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to
buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction must fill in this part of the table with "YES."
Otherwise, the jurisdiction must indicate "NO" in this part of the table.
l. Date of original adoption November 1980.
m. FIS dates: February 1984, November 1995, and September 2009.
n. Community number 320010.
o. Panel numbers: 5188, 5190, 5606, 5607, 5608, 5609, 5615, 5625, 5626, 5628, 5630.
R301.6 Roof Load.
Revise section R301.6 as follows:
Roof must be designed for the live load indicated in table R301.6 or the snow load indicated in table R301.2(1),
whichever is greater. Roof live loads in accordance with section 1607.11 of the 2009 international building code
may be used in place of the loads in table R301.6.
Section R302.1 - Exterior Walls.
Revise section R302.1 Exterior Walls, and add exceptions #6 and #7, as follows:
R302.1 Exterior Walls.
Construction, projections, openings and penetrations of exterior walls of dwellings and accessory buildings
must comply with table R302.1. To determine when protection is required by table R302.1, the dimension must
be determined from property line to the finish face of the wall.
Exceptions:
1. Walls, projections, openings or penetrations in walls perpendicular to the line used to determine the fire
separation distance.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 113/640
2. Walls in between dwellings and accessory structures located on the same lot. Garages must comply with
section R302.6.
3. Detached tool sheds and storage sheds, playhouses and similar structures exempted from permits are not
required to provide wall protection based on location on the lot. Projections beyond the exterior wall must not
extend over the lot line.
4. Detached garages accessory to a dwelling located within 2 feet (610 mm) of a lot line are permitted to
have roof eave projections not exceeding 4 inches (102 mm).
5. Foundation vents installed in compliance with this code are permitted.
6. Exterior decorative trim must not project more than 4 inches (102 mm) into the minimum fire separation
distance and must not exceed ten percent (10%) of the aggregate wall area on which it is located.
7. When there are no eave, attic or gable-end vent openings, the unprotected eave is limited to a maximum
of 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the wall construction into the minimum fire separation distance. The
unprotected eave projection is further limited to a maximum depth of 24 inches (610 mm) from the roof
sheathing to the bottom of the projection.
Table R302.1 Exterior Walls.
Revise table R302.1 Exterior Walls as follows:
TABLE R302.1
Exterior
Walls
Exterior Wall
Element Minimum Fire-Resistance Rating
Minimum Fire
Separation Distance
Walls (Fire-resistance
rated)
1 hour-tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL
263 with exposure from both sides
<5 feet
(Not fireresistance
rated)
0 hours = 5 feet
Projections Not allowed n/a 0 to <2 feet
(Fire-resistance
rated)
1 hour on the underside = 2 feet to <5 feet
(Not fireresistance
rated)
0 hours = 5 feet
Openings Not allowed n/a <3 feet
25% maximum
of wall area
0 hours = 3 feet to <5 feet
Unlimited 0 hours = 5 feet
Penetrations
All Comply with section 317.3 <5 feet
None required = 5 feet
Section R309 - Garages And Carports.
Revise R309.2 as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 114/640
R309.2 Carports.
Carports shall be open on at least two complete sides. Carports in which a side(s) is within thirty six inches
(914 mm) of an adjacent structure, for the purpose of this section, must be considered a closed side.
Carport floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible material. Carports not open on at least two sides
shall be considered a garage and shall comply with the provisions of this section for garages.
Exception: Asphalt surfaces shall be permitted at ground level in carports.
The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of
liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway.
Section R313 - Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
R313 is deleted in its entirety with no replacement.
Section R314 - Smoke Alarms.
Revise section R314, R314.1 as follows:
R314 Smoke Alarms And Carbon Monoxide Detectors.
R314.1 Smoke Detection And Notification.
All smoke alarms must be listed in accordance with UL 217 and installed in accordance with the provisions of this
code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
R314.2 Smoke Detection Systems.
Household fire alarm systems installed in accordance with NFPA 72 that include smoke alarms, or a combination
of smoke detector and audible notification device installed as required by this section for smoke alarms will be
permitted. The household fire alarm system must provide the same level of smoke detection and alarm as
required by this section for smoke alarms. Where a household fire warning system is installed using a
combination of smoke detector and audible notification device(s), it must become a permanent fixture of the
occupancy and owned by the homeowner. The system must be monitored by an approved supervising station
and be maintained in accordance with NFPA 72.
Exception:
Where smoke alarms are provided meeting the requirements of section R314.4.
R314.2.1 Carbon Monoxide Alarms.
Carbon monoxide alarms must be listed as complying with UL2034 and must be installed in accordance with this
code and the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Exception:
Where carbon monoxide alarms are provided meeting the requirements of section R314.4.
R314.3 Location.
1. Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms must be installed in the following locations:
a) Smoke alarms in each sleeping room.
b) Smoke alarms must be located immediately outside of each sleeping room.
c) Smoke alarms on each additional story of the dwelling, including basements but not including crawl
spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 115/640
door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level must suffice for the adjacent
lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
d) Carbon monoxide alarms outside of sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms in dwellings
units within which fuel-fired appliances are installed and in dwelling units that have attached garages.
e) Carbon monoxide alarms within each bedroom which contains a fuel-fired appliance.
2. Smoke detectors should not be located:
a) Within three (3) feet of a door to a bathroom containing a tub or a shower.
b) Within three (3) feet of the supply registers of a forced air HVAC system.
c) Directly over the stove or range.
d) Near ceiling fans.
3. Carbon monoxide detectors should not be installed in the following locations:
a) Within fifteen feet of heating or cooking appliances.
b) Near very humid areas such as bathrooms.
4. When more than either one (1) smoke alarm or more than one (1) carbon monoxide alarm is required to
be installed within an individual dwelling unit all alarm devices must be interconnected in such a manner that
the actuation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit.
R314.3.1 Alterations, Repairs And Additions.
When alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or
created in existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit must be equipped with smoke and carbon monoxide
alarms located as required for new dwellings.
Exceptions:
a) Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or siding, or the
addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck, are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
b) Replacement, alteration or repairs of existing electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from
the requirements of this section.
R314.4 Power Source.
Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms must receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring
is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is interrupted, must receive power from a battery.
Wiring must be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent
protection. Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms must be interconnected.
Exceptions:
a) Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms must be permitted to be battery operated when installed in buildings
without commercial power.
b) Interconnection and hard-wiring of smoke and carbon monoxide alarms in existing areas must not be
required where the alteration, addition or remodel does not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling
finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 116/640
access for hard wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
Section R315 - Carbon Monoxide Alarms.
Delete section R315 in its entirety.
Section R319 - Site Address.
Revise section R319 as follows:
R319.1 Address Numbers.
Buildings must have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in
a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers must
contrast with their background. Address numbers must be arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers
must be a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where
access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a
monument, pole or other sign or means must be used to identify the structure.
Exception:
Any address or building number that is displayed on a permanently internally illuminated base must be a
minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).
Chapter 4 - Foundations
Section R401 - General.
Revise section R401 as follows:
R401.3 Drainage.
Delete R401.3 in its entirety and replace, as follows:
R401.3 Drainage.
The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation must be sloped away from the building at a slope of not
less than 1 unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) for a minimum distance of 10 feet (3048 mm)
measured perpendicular to the face of the wall. If physical obstructions or lot lines prohibit 10 feet (3048 mm) of
horizontal distance, a 5-percent slope must be provided to an approved alternate location or a alternative
method of diverting water away from the foundation must be considered. Swales must be used for the purpose
of drainage and must be sloped a minimum of 1 percent along the flow line where located within 10 feet
(3048 mm) of the building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foundation
must be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the building. All drainage must be directed to the nearest
drainage easement or public right of way.
Exception:
Where an exterior asphalt or concrete surface abuts a building, the slope of the ground away from the
building foundation is permitted to be reduced to not less than one unit vertical in 48 units (2-percent slope).
The procedure used to establish the final ground level adjacent to the foundation must account for additional
settlement of the backfill.
Section R403 - Footings.
Revise section R403 as follows:
R403.1.1 Minimum Size.
Minimum sizes for concrete and masonry footings must be as set forth in table R403.1 and figure R403.1(1).
The footing width, W, must be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance with table R401.4.1.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 117/640
Spread footings must be at least 8 inches (203 mm) in thickness, T. Footing projections, P, must be at least 2
inches (51 mm) and must not exceed the thickness of the footing. The size of footings supporting piers and
columns must be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with table R401.4.1.
Footings for wood foundations must be in accordance with the details set forth in section R403.2, and figures
R403.1(2) and R403.1(3).
Section 406 - Foundation Waterproofing And Damp-Proofing.
Revise section R406 as follows:
R406.2 Concrete And Masonry Foundation Waterproofing.
Unless an approved geotechnical report indicates there is not a high water table or other severe soil-water
conditions are known to exist, exterior foundation walls that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors
below grade must be waterproofed from the top of the footing to the finished grade. Walls must be
waterproofed in accordance with one of the following:
1. Two-ply hot mopped felts.
2. Fifty five pound (25 kg) roll roofing.
3. Six-mil (0.15 mm) polyvinyl chloride.
4. Six-mil (0.15 mm) polyethylene.
5. Forty-mil (1 mm) polymer-modified asphalt.
6. Sixty-mil (1.5 mm) flexible polymer cement.
7. One-eighth inch (3 mm) cement-based, fiber-reinforced, waterproof coating.
8. Sixty-mil (0.22) solvent free liquid-applied synthetic rubber.
Exception:
Organic-solvent-based products such as hydrocarbons, chlorinated hydrocarbons, ketones and esters shall
not be used for ICF walls with expanded polystyrene form material. Use of plastic roofing cements, acrylic
coatings, latex coatings, mortars and pargings to seal ICF walls is permitted. Cold-setting asphalt or hot
asphalt shall conform to type C of ASTM D 449. Hot asphalt shall be applied at a temperature of 200F
(93C).
All joints in membrane waterproofing shall be lapped and sealed with an adhesive compatible with the
membrane.
Section R408 - Under-Floor Space.
Revise section R408 as follows:
R408.1 Ventilation.
The under-floor space between the bottom of the floor joists and the earth under any building (except space
occupied by a basement) must have the grade of the ground surface at the top of the footings and ventilation
openings through foundation walls or exterior walls.
The minimum net area of ventilation openings must not be less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 150
square feet (14 m2) of under-floor space area, unless the ground surface is covered by a class 1 vapor retarder
material. When a class 1 vapor retarder material is used, the minimum net area of ventilation openings must
not be less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 1,500 square feet (140 m2) of under-floor space area. One
such ventilating opening must be within 3 feet (914 mm) of each corner of the building.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 118/640
R408.2 Openings For Under-Floor Ventilation.
The minimum net area of ventilation openings must not be less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 150
square feet (14 m2) of under-floor area. One ventilation opening must be within 3 feet (915 mm) of each corner of
the building. Ventilation openings must be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials
provided that the least dimension of the covering must not exceed 1/4 inch (6.4 mm):
1. Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch (1.8 mm) thick.
2. Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch (1.2 mm) thick.
3. Cast-iron grill or grating.
4. Extruded load-bearing brick vents.
5. Hardware cloth of 0.035 inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier.
6. Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension being 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) thick.
Exception: The total area of ventilation openings must be permitted to be reduced to 1/1,500 of the under-floor
area where the grade of the ground surface is at the top of the footings and covered with an approved class I
vapor retarder material and the required openings are placed to provide cross ventilation of the space. The
installation of operable louvers will not be prohibited.
R408.3 Unvented Crawl Space.
Ventilation openings in under-floor spaces specified in sections R408.1 and R408.2 are not required where:
1. The grade of the ground surface is at the top of the footings and is covered with a continuous class I vapor
retarder. Joints of the vapor retarder must overlap by 6 inches (152 mm) and must be sealed or taped. The
edges of the vapor retarder must extend at least 6 inches (152 mm) up the stem wall and must be attached
and sealed to the stem wall; and
2. One of the following is provided for the under-floor space:
2.1. Continuously operated mechanical exhaust ventilation at a rate equal to 1 cubic foot per minute (0.47 L/s)
for each 50 square feet (4.7 m2) of crawlspace floor area, including an air pathway to the common area (such
as a duct or transfer grille), and perimeter walls insulated in accordance with the currently adopted energy
code.
2.2. Conditioned air supply sized to deliver at a rate equal to 1 cubic foot per minute (0.47 L/s) for each 50
square feet (4.7 m2) of under-floor area, including a return air pathway to the common area (such as a duct or
transfer grille), and perimeter walls insulated in accordance with section N1102.2.9.
2.3. Under-floor space being used as a supply plenum must comply with the requirements of section 608.0
2009 uniform mechanical code.
Chapter 5 - Floors
Section R506.2.3 - Vapor Retarder.
Revise subsection R506.2.3 as follows:
R506.2.3 Vapor Retarder.
A 10 mil (0.010 inches; 0.254 mm) polyethylene or approved vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6
inches (152 mm) must be placed between the concrete floor slab and the base course or the prepared subgrade
where no base course exists.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 119/640
Exception: The vapor retarder may be omitted:
1. From detached garages, utility buildings and other unheated accessory structures.
2. For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports.
3. From driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork not likely to be enclosed and heated at a later date.
4. Where approved by the building official, based on local site conditions.
Chapter 8 - Roof-Ceiling Construction
Section R807 - Attic Access.
Revise section R807 as follows:
R807.1 Attic Access.
Buildings with combustible ceiling or roof construction must have at least one (1) attic access opening to attic
areas that exceed 30 square feet and have a vertical height of 30 inches or greater. Additional access
openings must be provided to attic areas that have electrical, plumbing, or mechanical fixtures or equipment
that require access for periodic maintenance. The vertical height must be measured from the top of the ceiling
framing members to the underside of the roof framing members.
The rough-framed opening must not be less than 22 inches by 30 inches (559 mm by 762 mm) and must be
located in a hallway or other readily accessible location. When located in a wall, the opening must be a
minimum of 22 inches wide by 30 inches high. When the access is located in a ceiling, minimum unobstructed
headroom in the attic space directly above any portion of the access must be 30 inches (762 mm) measured
vertically from the top of ceiling framing members to the underside of the roof framing members. See the
adopted mechanical code for access requirements where mechanical equipment is located in attics.
Chapter 10 - Chimneys And Fireplaces
Section R1007 - Fireplace Requirements.
R1007 Fireplace Requirements is added to read as follows:
R1007 Fireplace Requirements.
A gas or wood burning fireplace installed within a dwelling unit shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The fireplace opening shall be provided with solid doors such as glass, solid steel or cast iron.
2. If the fireplace is located in a sleeping room or an adjacent bathroom, then a permanent unobstructed fresh
air supply shall be provided directly from the exterior of the structure to the firebox.
3. When gas is piped to the fireplace, a caution sign shall be installed that states "Caution: Damper must be
permanently blocked open if gas is supplied to this fireplace." The letters on the sign must be a minimum of 3/8
inches in height.
(Ord. 724, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL CODE
2-4-1: MECHANICAL CODE PROVISIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 120/640
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM MECHANICAL CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO, hereinafter
"code", including the adoption of the 2009 uniform mechanical code with appendices A, B, C, and D and necessary
administrative provisions. Certain sections of the uniform mechanical code and appendices may be added or
deleted.
B. Applicability: All construction of or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy
of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any component,
element or portion of a building or structure within the city must be in compliance with, in addition to, the other
applicable codes or amendments set forth by the city council and the latest edition of the uniform mechanical code.
C. Supplements: All supplements to the uniform mechanical code, issued by the International Association Of Plumbing
And Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), between editions are hereby not made a part of the then current edition of the
uniform mechanical code.
D. Conflict: In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the uniform mechanical code conflicts with any
provision of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter must govern and be controlling. (Ord. 725, 2-8-2011)
2-4-2: MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
All building construction work and the inspections thereof must be in conformity with the provisions of this code and
with the latest edition of the uniform mechanical code, which is hereby adopted by the city, with the following specific
deletions and additions:
Chapter 1 - Administration
Chapter 1 Administration is deleted in its entirety except for section 101.0 Title and section 102.0 Purpose, and
replaced by title 2, chapter 1, "Building Regulations Administrative Code", of the city code.
Chapter 2 - Definitions
Section 205.0 C - Definitions.
Add a new definition to section 205.0 to be placed in alphabetical order, as follows:
Combustible Construction. Combustible construction means work within any building or structure classified as
type III, type IV, type V as defined in the building code. Plastic piping is not permitted in type I and type II
buildings.
Chapter 5 - Exhaust Systems
Section 504.0 - Environmental Air Ducts.
Revise subsection 504.3.1, 504.3.2 and 504.3.2.2 as follows:
504.3.1 Moisture Exhaust Ducts.
Moisture exhaust ducts must terminate on the outside of the building and must be equipped with a back-draft
damper. Screens must not be installed at the duct termination. Ducts for exhausting clothes dryers must not be
connected or installed with sheet metal screws or other fasteners which will obstruct the flow. Clothes dryer
moisture exhaust ducts must not be connected to a gas vent connector, gas vent or chimney and must only serve
clothes dryers. Clothes dryer moisture exhaust ducts under positive pressure must not extend into or through
ducts or plenums.
Exception: When moisture exhaust ducts terminate vertically through a roof, back-draft dampers are not required.
504.3.2 Domestic Clothes Dryers.
When a compartment or space for a domestic clothes dryer is provided, a minimum four (4) inch diameter
(102 mm) moisture exhaust duct of approved material must be installed in accordance with this section and
section 504.0.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 121/640
When a closet is designed for the installation of a clothes dryer, a minimum opening of 100 square inches
(64 5162) for makeup air must be provided by means of permanent openings. Vents, louvers, or other openings in
doors, or infiltration around doors must be prohibited in the calculation of the required makeup air.
504.3.2.2 Length Limitation.
Domestic dryer moisture exhaust ducts must not exceed a total combined horizontal and vertical length of
fourteen (14) feet (4267 mm), including two (2) 90 degree (1.57 rad) elbows. Two (2) feet (610 mm) must be
deducted for each 90 degree (1.57 rad) elbow in excess of two.
Chapter 7 - Combustion Air
Section 701.12 - Prohibited Openings.
Add a new section 701.12 as follows:
Vents, louvers, other openings in doors, or infiltration around doors is prohibited in the calculation of the required
combustion air.
Chapter 9 - Installation Of Specific Appliances
Section 904.0 - Central Heating Boilers And Furnaces.
Revise section 904.10, Title and subsection 904.10.1 as follows:
904.10 Access To Appliances And Air Moving Systems On Roofs.
904.10.1 Appliances and air moving systems located on roofs or other elevated locations fifteen (15) feet above
adjacent grade or floor level must be accessible by permanent roof access ladders, as follows:
1. Each ladder must have side railings which extend at least thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above the roof or
parapet wall.
2. Each ladder must be a minimum of fourteen (14) inches (356 mm) in width.
3. Each ladder rung must be spaced at a maximum of fourteen (14) inches (356 mm) on center.
4. Each ladder must have a minimum of a six (6) inch (152 mm) toe space.
5. Rungs must have a minimum 0.75-inch (19 mm) diameter and be capable of withstanding a 300-pound
(136.1 kg) load.
6. Each ladder must have intermediate horizontal landings whenever the ladder height exceeds eighteen feet
(5486 mm) above finished grade. Landings must be placed at eighteen foot (5486 mm) intervals, maximum.
Exceptions:
1. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) to
the finish grade.
2. A portable ladder may be used for access for a group R division 3 and 4 and U occupancies.
3. Permanent ladders for equipment access need not be provided at parapets or walls less than thirty (30)
inches (762 mm) in height.
904.10.2 An inside means of access must be a permanent stairway or ladder complying with 904.10.1,
terminating in an enclosure, scuttle, or trapdoor. Such scuttles or trapdoors must be at least twenty-two (22)
inches x twenty four (24) inches (560 mm x 610 mm) in size, must open easily and safely under all conditions,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 122/640
especially snow, and must be constructed as so to permit access from the roof side unless deliberately locked on
the inside. At least six (6) feet (1829 mm) of clearance must be available between the access opening and the
edge of the roof or similar hazard, or rigidly fixed rails or guards a minimum of forty-two (42) inches (1067 mm) in
height must be provided on the exposed side. Where parapets or other building structures are utilized in lieu of
guards or rails, they must be a minimum of forty-two (42) inches (1067 mm) in height.
Chapter 10 - Steam And Hot Water Boilers
Section 1001.0 - Scope Applicability.
Delete chapter 10 in its entirety except section 1001.0 and revise section 1001.0 as follows:
1001.0 Applicability.
For boilers and water heaters less than 120 gallon capacity, or a Btu input rating less than 200,000, or less than
160 pounds per square inch of pressure, see chapter 5 of the uniform plumbing code. For all other units, contact
the mechanical section of the Nevada division of occupational safety and health, part of the office of business and
industrial relations.
Chapter 11 - Refrigeration
Table 11-1 Refrigerant Groups, Properties And Allowable Quantities.
Revise table 11-1 by adding a new footnote #16 as follows:
16 For occupancy group I, division 1 and division 2, the quantity of refrigerant in each system is limited to 50 percent of
the respective amount listed in this table.
Exceptions: Kitchens, laboratories and mortuaries.
Justification: To correlate and avoid conflict with the state fire marshal requirements.
Table 11-2 Permissible Refrigeration Systems.
Revise table 11-2 as follows:
TABLE 11-2
PERMISSIBLE REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS1
Occupancy Group And Division4
High Probability
System
Low Probability
System
Machinery
Room
A-1 Group A1 only Any Any
A-2 Group A1 only Any Any
A-3 Group A1 only Any Any
A-4 Group A1 only Any Any
A-5 Group A1 only Any Any
B Group A1 only2 Any Any
E Group A1 only Any Any
F-1 Group A1 only Any Any
F-2 Any2 Any Any
H-1 Any Any Any
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 123/640
H-2 Any Any Any
H-3 Any Any Any
H-4 Any Any Any
H-5 Group A1 only Any Any
I-1 Group A1 only3 Any Any
I-2 Group A1 only3 Any Any
I-3 Group A1 only3 Any Any
I-4 Group A1 only3 Any Any
M Group A1 only2 Any Any
R-1 Group A1 only Any Any
R-2 Group A1 only Any Any
R-3 Group A1 only Any Any
R-4 Group A1 only Any Any
S-1 Group A1 only2 Any Any
S-2 Any2 Any Any
U-1 U Any Any Any
Notes:
1 See section 1105.0.
2 Any refrigerant may be used within a high-probability system when the room of space complies with section
1105.3.
3 The allowable quantities shown in table 11-1 must be reduced by 50 percent for all institutional occupancies
except kitchens, laboratories, and mortuaries. (ASHRAE safety standard for refrigeration systems 15-2007
section 7.2.1.).
4 Occupancy classifications are defined in the building code.
Chapter 13 - Fuel Gas Piping
1309.0 Gas Piping System Design, Materials, And Components.
1309.5.4 Plastic Pipe, Tubing, And Fittings.
Revise section 1309.5.4 by adding an exception as follows:
1309.5.4 Plastic Pipe, Tubing, And Fittings.
Plastic pipe, tubing, and fittings used to supply fuel gas shall conform with ASTM D 2513, standard specification
for thermoplastic gas pressure pipe, tubing, and fittings. Pipe to be used shall be marked "gas" and "ASTM D
2513." [NFPA 54:5.6.4.1]
Anodeless risers shall comply with the following: [NFPA 54:5.6.4.3]
Exception: Any time polyvinyl chloride (PVC) gas conveyance material is damaged, altered or repaired, the
material must be completely replaced with gas piping which complies with the mechanical and plumbing code in
effect at the time.
(Ord. 760, 9-11-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 124/640
Chapter 5
PLUMBING CODE
2-5-1: PLUMBING CODE PROVISIONS:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO, hereinafter "code",
including the adoption of the 2009 uniform plumbing code (UPC) as published by the International Association Of
Plumbing And Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) with appendices A, B, D, E, I, and L and necessary administrative
provisions. Certain sections of the uniform plumbing code and appendices may be added or deleted.
B. Applicability: All construction of or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy
of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any component,
element or portion of a building or structure within the city shall be in compliance with, in addition to, the other
applicable codes or amendments set forth by the city council and the latest edition of the uniform plumbing code.
C. Supplements: All supplements to the uniform plumbing code, issued by the International Association Of Plumbing
And Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), between editions are hereby not made a part of the then current edition of the
uniform plumbing code.
D. Conflict: In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the uniform plumbing code conflicts with any
provision of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and be controlling. (Ord. 726, 2-8-2011)
2-5-2: PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENTS:
All building construction work and the inspections thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of this code and
with the latest edition of the uniform plumbing code, which is hereby adopted by the city, with the following specific
deletions and additions:
Chapter 1 - Administration
Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety except for section 101.0 Title and section 102.0 Purpose, and replaced by title 2,
chapter 1, "Building Regulations Administrative Code", of the city code.
Chapter 2 - Definitions
Section 205.0 - C
205.0 C Definitions.
Add a new definition to section 205 to be placed in alphabetical order, as follows:
Combustible Construction - Combustible construction shall mean work within any building or structure classified
as type III, type IV, type V as defined in the building code. Plastic piping is not permitted in type I and type II
buildings.
Chapter 3 - General Regulations
Section 313.0 - Protection Of Piping, Materials, And Structures.
Revise section 313.6 as follows:
313.6 No water, soil, or waste pipe shall be installed or permitted outside of a building in an exterior wall or
outside of any conditioned space unless adequate provisions are made to protect such pipe from freezing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 125/640
Chapter 4 - Plumbing Fixtures And Fixture Fittings
Section 402.0 - Water Conserving Fixtures And Fittings.
Revise sections 402.2 and 402.3 as follows:
402.2 Water Closets.
Water closets, either flush tank, flushometer tank, or flushometer valve operated, shall have an average
consumption of 1.6 gallons (6.1 liters) of water per flush. A timing device or other mechanism which will
automatically flush a water closet periodically or continually is prohibited.
402.3 Urinals.
Urinals shall have an average water consumption of 1 gallon (3.8 liters) of water per flush. A timing device or
other mechanism which will automatically flush a urinal periodically or continually is prohibited.
Section 411.0 - Floor Drains.
411.2 Location Of Floor Drains.
Add a new subsection 411.2.4 as follows:
411.2.4 All fire pump rooms shall be provided with a (3) inch (76 mm) minimum floor drain which must be
connected to an approved trap primer.
Section 412.0 - Minimum Number Of Required Fixtures.
Delete sections 412.2 through 412.6 and table 4-1 in their entirety and revise section 412.1 as follows:
412.1 Minimum Number Of Required Fixtures.
Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for the type of occupancy and in the minimum number as required by the
currently adopted building code.
Chapter 5 - Water Heaters
Section 509.0 - Appliances On Roofs.
509.3 Access To Appliances On Roofs.
Revise subsection 509.3.1 as follows:
509.3.1 Gas utilization appliances located on roofs or other elevated locations shall be accessible by permanent
roof access ladders, as follows:
(1) Each ladder shall have side railings which extend at least thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above the roof or
parapet wall.
(2) Each ladder shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) inches (356 mm) in width.
(3) Each ladder rung shall be spaced at a maximum of fourteen (14) inches (356 mm) on center.
(4) Each ladder shall have a minimum of a six (6) inch (152 mm) toe space.
(5) Each ladder shall have intermediate horizontal landings whenever the ladder height exceeds eighteen feet
(5486 mm) above finished grade. Landings shall be placed at eighteen foot (5486 mm) intervals, maximum.
Exceptions:
a. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) to
the finish grade.
b. A portable ladder may be used for access for a group R division 3 and 4 and U occupancies.
c. Permanent ladders for equipment access need not be provided at parapets or walls less than thirty (30)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 126/640
inches (762 mm) in height.
Chapter 6 - Water Supply And Distribution
Section 603.0 - Cross-Connection Control.
603.3 General Requirements.
Revise subsection 603.3.3 as follows:
603.3.3 The premises owner or responsible person shall have the backflow prevention assembly tested by a
certified backflow assembly tester at the time of installation, repair, or relocation and not less than on an annual
schedule thereafter, or more often when required by the city of Elko. The certified tester shall leave a copy of their
backflow certification on site along with a copy of the certification of each device tested. These documents shall
be recorded into the permanent record at the time of installation. The periodic testing shall be performed in
accordance with the procedures referenced in table 14-1 by a tester qualified in accordance with those
standards.
Section 604.0 - Materials.
Add a new subsection 604.1.1 as follows:
604.1.1 Plastic piping shall be limited to buildings defined as combustible construction by this code.
Section 608.0 - Water Pressure, Pressure Regulators, Pressure Relief Valves, And Vacuum Relief Valves.
Revise section 608.5 Relief Valves as follows:
608.5 Relief Valves.
Relief valves located inside a building shall be provided with a drain, not smaller than the relief valve outlet, of
galvanized steel, hard-drawn copper piping and fittings, CPVC, flexible corrugated connectors complying with
604.12, or listed relief valve drain tube with fittings that will not reduce the internal bore of the pipe or tubing
(straight lengths as opposed to coils) and shall extend from the valve to the outside of the building with the end of
the pipe not more than two (2) feet (610 mm) nor less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the ground or the flood
level of the area receiving the discharge and pointing downward. Temperature and pressure relief (T & P) drains
may discharge through an air gap in a floor sink or a floor drain provided they are located in normally unoccupied
areas. Relief valve drains shall not terminate in a building's crawl space. No part of such drain pipe shall be
trapped or subject to freezing. The terminal end of the drain pipe shall not be threaded.
Table 6-5 - Water Supply Fixture Units (WSFU) And Minimum Fixture Branch Pipe Sizes.
Revise footnote number five (5) by adding the following:
Each single family dwelling shall be assigned ten (10) WSFU's for lawn sprinklers unless otherwise specified by
the design professional.
Chapter 7 - Sanitary Drainage
Section 701.0 - Materials.
Revise section 701.0 by adding a new subsection 701.1.2.1 Materials as follows:
701.1.2.1 Materials.
Plastic piping used for drainage waste and vent systems shall be limited to buildings defined as combustible
construction by this code.
Section 704.0 - Fixture Connection (Drainage).
704.3 Fixture Connections.
Revise section 704.3 as follows:
Pot sinks, scullery sinks, dishwashing sinks, silverware sinks, commercial dishwashing machines, silverwarewashing
machines, and other similar fixtures shall be indirectly connected to the drainage systems by means of
an air gap.
Section 707.0 - Cleanouts.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 127/640
707.4 Cleanouts.
Revise section 707.4 as follows:
Each horizontal drainage pipe shall be provided with a cleanout at its upper terminal, and each run of piping, that
is more than one-hundred (100) feet (30 480 mm) in total developed length, shall be provided with a cleanout for
each one-hundred (100) feet (30 480 mm), or fraction thereof, in length of such piping. An additional cleanout
shall be provided in a drainage line for each aggregate horizontal change of direction exceeding 135 degrees
(2.36 rad). A cleanout shall be provided on every sewer connection serving all structures, trailers, or mobile
homes, with said cleanout placed so as to fall outside of the area covered by the structure, trailer or mobile home.
The remainder of the section is unchanged.
Chapter 8 - Indirect Wastes
Section 801.0 - Indirect Wastes.
801.2 Food And Beverage Handling Establishments.
Revise subsection 801.2.2 as follows:
801.2.2 For walk-in coolers, floor drains shall be permitted to be connected to a separate drainage line
discharging into an outside receptor. The flood level rim of the receptor shall be not less than six (6) inches
(152 mm) lower than the lowest floor drain. Such floor drains shall be trapped and individually vented. Cleanouts
shall be provided at every ninety (90) degree (1.6 rad) turn and shall be accessibly located. Such waste shall
discharge through an airgap into a trapped and vented receptor, except that a full-size airgap is required where
the indirect waste pipe may be under vacuum.
801.2 Food And Beverage Handling Establishments.
Revise section 801.2 by adding a new subsection 801.2.4 Floor Sinks as follows:
801.2.4 Floor Sinks.
Floor sinks shall be installed flush with the finished floor and shall be accessible for cleaning.
Chapter 9 - Vents
Section 903.0 - Materials.
Revise section 903.1 by adding a new subsection 903.1.2.1 as follows:
903.1.2.1 Plastic piping used for drainage waste and vent systems shall be limited to buildings defined as
combustible construction by this code.
Chapter 10 - Traps And Interceptors
Section 1016.0 - Sand Interceptors.
Revise section 1016.0 by adding a new subsection 1016.4 as follows:
1016.4 Sand/Oil Interceptor Sizing Data:
(Square footage area of the facility/facility factor) x 7.48) x 2 = volume of interceptor
Example: 3 bay car wash calculations:
Square footage area of the facility = 1500 square feet
Divided by facility factor (below) = /25
Multiply by the gallons per cu. ft = x 7.48
Multiply by the retention time (2 hour) = x 2
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 128/640
Volume of the interceptor = 897.6 gallons
Manufactured size (traffic rated) 1000 gallon sand/oil interceptor
Facility factor:
One (1) cu. ft of interceptor capacity equals:
* 25 sq. feet of floor space at: truck washes, manual and automatic car wash
* 100 sq. feet of floor space at: machine shop, automotive workshops, storage garage/warehouse
* 250 sq. feet of floor space at: paint spray booths
* 300 sq. feet of floor space at: printers
* 2000 sq. feet of floor space at: parking garages (where floors are to be washed)
Chapter 11 - Storm Drainage
Section 1101.0 - General.
1101.3 Material Uses.
Revise section 1101.3 by adding a new subsection 1101.3.1 as follows:
1101.3.1 Plastic piping used for rainwater systems shall be limited to buildings defined as combustible
construction by this code.
Chapter 12 - Fuel Piping
Section 1209.0 Gas-Piping System Design, Materials, And Components.
1209.5.4 Plastic Pipe, Tubing, And Fittings.
Revise section 1209.5.4 by adding an exception as follows:
1209.5.4 Plastic Pipe, Tubing, And Fittings. Plastic pipe, tubing, and fittings used to supply fuel gas shall conform
with ASTM D 2513, standard specification for thermoplastic gas pressure pipe, tubing, and fittings. Pipe to be
used shall be marked "gas" and "ASTM D 2513." [NFPA 54:5.6.4.1]
Exception: Any time polyvinyl chloride (PVC) gas conveyance material is damaged, altered or repaired, the
material must be completely replaced with gas piping which complies with the mechanical and plumbing code
in effect at the time.
Chapter 15 - Firestop Protection
Delete chapter 15 in its entirety. Refer to the currently adopted IBC.
Chapter 16 - Nonpotable Water Reuse Systems
Delete chapter 16, Nonpotable Water Reuse Systems in its entirety.
Refer to the effluent management plan for the city of Elko.
(Ord. 761, 9-11-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 129/640
Chapter 6
ELECTRICAL CODE
2-6-1: ELECTRICAL CODE PROVISIONS:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the ELECTRICAL CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO, hereinafter "code",
including the adoption of the 2008 national electrical code and necessary provisions.
B. Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction, relocated buildings, and to any
alterations, repairs, or reconstruction, except as provided for otherwise in this chapter. All electrical construction
work, electrical alterations or repair, installation and maintenance of overhead and underground electrical supply
and communication lines and the inspections thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
with the 2008 edition of the national electrical code, along with supplements as adopted by the National Fire
Protection Association, which are hereby adopted by the city.
C. Conversions To Commercial Or Industrial Uses: In the event that any residential use presently permitted in any
commercially or industrially zoned area, which is presently being used as a residence, is converted to a commercial
or industrial use, such building, structure or other property must be rewired with electrical wiring and equipment
which meets commercial and industrial standards established pursuant to this chapter and the national electrical
code.
D. Construction Power: The city is hereby empowered and authorized to permit and approve the use of electrical
current through any wiring or equipment for the purpose of construction. Permits for construction power shall be
issued only after the primary building permit has been issued. Any wiring or equipment shall comply with the
limitations and restrictions of the electrical code. Construction power wiring and equipment must be removed prior
to the final building inspection. (Ord. 727, 2-8-2011)
2-6-2: ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
All electrical construction work, electrical alterations or repair, installation and maintenance of overhead and
underground electrical supply and communication lines and the inspections thereof, shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and with the latest edition of the national electrical code, along with supplements as adopted
by the National Fire Protection Association, which are hereby adopted by the city, with the following specific additions
and deletions:
Article 90 - Introduction
Section 90.2 (B)(5)(a) Scope.
Revise item (a) of section 90.2 (B)(5) as follows:
a. Consist of service drops or service laterals, and associated metering and monitoring equipment, or
Chapter 1; Article 110 - Requirements For Electrical Installations
Section 110.12 Mechanical Execution Of Work.
Add a new subsection (C) as follows:
(C) Abandoned Conductors And Cables. For those structures regulated by the building or swimming pool code,
no electrical conductors or cables shall be abandoned in place. Such conductors or cables shall be removed
from the building or structure back to the panelboard unless otherwise approved by the city based upon
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 130/640
consideration of safety and combustibility.
Add a new subsection (D) as follows:
(D) Used Materials And Equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for
new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the city.
Section 110.26 Spaces About Electrical Equipment.
Revise section 110.26 (C)(2) as follows:
(2) Large Equipment. For equipment rated 1200 amperes or more and over 1.8 m (6 ft) wide that contains
overcurrent devices, switching devices, or control devices, there shall be one entrance to and from the required
working space not less than 610 mm (24 in.) wide and 2.0 m (61/2 ft) high at each end of the working space.
When more than one entrance is required by this section both entrances shall open to the exterior of the
building or into an approved means of egress that is not under the control of an individual tenant.
A single entrance to and egress from the required working space shall be permitted where either of the
conditions in 110.26 (C)(2)(a) or (C)(2)(b) is met.
The remainder of this section remains unchanged.
Section 110.33 Entrance To Enclosures And Access To Working Space.
Revise section 110.33 (A)(1) as follows:
(1) Large Equipment. On switchboard and control panels exceeding 1.8 m (6 ft) in width, there shall be one
entrance at the end of the equipment. When more than one entrance is required by this section both entrances
shall open to the exterior of the building or into an approved means of egress that is not under the control of an
individual tenant. A single entrance to the required working space shall be permitted where either of the
conditions in 110.33 (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) is met.
The remainder of this section remains unchanged.
Chapter 2; Article 210 - Branch Circuits
Section 210.23 Permissible Loads.
Add a new subsection (E) to section 210.23 as follows:
(E) Dwelling Branch Circuits.
Maximum Number (15-Ampere). The maximum number of outlets on a 15-ampere, 125 volt (nominal) luminaire
lighting fixture circuit shall be twelve (12) and shall not contain general purpose outlets. The maximum number
of outlets on a 15-ampere, 125 volt (nominal) general purpose (duplex receptacle) circuit shall be eight (8). The
maximum number of outlets on a 15-ampere, 125 volt (nominal) combination (luminaire lighting fixture and
general purpose outlets) circuit shall be eight (8).
Exception No. 1: Dedicated branch circuits feeding only IC rated recessed luminaires (recessed lighting
fixtures) and/or low wattage energy efficient luminaires (lighting fixtures) may use article 220.14 (D) for
maximum number of lighting outlets.
Exception No. 2: In branch circuits serving smoke detectors the smoke detectors outlets need not be
counted with the other lighting outlets.
Maximum Number (20-Ampere). The maximum number of outlets on a 20-ampere, 125-volt (nominal) luminaire
lighting fixture circuit shall be fourteen (14) and shall not contain general purpose outlets. The maximum number
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 131/640
of outlets on a 20-ampere, 125 volt (nominal) general purpose (duplex receptacle) circuit shall be ten (10). The
maximum number of outlets on a 20-ampere, 125 volt (nominal) combination (luminaire lighting fixture and
general purpose outlets) circuit shall be ten (10).
Exception No. 1: Dedicated branch circuits feeding only IC rated recessed luminaires (recessed lighting
fixtures) and/or low wattage energy efficient luminaires (lighting fixtures) may use article 220.14(D) for
maximum number of lighting outlets.
Exception No. 2: In branch circuits serving smoke detectors the smoke detectors outlets need not be counted
with the other lighting outlets.
Individual Branch Circuits. The following fastened-in-place appliances are required to have a separate
minimum 20-ampere circuit: dishwasher, trash compactor and microwave oven. The required laundry circuit
may serve one (1) additional outlet in the laundry area.
Section 210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets.
Revise section 210.52 (B)(3), and add a new exception as follows:
(3) Kitchen Receptacle Requirements. Receptacles installed in a kitchen to serve countertop surfaces shall be
limited to four (4) duplex receptacles on a circuit. They shall be supplied by not fewer than two small-appliance
branch circuits, either or both of which shall also be permitted to supply receptacle outlets in the same kitchen
or in other rooms as specified in 210.52(B)(1). Additional small-appliance branch circuits shall be permitted to
supply receptacle outlets in the kitchen and other rooms specified in 210.52(B)(1). No small-appliance branch
circuit shall serve more than one kitchen.
Exception: Receptacles installed to provide power for electric ignition systems or clock timers for gas-fired
ranges, ovens or counter-mounted cooking units.
Section 210.70 Lighting Outlets Required.
Revise item (1) in section 210.70 (A) as follows:
(1) Habitable Rooms. At least one wall switch-controlled lighting outlet shall be installed in every habitable
room and bathroom. Unless prohibited by structural design, a wall switch shall be located within 1.8 m (6 ft) of
the point of entry, and shall not be located behind an active door in the fully open position.
The remainder of this section remains unchanged.
Section 210.70 (A)(2)(a) Additional Locations.
Revise item (a) in section 210.70 (A)(2) as follows:
Additional Locations:
(a) At least one wall switch-controlled lighting outlet shall be installed in hallways, stairways, attached garages,
and detached garages with electric power. Hallways of 3.0 m (10 ft) or more in length shall have wall switches
at each end. There shall be a wall switch within 1.8 m (6 ft) of each bedroom door unless prohibited by
structural design.
Section 210.70 (A)(2)(b) Additional Locations.
Revise item (b) is section 210.70 (A)(2)(b) as follows:
Additional Locations:
(b) For dwelling units, attached garages, and detached garages with electric power, at least one wall-switch
controlled lighting outlet shall be installed to provide illumination on the exterior side of outdoor entrances or
exits with grade level access. A vehicle door shall not be considered as an outdoor entrance or exit with grade
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 132/640
level access. At least one wall switch that controls an interior lighting outlet shall be located at each keyed
exterior entry. This switch shall be located within 1.8 m (6 ft) of the latching jamb side, unless prohibited by
structural design, and not behind an active door in the fully open position.
Section 210.70(A)(4) Closets.
Add a new subsection (4) to section 210.70(A) as follows:
(4) Closets. All walk-in closets or storage areas of 1.86 sq. m (20 square feet) or more in floor area shall
contain a light fixture controlled by a wall switch.
Section 210.70 (D) Self-Service Storage Facilities.
Add a new subsection (D) to section 210.70 as follows:
(D) Self-Service Storage Facilities. All self-service storage facilities shall have egress illumination as required
by the building code.
Chapter 2; Article 225 - Outside Branch Circuits And Feeders
Section 225.31 Disconnecting Means.
Revise section 225.31 as follows:
Disconnecting Means.
Means shall be provided for disconnecting all ungrounded conductors that supply or pass through the building
or structure. When more than one building or other structure is on the same property and under single
management, each building or other structure served shall be provided with means for disconnecting all
ungrounded conductors. The disconnecting means shall be installed outside of the building served at a readily
accessible location. A shunt trip may be used to satisfy this requirement where:
(1) It is located at seven (7) feet above finished grade.
(2) It is located within an equilateral triangle (12 inch minimum), red in color.
Section 225.32 Location.
Revise section 225.32 as follows:
Location.
The disconnecting means shall be installed as described in 230.70 of these amendments. For the purposes of
this section the requirements in 230.6 shall be utilized.
Exception No. 1: For installations under single management, where documented safe switching procedures
are established and maintained for disconnection, and where the installation is monitored by qualified
individuals, the disconnecting means shall be permitted to be located elsewhere on the premises.
Exception No. 2: For buildings or other structures qualifying under the provisions of article 685, the
disconnecting means shall be permitted to be located elsewhere on the premises.
Exception No. 3: For towers or poles used as lighting standards, the disconnecting means shall be permitted
to be located elsewhere on the premises.
Exception No. 4: For accessory buildings to one and two-family dwellings the disconnecting means may be
installed either inside or on the exterior of the accessory structure.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 133/640
Chapter 2; Article 230 - Services
Section 230.70 General.
Revise section 230.70 General, in its entirety, as follows:
230.70 General.
Means shall be provided to disconnect all ungrounded service entrance conductors to a building or structure.
(A) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed in accordance with 230.70(A)(1), (2), (3), (4)
and (5).
(1) Exterior Of The Building. The service disconnecting means shall be installed in a readily accessible
exterior location and within 3.7 m (12 ft.) of the building or structure. Where the distance is greater than
3.7 m (12 ft.) from the building or structure the service disconnecting means shall be considered as a
separate structure.
Exception: A fire pump and its associated electrical equipment.
(2) Electrical Equipment Room. The service disconnecting means may be installed within a dedicated
electrical equipment room with a readily accessible direct access on the exterior of a building or structure.
Such rooms shall be separated from all other rooms or spaces within the building by a minimum of one (1)
hour fire resistive construction and shall have approved fire department access.
(3) Bathrooms. Service disconnecting means shall not be installed in bathrooms.
(4) Remote Control. Where a remote control device(s), required by another code such as in a fire command
center, is used to actuate the service disconnecting means, the service disconnecting means shall be
located in accordance with 230.70(A)(1) or (2). The remote control device shall be supervised by a local
signaling service that causes an audible signal and illumination of an amber visual signal at the fire
command center and at each auxiliary location required for the life safety system.
(5) Emergency Systems, Information Technology Equipment And Uninterruptible Power Supplies (UPS).
Emergency systems driven by prime movers and UPS systems shall have separate disconnecting means
with separate identification. Information technology equipment rooms complying with article 645.2 shall be
permitted to have their disconnecting means installed per article 645.10 and 645.11 if identified at the same
location as the "service disconnect."
(B) Marking. Each service disconnecting means shall be marked with a sign(s). When located in a dedicated
electrical room the exterior door(s) providing access to the disconnecting means located in a dedicated
electrical room shall be permanently marked with a sign(s). Each sign shall be a minimum 0.093 sq. m (1 sq.
foot), colored red with 25.4 mm (1 inch) high; 6.35 mm (1/4 inch) stroke raised or engraved letters and/or
numbers indicating the address or unit it serves and be identified as the "Electrical Service Disconnect(s)"
and/or "Electrical Service Disconnect(s) Inside." Emergency systems disconnects shall be permanently marked
with sign(s), identified as "Emergency Electrical Disconnect(s)" and/or "Main Emergency Electrical
Disconnect(s) Inside." When the service disconnecting means is located inside a dedicated electrical room and
it is not the first service disconnect encountered or there are multiple service disconnects there shall be a
directional 75 mm (3 inch) wide painted red stripe on the floor from the entry door(s) to each service
disconnect.
Exception: One and two family dwelling units and their associated accessory structures.
(C) Suitable For Use. Each service disconnecting means shall be suitable for the prevailing conditions. Service
equipment installed in hazardous (classified) locations shall comply with the requirements of articles 500
through 517.
Chapter 2; Article 250 - Grounding And Bonding
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 134/640
Section 250.32 Buildings Or Structures Supplied By A Feeder Or Branch Circuit.
Revise section 250.32(A) as follows:
(A) Grounding Electrode. For the purposes of this section all buildings or structures not joined by a continuous
concrete foundation or footing and roof shall be considered as separate buildings or structures. Building(s) or
structure(s) supplied by feeder(s) or branch circuit(s) shall have a grounding electrode system installed in
accordance with part III of article 250. The grounding electrode conductor(s) shall be connected in accordance
with 250.32(B) or (C). Where there is no existing grounding electrode, the grounding electrode(s) required in
250.50 shall be installed.
Section 250.50 Grounding Electrode System.
Revise section 250.50 as follows:
250.50 Grounding Electrode System.
All grounding electrodes as described in 250.52(A)(1) through (A)(7) that are present at each building or structure
served shall be bonded together to form the grounding electrode system.
Where none of these grounding electrodes exist, one or more of the grounding electrodes specified in 250.52(A)
(4) through (A)(8) shall be installed and used. The concrete-encased electrode described in article 250.52(A)(3)
shall be required for new buildings and structures that are supplied with electrical power and have concrete
foundations or footings.
Exception: Concrete-encased electrodes of existing buildings or structures shall not be required to be part of the
grounding electrode system where the steel reinforcing bars or rods are not accessible for use without disturbing
the concrete.
Section 250.120 Equipment Grounding Conductor Installation.
Add a new subsection (D) to section 250.120 as follows:
(D) Equipment Grounding Conductor. All raceways installed on roofs shall contain an equipment grounding
conductor sized per table 250.122 installed with the circuit conductors.
Exception No. 1: Low voltage, communication and similar type systems unless required elsewhere in the
code.
Exception No. 2: As permitted by article 250.86 for short sections of metal enclosures or raceways.
Table 250.122 Minimum Size Equipment Grounding Conductors For Grounding Raceway And Equipment.
Revise the minimum aluminum or copper-clad aluminum wire size for a 4000 amp overcurrent device, as follows:
Rating Or Setting Of Automatic Overcurrent Device In Circuit
Ahead Of Equipment, Conduit, Etc., Not Exceeding (Amperes)
Size (AWG Or
kcmil) Copper
Size (AWG Or kcmil)
Aluminum Or Copper-Clad
Aluminum*
4000 500 750
Chapter 3; Article 358 - Electrical Metallic Tubing: Type EMT
Section 358.12 Uses Not Permitted.
Add new items (7), (8) and (9) to section 358.12 as follows:
(7) Embedded within concrete or masonry in contact with earth.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 135/640
(8) Underground installations.
(9) Within earth fills.
Chapter 5; Article 514 - Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities
Section 514.11 (A) Circuit Disconnects. General.
Revise section 514.11(A) as follows:
(A) General. Each circuit leading to or through dispensing equipment, including equipment for remote pumping
systems, shall be provided with a clearly identified and readily accessible switch or other acceptable means,
located remote from the dispensing devices, to disconnect simultaneously from the source of supply, all
conductors of the circuits, including the grounded conductor, if any. Single-pole breakers utilizing handle ties
shall not be permitted. The switch shall be a momentary contact type. The disconnect station sign shall be
0.093 sq. m (1 ft square), colored red and have black, 25.4 mm (1 inch) high, 6.35 mm (1/4 inch) stroke
permanent lettering describing it as "Emergency Pump Shutoff".
Chapter 6; Article 690 - Solar Photovoltaic Systems
Section 690.14 Additional Provisions.
Delete the exception and revise section 690.14(C)(1) as follows:
(1) Location. The photovoltaic disconnecting means and overcurrent device shall be installed at an accessible
location on the outside of a building before any system conductors enter the building or structure.
The photovoltaic system disconnecting means shall not be installed in bathrooms.
Chapter 7; Article 700 - Emergency Systems
Section 700.12 (B) Generator Set.
Add a new subsection (7) to section 700.12 (B) as follows:
(7) The emergency generator must not be located more than 55 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire
department vehicle access. When the generator set is located inside a building it must be located in a room
dedicated to the emergency power supply system. This room must be separate from the interior of the building
by a minimum of two-hour resistive construction or must be in room(s) fully protected by approved automatic
fire suppression systems. Unless otherwise required by building codes openings for generator cooling and
exhaust is required to be fire-resistive construction.
When a generator set is located within 1.5 m (5 ft) of a building it must be separated from the building with a
rated separation wall equal to the highest fire rating within the building that has no openings. It must be isolated
within an enclosure and protected from physical damage.
When a generator set is located more than 1.5 m (5 ft) from a building it must be isolated within an enclosure
and protected from physical damage.
(Ord. 727, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 7
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
2-7-1: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE PROVISIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 136/640
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE OF THE CITY OF
ELKO, hereinafter "code", including the adoption of the 2009 international energy conservation code and necessary
administrative provisions. Certain sections of the international energy conservation code and appendices may be
added or deleted.
B. Applicability: All construction of or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the occupancy
of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any component,
element or portion of a building or structure within the city shall be in compliance with, in addition to, the other
applicable codes or amendments set forth by the city council and the latest edition of the international energy
conservation code.
C. Materials: These provisions are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not
specifically prescribed herein, provided the city of Elko has approved any alternates.
D. Supplements: All supplements to the international energy conservation code, issued by the International Code
Council Inc., between editions are hereby not made a part of the then current edition of the international energy
conservation code.
E. Conflicts: In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the international residential code conflict with
any provision of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and be controlling. (Ord. 728, 2-8-2011)
2-7-2: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE AMENDMENTS:
Chapter 1 - Administration
Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety except for sections 101 and 102.
Section 101 - Scope And General Requirements.
Revise section 101 as follows:
101.4.3 Additions, Alterations, Renovations Or Repairs.
Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to an existing building, building system or portion thereof shall
conform to the provisions of this code as they relate to new construction without requiring the unaltered portions
of the existing building or building system to comply with this code. Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs
shall not create an unsafe or hazardous condition or overload existing building systems. The addition shall be
deemed to comply with this code if the addition alone complies or if the existing building and addition comply with
this code as a single building.
Exceptions:
The following need not comply provided the energy use of the building is not increased:
1. Storm windows installed over existing fenestrations.
2. Glass only replacements in an existing sash and frame.
3. Existing ceiling, wall or floor cavities exposed during construction provided that these cavities are filled with
insulation.
4. Construction where the existing roof, wall or floor cavity is not exposed.
5. Reroofing for roofs where neither the sheathing nor the insulation is exposed. Roofs without insulation in the
cavity and where the sheathing or insulation is exposed during reroofing shall be insulated either above or
below sheathing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 137/640
6. Replacement of existing doors that separate conditioned space from the exterior shall not require installation
of the vestibule or revolving door, provided, however, that an existing vestibule that separates a conditioned
space from the exterior shall not be removed.
7. Alterations that replace less than 50 percent of the luminaires in a space provided that such alterations do
not increase the installed interior lighting power.
8. Alterations that replace only the bulb and ballast within the existing luminaires in a space provided that the
alteration does not increase the installed interior lighting power.
9. Relocations only of existing luminaires within an existing area enclosed by walls or floor to ceiling partitions.
101.5.2.1 Low Energy Buildings is amended to read as follows:
101.5.2 Low Energy Buildings.
The following buildings, or portions thereof, separated from the remainder of the building by building thermal
envelope assemblies complying with this code shall be exempt from the building thermal envelope provisions of
this code:
1. Those with a peak design rate of energy usage less than 3.4 Btu's/h/ft2 (10.7W/m2) or 1.0 watt/ft2
(10.7W/m2) of floor area for space conditioning purposes.
2. Those that do not contain conditioned space.
3. Those spaces that employ evaporative cooling as the sole source of conditioning.
4. Spaces whose sole purpose is to house and protect from freezing risers and mechanisms directly related to
the building fire suppression system.
Chapter 2 - Definitions
Section 202 - Definitions.
Revise section 202 by adding the definitions as follows:
Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source such as a lamp or lamps, together with the parts
designed to position the light source and connect it to the power supply. It may also include parts to protect the
light source or the ballast or to distribute the light. A lamp-holder itself is not a luminaire.
Occupant Sensor (Lighting). A device that detects the presence or absence of people within an area and
causes lighting to be regulated accordingly. The term "occupant sensor" applies to a device that controls indoor
lighting systems. When the device is used to control outdoor lighting systems, it is defined as a motion sensor.
This definition also applies to "occupancy sensor" and "occupant-sensing device." When used with a manual
device for initial activation, an occupant sensor may be called a "vacancy sensor."
Chapter 4 - Residential Energy Efficiency
Section 401 - General.
Revise section 401.3 as follows:
401.3 Certificate.
A permanent certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or in the home. The certificate shall be
completed by the builder or registered design professional. The certificate shall list the predominant R-values of
insulation installed in or on ceiling/roof, walls, foundation (slab, basement wall, crawlspace wall and/or floor) and
ducts outside conditioned spaces; U-factors for fenestration and the solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) of
fenestration. Where there is more than one value for each component, the certificate shall list the value covering
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 138/640
the largest area. The certificate shall list the types and efficiencies of heating, cooling and service water heating
equipment.
Section 403 - Systems.
Revise section 403 as follows:
403.2.2 Sealing (Mandatory).
All ducts, air handler connections at the plenum, filter boxes and building cavities used as ducts shall be sealed.
Joints and seams shall comply with the currently adopted mechanical code. Duct assemblies shall be verified for
tightness by either of the following methods:
The remainder of this section remains unchanged.
403.4 Circulating Hot Water Systems (Mandatory).
Delete section 403.4 Circulating Hot Water Systems (Mandatory) in its entirety and replace as follows:
403.4 Hot Water Systems.
All service hot water heating systems and domestic water systems shall meet the requirements of 403.4.1 or
403.4.2.
403.4.1 Non-Circulating Hot Water Systems.
All service hot water piping installed in unconditioned spaces, including under-slab piping, shall be insulated to R-
2.
403.4.2 Circulating Hot Water Systems.
All circulating service hot water piping, including under-slab piping, shall be insulated to at least R-2. Circulating
hot water systems shall include an automatic or readily accessible manual switch that can turn off the hot water
circulating pump when the system is not in use.
Exception:
Under-slab radiant heat for exterior ice and snowmelt shall be designed by a design professional to ensure the
most efficient use of the system.
403.5 Mechanical Ventilation (Mandatory).
Revise section 403.5 Mechanical Ventilation (Mandatory) as follows:
Outdoor air intakes and exhausts shall have automatic or gravity dampers that close when the ventilation system
is not operating.
Exception:
Where clothes dryer exhaust vents terminate at the roof, back-draft dampers are not required.
Chapter 5 - Commercial Energy Efficiency
Section 502 - Building Envelope Requirements.
Section 502.4.5 Outdoor Air Intakes And Exhaust Openings.
Revise section 502.4.5, to add new exceptions 2 through 6, as follows:
502.4.5 Outdoor Air Intakes And Exhaust Openings.
Stair and elevator shaft vents and other outdoor air intakes and exhaust openings integral to the building
envelope shall be equipped with not less than a class I motorized, leakage-rated damper with a maximum
leakage rate of 4 cfm per square foot (6.8 L/s . Cm2) at 1.0 inch water gauge (w.g.) (250 Pa) when tested in
accordance with AMCA 500D.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 139/640
Exceptions:
1. Gravity (non-motorized) dampers are permitted to be used in buildings less than three stories in height
above grade.
2. Supply and exhaust ducts or shafts integral to the smoke management system as required by sec. 909 of
the international building code.
3. Type I and type II fume hoods in commercial kitchens and the make-up air units that are required for the
operation of these fume hoods.
4. All vents used for conveying products of combustion.
5. Clothes dryer vents that terminate vertically through a roof.
6. Explosion venting.
Section 505 Electrical Power And Lighting Systems (Mandatory).
Revise the title of section 505 as follows:
Section 505 Electrical Power And Lighting Systems.
505.2.1 Interior Lighting Controls.
Revise section 505.2.1 Interior Lighting Controls, by adding a new exception #3, as follows:
505.2.1 Interior Lighting Controls.
Exceptions:
3. Normally unoccupied areas, such as restrooms, janitor closets, storage closets and similar spaces,
controlled by local occupancy sensors.
505.6 Exterior Lighting (Mandatory).
Revise section 505.6 Exterior Lighting, by adding a new exception #2, as follows:
When the power for the exterior lighting is supplied through the energy service to the building, all exterior lighting,
other than low voltage landscaping lighting, shall comply with sections 505.6.1 and 505.6.2.
Exceptions:
1. Where approved because of historical, safety, signage or emergency considerations.
2. Where specific lighting levels are required by state or local governmental criteria, the state or local code
shall prevail. Areas affected by this exemption include, but are not limited to, ATM's and parking garage
emergency lighting.
(Ord. 728, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 8
RESERVED
(Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 140/640
Chapter 9
RESERVED
(Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 10
RESERVED
(Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 11
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
2-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord.
721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this
section and elsewhere in this chapter where specific definitions are provided. Definitions listed in Nevada
administrative code 444.010 through 444.097 and 444.310 through 444.410 shall also be applicable to this chapter.
ACCESS BARRIER: A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof that completely encloses a pool or spa and
obstructs access.
ACCESSIBLE: When applied to a fixture, connection, appliance or equipment shall mean having access thereto, but
which may require the removal of an access panel, door or similar obstruction without damaging the structure or finish.
ACCESSIBLE, READILY: When applied to a fixture, connection, appliance or equipment shall mean having direct
access without the necessity to remove an access panel, door or similar obstruction.
APPROVED: Approval by the city of Elko as the result of investigation and tests conducted by the city of Elko, or by
reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
GATE OR DOOR: A single movable panel that swings or hinges, rotates or slides used for entrance into or closing off
an opening in the required barrier.
HEALTH DISTRICT: Department of human resources, Nevada state health division hereinafter "health authority".
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 141/640
LISTED AND LISTING: Equipment or materials included in a list published by an approved testing laboratory,
inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of current
productions of listed equipment or materials. The published list shall state that the material or equipment complies with
approved nationally recognized codes, standards or tests and has been tested or evaluated and found suitable for use
in a specified manner.
MANUFACTURED: A pool or spa that is manufactured or constructed at another location, transported to the property,
and placed and/or assembled at the property.
NORMAL OPERATING WATER LEVEL: The overflow point on overflow gutters or the midpoint in the throat of
skimmers.
POOL: See definition of Swimming Pool.
POOL DEPTH: The distance between the lowest point of the pool floor and the normal operating water level.
PORTABLE POOL (NONPERMANENTLY INSTALLED POOL): A pool that may be readily disassembled for storage
and reassembled to its original integrity, and is not permanently attached to plumbing or electrical services.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL OR SPA: All artificially constructed swimming pools or spas which are used in conjunction
with and appurtenant to a single-family residence, and available only to the family of the residence or their private
guests.
PUBLIC POOL OR SPA: Any swimming pool or spa, other than a private pool or spa, which is intended to be used for
swimming or bathing, and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire regardless of whether
a fee is charged for use.
SLIP RESISTANT: A surface that has been so treated or constructed as to significantly reduce the chance of a user
slipping when wet.
SPA: A permanently installed artificial body of water in excess of twenty four inches (24") in depth designed for
recreation or therapeutic use that is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each individual user.
STAIR, RECESSED TREAD, LADDER: A means of entry and exit to and from the pool or spa that may be used in
conjunction with each other.
Ladder: A series of vertically separated treads or rungs connected by vertical rail members or independently
fastened to an adjacent vertical wall.
Recessed Tread: A series of vertically spaced cavities in the pool or spa wall creating tread areas for step holes.
Stair: A riser/tread or series of risers/treads extending down from the deck into the pool/spa area.
SWIMMING POOL: A permanently installed artificial body of water in excess of twenty four inches (24") in depth which
includes all equipment necessary for its use.
WASTEWATER: Water from filter cleansing, draining of a pool or spa, or lowering of the water level in a pool or spa.
WATERSCAPE: Any structure that is used in conjunction with and appurtenant with a swimming pool or spa (i.e.,
waterfalls, creeks, caves, fountains, rock structures, etc.).
WIDTH OR LENGTH: The actual dimension taken at the maximum location from inner wall to inner wall at the normal
operating water level of a pool or spa. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be known as the swimming pool and spa code of the city of Elko, hereinafter "code".
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 142/640
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction, alterations, or reconstruction, except as provided for
otherwise in this chapter. All new construction, alterations, or reconstruction of swimming pools and spas in the city
shall comply with this chapter, in addition to any other applicable provisions or amendments set forth by the Elko city
council through resolution or ordinance, which include, but are not limited to, the latest edition of the uniform
mechanical code, uniform plumbing code, national electrical code, and international energy conservation code adopted
by the city.
A. The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to
the prescribed extent of each such reference. In the event of differences between the provisions of this chapter and
the referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
B. Spas, whether permanent or portable, are regulated under the provisions of the national electrical code and the
uniform plumbing code. Electrical and plumbing permits are required when any spa is permanently attached to
electrical or plumbing services.
C. In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, public swimming pools, wading pools and spas, designed for
full or partial human submersion and open to the public must be constructed in compliance with the Nevada
administrative code chapter 444, sanitation. In the event that conflicts between this chapter and those regulations
occur, the most restrictive condition will apply.
D. No person shall construct or proceed with the construction of, or add to, enlarge, alter, or cause the same to be
done to any swimming pool or spa, without first obtaining a building permit in the manner as required, and upon the
payment of fees and under the conditions as set forth in this chapter or other applicable codes or provisions set
forth by the Elko city council.
E. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, which are less than twenty four inches (24")
deep, do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons and are installed entirely aboveground are exempt from permits.
Electrical and plumbing permits are required when any pool is permanently attached to electrical or plumbing
services. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-4: TO WHOM PERMITS MAY BE ISSUED:
Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any of the following persons:
A. To a person holding an appropriate valid Nevada state contractor's license (A-10) and an appropriate valid city of
Elko business license. If a contract provides for the construction of a swimming pool or spa, the prime contractor on
the project must hire a properly licensed A-10 contractor to perform the construction of the swimming pool or spa.
B. To an owner of property who is installing a residential pool on the property for his own use and not intended for sale
or lease within one year after its completion.
Note: The city of Elko requires that all general and subcontractors must maintain a valid Nevada state contractor's
license and an appropriate valid city of Elko business license. Any company or individual that bids work, not hired
on an hourly basis by a licensed contractor, must be licensed as stated above. The city of Elko shall require a
complete list of all contractors prior to the issuance of the building permit and request an update at any time until
the certificate of completion is issued. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-5: PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Plot plans dimensioned and drawn to a reasonable scale and showing at least the following:
1. Property lines, easements, right of way of record, and overhead utilities.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 143/640
2. Existing structures, fences, retaining walls, irregular grades (2 to 1 slope or greater), and other relevant
characteristics adjacent to the pool/spa or waterscape area. Whenever the water line of the pool/waterscape is
less than five feet (5') from a property line or a structure a detailed cross section will be required showing at least
the following:
a. Grade to property line/structure.
b. Design and location of footings for structure, fence/retaining wall, house, etc.
c. Grade of adjacent property.
d. Pool wall, raised bond beam, spa, waterfall, etc.
3. The proposed pool/spa or waterscape shape and type, dimensioned and located to show setbacks, side yards
and clearances from existing structures adjacent to the pool/spa or waterscape area.
4. The proposed mechanical equipment pad dimensioned location in relation to setbacks and side yards.
5. All diving and deck equipment items if included.
6. The proposed deck work configuration showing its anticipated drainage.
B. A structural working plan showing at least the following:
1. Type Of Construction: The type of construction.
2. Dimensions: The pool/spa or waterscape dimensions, including the depth, surface area, and adequate cross
sections drawn to scale.
3. Correctness Of Plans: Computations, stress diagrams, and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the
plans, including the reinforcing steel schedule and detail, if applicable.
4. Contractor's Structural Calculations: Contractor's structural calculations (stamped and signed by a properly
registered design professional) for pool, spas, spa dam walls, raised bond beams, surcharges within five feet (5')
of structures or property lines, waterscape and all other unusual conditions.
Note: The structural calculations are to be used to substantiate the drawings not to replace them; separate
detailed drawings are required.
5. Drawings: Detailed working drawings of the items listed in subsection B4 of this section, which shall be stamped
and signed by the design professional of record and show:
a. Plan view.
b. Cross sections.
c. Reinforcing steel size.
d. Reinforcing steel spacing.
e. Thickness of walls.
6. International Code Council Evaluation Service: Premanufactured pools or spas must include copies of the
applicable International Code Council evaluation services report.
C. A mechanical plan showing at least the following:
1. The volume, system flow rate in gallons per minute (GPMs) and turnover in hours (see section 2-11-8 of this
chapter).
2. The type and size of filtration system and the means of waste disposal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 144/640
3. The type and size of the pool heater, including the method of venting and provisions for combustion air, if
applicable.
4. A pool piping schedule listing the types of materials and size of materials being used, and showing the location of
the main outlets, surface skimmers, and inlets.
5. The means of adding make up water.
6. The size, length, material and routing of the gas line from source to heater, if applicable.
7. All underground installation of plumbing lines to include water supply, drain, vacuum and circulating lines and gas
piping systems shall be installed on a minimum three inch (3") base with four inch (4") cover of clean sand.
D. An electrical plan showing at least the following:
1. The size and location of the existing electrical service.
Note: An electrical load calculation will be required if the size of the main electrical service is less than two
hundred (200) amp or two (2) or more pumps are installed.
2. Indicate the type and size of conduit and size of conductors.
Note: For plans provided by a contractor: If a contractor chooses to draw his own plans, in a prominent location,
on the front sheet of each principal's plans, the contractor needs to properly sign taking responsibility for the
design. Each signature must be an original, copies will not be accepted. Plans may be copied, but the signature
still needs to be an original. The following information is required to be placed on the front sheet for each principal
of each set of plans:
A. The contractor company name.
B. State contractor number.
C. State license classification held.
D. State license limit.
E. The name of person who prepared the drawings.
F. Original signature of person who prepared the drawings.
The primary contractor may sign the cover/front sheet for the entire set of plans. This does not include the
site plan sheet; this sheet would need to be signed separately. The electrical, mechanical and plumbing
contractors need to sign the first sheet of the sections he/she drew.
Note: For plans prepared by an owner/builder: If an owner/builder draws the plans, the plans shall be so identified
with the following information on the site plan and front sheet of each set of plans:
A. Printed name of owner who prepared drawings.
B. Original signature of owner who prepared drawings.
C. Statement "owner/builder" underneath signature. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 145/640
2-11-6: SITE WORK:
A. Excavation: Excavations shall be so constructed or protected that they do not endanger life or property. Temporary
barricades shall be maintained in place and kept in good order until permanent barriers are installed. It shall be the
responsibility of the contractor or owner to verify property line locations prior to excavation.
B. Equipment Clearances: All electrical equipment clearances shall comply with requirements specified per national
electrical code and manufacturer's listing guidelines. A twenty four inch (24") access path is required to all pool and
existing mechanical equipment. Equipment shall be mounted on a permanent, secure wall, fence or other approved
structure.
C. Equipment: The equipment slab shall not be in contact with the foundation system of a property line structure.
Equipment shall be installed with adequate drainage. Equipment in vaults or pits shall have automatic means to
drain water. Equipment shall be installed in accordance with the currently adopted codes, listing requirements and
the manufacturer's installation instructions. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-7: ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION:
All electrical installations, modifications, repairs or alterations of pools and spas shall conform to the provisions of the
currently adopted national electrical code and local amendments.
A. Pool And Spa Lighting: Pools and spas shall be equipped with lighting that illuminates the entire bottom and volume,
and may be an underwater or overhead type. Underwater lighting shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) watt or
equivalent lumens per square foot of water surface area. Overhead lights shall be a minimum of two (2) watts or
equivalent lumens per square foot of water surface area and shall be protected from breakage of any glass parts.
Optical fiber lighting used for pool and spa lighting shall be installed in accordance with their listing and labeling.
B. Area Lighting Of Public Pools And Spas: Area lighting shall be provided to illuminate the surface areas of the pool
deck and spa deck. The lights shall be a minimum of six-tenths (6/10) watt or equivalent lumens per square foot of
deck area.
C. Disconnecting Means: Time clocks are not permitted as a means of disconnect for motors unless listed or approved
by the city of Elko.
D. Load Calculations: Electrical load calculations will be required for any pool, spa, or combination that utilizes more
than one pump motor or if the size of the main electrical service is less than two hundred (200) amp. This is
required to verify that the existing electrical system is adequate for the additional loads being added.
E. Conductor Feeder, Overcurrent Protection And Grounding: All pool panels shall have a minimum no. 10 AWG wire
feeder and a thirty (30) ampere breaker with an insulated ground wire to the existing panel. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008;
amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-8: PLUMBING INSTALLATION:
Plumbing installation, modification, repair or alteration of a pool or spa shall conform to the currently adopted plumbing
code and the additional following requirements:
A. Water Quality: All water treatment, filtration and recirculation devices, and hydraulic lines and systems shall be
approved by the health authority for a public pool or spa per Nevada administrative code 444.100 prior to permit
issuance. Water features designed for full or partial human submersion open to the public shall be reviewed and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 146/640
approved by the health authority per Nevada administrative code 444.100 prior to permit issuance. Water quality in
water features which do not come in contact with the public and private pools and spas shall be maintained in such
a manner that a nuisance is not created pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 40.140.
B. Heating Equipment: Heating equipment shall conform to the provisions of the currently adopted mechanical,
plumbing and electrical codes. Installation of such equipment shall be according to the manufacturer's instructions
and listing. Heating equipment shall be located on a minimum three inch (3") thick pad of concrete or other
approved material. The top of the pad shall be a minimum of three inches (3") above adjacent grade and shall be
appropriately sized to accommodate all equipment. Alternate locations, such as vaults or pits, are subject to the city
of Elko approval. When pool or spa water heating equipment is installed with a full way type shutoff valve between
the outlet of the heater and the pool or spa, an approved pressure relief valve shall be installed on the discharge
side of the water heating equipment. Vents shall terminate with clearances as follows:
1. A minimum of four feet (4') below; or one foot (1') above; or four feet (4') horizontally from a door, an operable
window or a gravity air inlet into a building.
2. A minimum of three feet (3') above a forced air inlet that is within ten feet (10') of the vent.
3. A minimum of four feet (4') from a property line, except a public way.
4. Vents shall terminate per the manufacturer's listing.
C. Underground Installation: Underground installation of plumbing lines to include water supply, drain, vacuum and
circulating lines and gas piping systems shall be installed on a minimum three inch (3") base and four inch (4")
cover of clean sand in place at time of inspection.
D. Water Piping: Swimming pools and spas shall use approved type "L" copper or approved PVC pipe of a minimum
schedule 40 PVC meeting the NSF PW-14 standard or equal. PVC pipe shall be bent using heat by thermostatically
controlled equipment. All plastic pipe exposed to sunlight shall be protected with an approved tape wrapping or
paint. Water piping shall be pressure tested at twenty (20) psi for fifteen (15) minutes.
E. Gas Piping: Natural gas piping systems shall conform to the provisions of the currently adopted plumbing code. All
other approved systems shall be tested at sixty (60) psi for thirty (30) minutes. Liquefied petroleum gas piping
systems shall conform to the provisions of the NFPA 54. Threaded ferrous metal gas pipe systems shall be
pressure tested at ten (10) psi for fifteen (15) minutes.
F. Water Supply: Pools and spas shall have water directly supplied through a water supply inlet. The water supply inlet
for public pools shall comply with the health authority standards. The water supply inlet on private pools shall be
protected by a one inch (1") air gap or approved backflow protection device. A positive point of potable water supply
to each swimming pool shall be established and shall be installed with a reduced pressure principle backflow
assembly.
1. Exception: Private pools and spas may be provided with a water supply consisting of an approved backflow
protection device (vacuum breaker) located on the discharge side of the last valve or a sill cock (hose bib) from
which a water hose may be attached.
G. Wastewater: Wastewater from pools and spas shall be discharged to the public sewer through a permanently
installed waste line. Wastewater shall not be discharged to a septic tank. No direct connection shall be made
between any storm sewer, storm drain, sanitary sewer, drainage system, drywell or subsoil irrigation line and any
line connected to a swimming pool or spa. The permanently installed waste line shall discharge through an air gap
waste connection of the following type: an approved interceptor; a sand trap which is vented and provided with a
cleanout on the discharge side; or a "P" trap of a minimum size of three inches (3"). The air gap shall be at least
twice the effective diameter at the pipe, or if the pipe is affected by sidewalls, at least three (3) times the effective
diameter of the pipe. In no case shall an air gap separation be less than one inch (1").
1. Exception: If a public sewer service is not available, the city of Elko may authorize the wastewater to be
discharged aboveground and used for irrigation purposes. The wastewater shall not be allowed to drain to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 147/640
adjacent properties or the public way. This authorization may be revoked if a hazardous, nuisance or unsanitary
condition occurs.
2. Exception: For private pools and spas, a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") hose connection may be used as
a waste line.
H. Entrapment Avoidance: The suction inlet for pool and spa cleaning systems shall be protected against user
entrapment by installation of an antivortex cover. A minimum of two (2) suction inlets shall be provided in the
suction system. Separation of such inlets shall be a minimum of three feet (3') on the horizontal plane, or located on
two (2) different planes. (For example: 1 on the bottom and 1 on a vertical plane, 1 each on 2 separate walls, or 1
skimmer and 1 main drain on the same suction line.) The suction outlets shall be plumbed so water is drawn
simultaneously without valves, through the inlets to a common line to the pump system.
I. Filtering And Recirculation: Pools and spas shall be equipped with a filtering and recirculation system. Equipment
shall be mounted on a minimum three inch (3") thick pad of concrete or other approved materials. The pad shall be
a minimum of three inches (3") above adjacent grade and sized to accommodate all equipment. All equipment shall
be listed by a recognized testing agency for the appropriate use. The circulation system shall provide a complete
turnover of water within the time frame specified below:
Public pool 6 hours
Private pool 12 hours
Public spa 0.5 hour
Private spa 1 hour
Filter, circulation systems, scum gutters and skimmers that are located in public pools and spas shall conform to the
health authority regulations. Inlets for fresh or repurified water in all pools and spas shall be located to produce uniform
circulation of water throughout the entire pool or spa.
J. Over Sewer Lines: Swimming pools or inground spas shall not be constructed over a sewer line, unless the sewer
line is of cast iron material and prior approval from the city of Elko is obtained.
K. Septic Systems: All swimming pool and spa water filter and circulation piping within twenty five feet (25') of a septic
system shall conform to the health authority regulations. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-9: STRUCTURAL DESIGN AND INSTALLATION:
A. General: Pools and spas shall be constructed of reinforced concrete conforming to the currently adopted codes or
as approved by the building official. If groundwater is present, a hydrostatic valve or other approved means shall be
installed at the lowest point. Approved, listed manufactured pools and spas shall be installed in accordance with
manufacturer's installation instructions and their listing. Any changes or modifications to listed manufactured pools,
spas and waterscape shall require the submittal of plans to the city of Elko for approval. All plans submitted shall be
properly stamped and signed by a properly licensed state of Nevada registered design professional. (Ord. 696, 5-
27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
B. Concrete And Steel Reinforcement: Concrete and steel reinforcement of concrete pools and spas shall be designed
by a properly licensed state of Nevada registered design professional. The minimum design strength of the
concrete shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds per square inch unless otherwise approved by the
design professional (special inspections as per section 1704 of the 2009 international building code will not be
mandatory unless noted by the design professional). The continuity of a bond beam shall not be interrupted for the
installation of skimmers or similar apparatus. Reinforcing steel shall be continuous around the apparatus to tie in
with the remainder of the bond beam. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011; Ord. 723, 2-8-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 148/640
C. Walls And Floors: The materials used in pool and spa wall and floor construction shall conform to the provisions of
the currently adopted building code. Walls and floors shall be designed and constructed of nonabsorbent material in
a manner to be leakproof and structurally sound under all the conditions of the site. The inner surface of the pool or
spa shall be coved, rounded, or bullnosed at all joints, corners, angles of bases, walls, floors, or curbs. No sharp
corners or projections shall be permitted.
D. Entry/Egress:
1. Pools and spas with a depth greater than two feet (2') at pool walls shall be provided with a means of
entry/egress. Pools exceeding thirty feet (30') in width or length shall have egress provided on opposite ends of
those sides greater than thirty feet (30'). A seat meeting the requirements of subsection E2 of this section shall be
considered as a second means of egress.
2. An entry/egress for a pool or spa shall be constructed to minimize hazards and consist of a ladder, stairs, or
recessed treads or an alternate method approved by the city of Elko. The ladder, stairs or recessed treads shall
comply with the following requirements, respectively:
a. Ladder: Ladders shall be of a corrosion resistant material and be provided with two (2) handholds or handrails.
Ladder treads shall have a uniform vertical spacing of seven inches (7") minimum and twelve inches (12")
maximum. Vertical spacing variation within each ladder shall not exceed one inch (1"). Treads shall have a
minimum horizontal depth of one and one-half inches (11/2"). The top tread of the ladder shall be a maximum
of twelve inches (12") below the coping, deck or exterior edge of the pool or spa.
b. Stairs/Steps: Stairs/steps shall have a slip resistant surface and rounded corners. Public pools shall have a
maximum riser height of ten inches (10") with a minimum horizontal tread depth of twelve inches (12"). Riser
height variation within each stair shall not exceed one inch (1"). (Note: The distance from the bottom of the pool
to the bottom step shall not be considered a riser.) Private pools, spas and waterscape may have a maximum
riser height of twelve inches (12") with a minimum horizontal tread depth of twelve inches (12"). Riser height
variation within each stair shall not exceed one inch (1"). The distance from the bottom of the pool to the
bottom step shall not be considered a riser.
c. Recessed Treads: Recessed treads shall be provided with a set of handrails or handholds to serve all treads
and risers. Recessed treads shall have a uniform vertical spacing of seven inches (7") minimum and twelve
inches (12") maximum. Recessed treads shall have a minimum depth of five inches (5") and a minimum width
of twelve inches (12"). The uppermost tread shall be a maximum of twelve inches (12") below the coping, deck
or exterior edge of the pool or spa.
E. Deck, Seat Or Handholds: Pools and spas greater than three feet (3') in water depth shall be provided with a deck
made of a slip resistant material or alternate method as approved by the city of Elko. Manmade decorative
waterscape and planters behind a rolled bond beam may interrupt the deck. In these cases seats or handholds may
be used for safety and emergency provisions, and shall be a maximum of every four feet (4') around the perimeter
of the pool or spa. The deck, seat or handholds shall comply with the following requirements, respectively:
1. Deck: The deck shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") wide and slope one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot away from
pool, property lines and house footings. The deck shall be placed a maximum of twelve inches (12") above the
normal operating water level to qualify as a handhold. Public pools and spas shall have a minimum deck width of
four feet (4'). Decks shall be sloped to effectively drain to either deck drains or perimeter areas away from the
pool or spa.
2. Seat: An underwater seat, bench or swim out shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") long and a maximum of
twenty four inches (24") below the water surface.
3. Handhold: A handhold shall consist of any of the following:
a. A continuous coping, ledge or handhold shall be a minimum width of three inches (3") and placed a maximum
of twelve inches (12") above the water surface or no greater than four inches (4") below water level. Individual
handholds must be at least six inches (6") in length and one and one-half inches (11/2") in depth. Attachment
must be made by an approved listed waterproof epoxy.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 149/640
b. A permanently secured rope of a minimum diameter of three- fourths inch (3/4") or a railing of one and onefourth
inches (11/4") to two inches (2") in diameter placed at a maximum of twelve inches (12") above the water
surface.
c. Ladders, steps or recessed treads complying with subsection D, "Entry/Egress", of this section.
F. Site Drainage: Site drainage shall be provided to direct all perimeter deck drainage, general site and roof drainage
away from the pool, spa and adjacent buildings and structures. Deck drains must terminate a minimum of twenty
four inches (24") from the foundation of any structure.
G. Diving Boards/Slides: Pools equipped with diving boards or slides shall be engineered and designed to comply with
standards such as ANSI/NSPI-1 required by the National Spa And Pool Institute. Slides shall be installed per
manufacturer's listing. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-10: SETBACKS AND CLEARANCES:
A. Location: Inground pools and spas shall not be placed closer than five feet (5') to any building or structure. An
exception may be permitted when justification is provided by a Nevada licensed structural or civil engineer that no
damage will occur to buildings, structures or adjacent properties and that no unsafe structural conditions will exist.
Inground pools and spas shall not encroach within public utility or drainage easements.
B. Overhead Electrical Conductor Clearances: Conductor clearances shall conform to the provisions of the currently
adopted national electrical code and local amendments. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-11: ACCESSIBILITY AND SAFETY:
A. Access Barrier Required: Pools and spas in excess of twenty four inches (24") in depth shall comply with the
requirements of this code.
1. Exception: Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to group R-3 occupancy, which are less than twenty four
inches (24") deep, do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons and are installed entirely aboveground.
2. Exception: Spa with an approved lockable cover in the closed position meeting the most recent addition of ASTM
standard F1 346, or equal, requiring structural support capacity of two hundred seventy five (275) pounds.
B. Access Barrier Construction Requirements: Access barriers shall comply with the following:
1. The top of the barrier shall not be less than sixty inches (60") in height above adjacent grade measured from
outside the enclosed area. The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be four
inches (4") maximum.
2. Wrought iron fence with open guardrails shall have intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern such that a sphere
four inches (4") in diameter cannot pass. Horizontal support members shall be spaced a minimum of thirty two
inches (32") apart and shall comply with subsection A of this section.
3. Mixed use of masonry and wrought iron walls shall comply with all of the following:
a. Masonry or wrought iron portion of the wall shall be a minimum of thirty two inches (32") in height.
b. Wrought iron portion of the wall shall comply with subsections B1 and B2 of this section with a maximum of two
(2) horizontal members, one near the top of the masonry wall (maximum of 4 inches above top of wall) and one
a minimum of sixty inches (60") above grade.
c. Chainlink fences shall have approved slats installed.
d. Public pools and spas shall comply with the health authority requirements.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 150/640
C. Gates Or Doors: All gates or doors eight feet (8') in width or less shall be self-closing and self-latching. Gates shall
open outward. The self-latching device for gates shall be mounted inside the enclosed area and be designed to be
inoperable from outside the enclosed area. Such devices shall be mounted at a minimum of forty eight inches (48")
above grade and not less than six inches (6") nor more than twelve inches (12") below the top of the door or gate.
The devices shall be inaccessible from outside the enclosed area for a distance of twenty inches (20") in all
directions from the latch except that opening not greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") diameter shall be permitted.
Access barrier gates not required to be self-closing and self-latching shall be equipped with protected self-latching,
lockable hardware and shall remain locked at all times when not in use.
Single access gates and doors integral to fences shall comply with the requirements of subsection B1 of this
section and have latching devices capable of keeping the door or gate securely closed and latched.
Double gates used to close an opening shall be permanently locked. If the double gates are the only access to the
protected area, one gate shall be pinned and locked in the closed position and the adjoining gate must be selfclosing
and self-latching.
Key operated, self-latching locks that are integral to the gate or door may be used as latching devices, so long as
they are permanently locked from the outside and comply with the above installation requirements.
D. Private Pool And Spa Safety Requirements: One of the following shall be used:
1. Door Devices: Self-closing and self-latching devices installed on all doors with direct access to the pool with the
release mechanism located a minimum of fifty four inches (54") above the floor.
2. Alarm System: Residential dwelling units that do not have a separate pool or spa enclosure barrier shall have an
alarm installed on all doors with direct access to the pool. The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of
thirty (30) seconds within seven (7) seconds after the door and its screen, if present, are opened, and be capable
of providing a sound pressure level of not less than eighty five (85) dB when measured indoors at ten feet (10').
The alarm shall automatically reset under all conditions. The alarm shall be equipped with a manual means, such
as a touch pad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a single opening. The deactivation switch shall
be located at least fifty four inches (54") above the threshold of the door.
3. Laser Or Light Beam: A laser or light beam perimeter alarm that provides an active beam barrier around the total
perimeter or isolates the pool or spa may be used. The laser or light beam must have an adjustable height
capability and sound an alarm of at least eighty five (85) dB both inside and outside of the home when the beam
is crossed. The alarm must automatically reset after alarming. The alarm shall meet ASTM's provisional standard
specifications for pool alarms (PS 128-01) and be UL listed.
4. Addition Barriers: Addition barriers that isolate the dwelling from the pool shall be a minimum forty eight inches
(48") in height through which a four inch (4") sphere will not pass. Any gate shall be self-closing and self-latching
per subsection D1 of this section.
Exception: Latching mechanisms may be installed on the exterior side of the gate if it is installed at least fifty four
inches (54") above finished grade.
5. Power Safety Covers: Power safety covers meeting ASTM F1 346-1.
6. Other Means: When approved by the city of Elko, other means of protection may be acceptable so long as the
degree of protection afforded is not less than that afforded by any of the devices described above.
E. Safety Glazing: Glazing in walls and fences within five feet (5') of the water's edge measured horizontally and less
than sixty inches (60") measured vertically above grade shall be considered hazardous locations. In these
locations, tempered glazing, laminated glass or plexiglas shall be used.
F. Barrier Timeliness: All required access barrier elements shall be in place prior to:
1. Setting a manufactured pool or spa.
2. The preplaster inspection of a conventionally constructed pool or spa.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 151/640
3. The filling with water of artificial bodies of water.
G. Surveillance Substitute: For resort hotel type facilities only; in lieu of access barriers required above for swimming
pools or spas, a pool guard may be provided so that observation is maintained at all times or an alternate method
submitted in writing and approved by the city of Elko. Such submittal shall become a permanent part of the job
record.
H. Responsible Party: The owner of the property upon which pools, spas or artificial bodies of water are located are
responsible to establish and maintain access barriers. The owner or developer of land adjacent to an access barrier
required by this section shall not reduce, degrade, or infringe on the access barrier's compliance with this code.
I. Alternative Plans Or Devices: Written alternative plans or devices for access barriers shall be submitted to the city of
Elko. If approved by the city of Elko, the owner remains responsible for establishing and maintaining such approved
alternate methods. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-12: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
The fire department shall have the authority to require the stored water in a swimming pool and spa to be available
through standard fire department approved connections for fire protection purposes when deemed necessary by the
current fire code adopted by the city and/or unique design, location, type and use of the residence or facility as
determined by the fire chief. (Ord. 696, 5-27-2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-11-13: CHEMICALS:
Commercial pools and spas that utilize chemicals such as chlorine, must post on the exterior of the door where
chemicals are stored and/or mixed, and further provide generic mix bucket or container with common name of
chemical, mix percentages contained within, and health risk hazard per NFPA standard UN identifiers. (Ord. 696, 5-27-
2008; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 12
STREET NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
2-12-1: STREET ADDRESSES FOR APARTMENT COMPLEXES:
Every person owning any apartment complex, or the agent thereof, shall, within thirty (30) days after the effective date
hereof, and within thirty (30) days after the completion of a new apartment complex, place or cause to be placed the
number of its street address on the complex in such a manner that the police, fire department and other persons
responding to an emergency can readily locate individual dwelling units within the complex. The number shall be three
inches (3") high, or higher. As used in this section, "apartment complex" means a building or group of buildings, each
building of which is arranged in several suites of connecting rooms, each suite designed for independent
housekeeping. (Ord. 420, 2-11-1992; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-12-2: MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
Every person owning any mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, or the agent thereof, shall, within thirty (30)
days after the effective date hereof, and within thirty (30) days after the completion of a new mobile home park or
recreational vehicle park, place or cause to be placed the number of each space on each space in such a manner that
the police, fire department and other persons responding to an emergency can readily locate individual spaces within
the park. The number shall be three inches (3") high, or higher. (Ord. 420, 2-11-1992; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 152/640
2-12-3: COMMERCIAL SHOPPING CENTERS:
Every person owning a commercial shopping center, or the agent thereof, shall, within thirty (30) days after the
effective date hereof, and within thirty (30) days after completion of any new commercial shopping center, place or
cause to be placed a number identifying that business on the back door of each business in the shopping center in
such a manner that the police, fire department and other persons responding to an emergency can readily locate the
business within the shopping center. The number shall be three inches (3") high, or higher. (Ord. 420, 2-11-1992; amd.
Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
2-12-4: STATE OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION BUILDINGS:
Every state or political subdivision owning any building shall, within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, and
within thirty (30) days after the completion of any new building, place the number of its street address on the front of
the building in such a manner that the police, fire department and other persons responding to an emergency can
readily locate the building. The number shall be three inches (3") high, or higher. (Ord. 420, 2-11-1992; amd. Ord. 721,
2-8-2011)
2-12-5: BUILDINGS USED FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES:
Every person, or the agent thereof, owning any building which is used for commercial purposes shall, within thirty (30)
days after the effective date hereof, and within thirty (30) days after the completion of any new building built for a
commercial purpose, place the number of its street address on the front of the building in such a manner that the
police, fire department and other persons responding to an emergency can readily locate the building. The number
shall be three inches (3") high, or higher. (Ord. 420, 2-11-1992; amd. Ord. 721, 2-8-2011)
Chapter 13
SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS
2-13-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter install, construct, or lay, or cause to be installed, constructed or laid, any
sidewalk or sidewalks, curb or gutter within the street lines of the city without first obtaining a permit authorizing the
same from the city council, to be issued by its authorized agent; and it shall also be unlawful for any person to
construct, install or lay any sidewalk, curb or gutter for any other person until such person shall have first obtained a
permit permitting the same from the city council, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 787, 8-26-2014)
2-13-2: PLANS TO BE APPROVED:
Any sidewalk, curb or gutter hereafter constructed within the street lines of the city by any person shall be constructed
in strict compliance with specifications and plans and upon grades and lines to be approved by the city council or its
duly authorized engineer. (Ord. 787, 8-26-2014)
2-13-3: SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION:
A. Required; Exception: Except as otherwise provided in this section, sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be required on
all vacant lots or parcels of land which are hereafter developed; or upon lots or parcels of land which are merged or
divided; or developed lots or parcels of land involving a change in building occupancy and use of land; or upon
which any building expansion or new construction shall take place involving the addition of gross floor area greater
than four hundred (400) square feet; or when a change of use results in a measurable increase in pedestrian or
vehicular traffic; provided, however, that upon the request of the city development department or application by a
property owner, tenant, lessee or a contractor duly authorized to represent said property owner and for cause
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 153/640
shown, the city council may waive all or part of, the requirement for the installation of the above described
improvements.
B. Request To Waive Requirements By Development Department: Any request by the city development department to
waive all or part of the requirement to install curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be based on the following criteria: 1) the
presence or proposed installation of other substantially equivalent or superior improvements in the vicinity of the lot
or parcel of land, 2) conditions on the lot or parcel of land affecting the practicability of installing the curb, gutter and
sidewalk and 3) any other factors deemed by the city development department to be appropriate grounds for
waiving any or all of the foregoing requirements relative to the installation of curb, gutter and sidewalk.
C. Request To Waive Requirements By Property Owner: Any application to waive all or part of the requirement to install
curb, gutter and sidewalk by a property owner, tenant, lessee or contractor duly authorized to represent said
property owner: 1) shall be based on evidence that it is impractical to install curb, gutter and sidewalk because of
circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the applicant and 2) shall include a filing fee paid to the city in an
amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 787, 8-26-2014)
2-13-4: SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR:
A. Responsibility Of Property Owners: It is the responsibility of all property owners in the city to maintain a sidewalk in
a public right of way that abuts the owner's property within the street lines of the city. The responsibility imposed is
that of a reasonable person and is not a duty greater than imposed by common law duty. Furthermore, this section
is not intended and cannot be relied upon to define the standard of care in any civil action for negligence or for the
establishment of negligence per se for its violation.
B. Standards: Except as otherwise provided in this code, all sections of the city sidewalks shall be of concrete cement
with a minimum of four inches (4") depth and a minimum of four feet (4') in width. Wherever any sidewalk has been
constructed under the authority of any former ordinance in any manner other than in accordance with the existing
lines and grades, sidewalks for the remaining properties in the same block shall be so constructed that uniformity of
line and grade may be maintained.
C. Reconstruction And Repair:
1. The city may require the reconstruction and repair of sidewalks in the following circumstances:
a. Imposing an assessment or other charge authorized by law for any reconstruction or repair of a sidewalk that
the governing body causes to be performed within a public right of way;
b. Requiring any reconstruction or repair of a sidewalk as a condition of approval for a change in the use of the
land;
c. The repair and reconstruction of a sidewalk in the public right of way that abuts the property of the owner if the
owner caused the need for such repair or reconstruction.
2. Any sidewalk ordered repaired or reconstructed by the city council shall be repaired or reconstructed by the
owners of the property which abut upon the sidewalk. The property owner shall complete said reconstruction and
repair, within a time period not to exceed ninety (90) days during the city construction season.
D. Failure: Failure of the owner to complete the sidewalk improvements as required within the time limits designated
shall be considered an infraction of this code and, upon conviction of such infraction, the municipal court may
impose any injunctive relief or fine of a civil nature as may be allowed by this code or laws of the state. (Ord. 787, 8-
26-2014)
2-13-5: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in title 1,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 154/640
chapter 3 of this code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
787, 8-26-2014)
Title 3
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
RESERVED
Chapter 2
GENERAL ZONING ORDINANCE
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the ELKO ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings indicated. Words used in the present
tense include the future tense; words in the singular include the plural, and vice versa. The word "shall" is always
mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. The word "persons" includes an association, firm, partnership or
corporation, as well as an individual. The word "occupied" and the word "used" shall be considered as meaning the
same as the words "intended", "arranged" or "designed to be used or occupied". The word "dwelling" includes the word
"residence"; the word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel".
ABUTTING: The condition of two (2) adjoining properties having a common property line or boundary, including cases
where two (2) or more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners, but not including cases where adjoining lots are
separated by a street or alley.
ADJOINING, ADJACENT: The condition of being near to or close to, but not necessarily having a common dividing
line; e.g., two (2) properties which are separated only by a street or alley shall be considered as adjoining one another.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: For the purposes of this chapter, means an establishment which merchandises printed material
or movies which are intended to appeal to the prurient interests of the reader.
ADULT CARE FACILITY: An establishment that furnishes food, shelter, assistance and limited supervision only during
the day to unrelated person(s) with an intellectual disability or with a physical disability who is aged or infirm.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A motion picture theater whose program, during the time of its operation,
contains one (1) or more motion pictures which are rated "X" by the code rating administration of the Motion Picture
Association of America or are not rated, and whose program is intended to appeal to the prurient interests of the
viewer.
AGRICULTURE: The practice of cultivating the soil, producing crops and raising livestock.
ALLEY: A. A street or highway within a City block set apart for public use, vehicular traffic and local convenience;
B. A street or highway which primarily furnishes access to the rear entrances of abutting property.
AWNING: An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is partially or wholly
supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight frame structure over which a
covering is attached.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 155/640
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and used for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, personal property or chattels of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building on the same lot with a principal building or use, the use of which is
customarily accessory and incidental to the main use of the principal building or use. When attached to the principal
building, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building for purposes of setback and yard
regulations.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the building.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: Qualified employee of the City of Elko Building Department delegated to do building
inspections and enforce applicable portions of this Code.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building, or where the context so indicates, a group of buildings, within which is conducted
the principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.
CAMPING: The use of real property owned or occupied by another person for living accommodation purposes outside
of a structure that is affixed to the ground, to include uses such as, without limitation, the following when done in
connection with outdoor living: a) overnight sleeping activities or making preparations to sleep overnight outside of a
motor vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer, such as the laying down of bedding on the ground for the purpose of
sleeping overnight; b) storing personal belongings outside of a structure in connection with overnight sleeping
activities; c) cooking outdoors or making a fire for the purpose of cooking food outdoors as approved by the City; or d)
using any tent, shelter or other mobile structure for sleeping overnight. "Camping" does not include using a motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer as long-term shelter, for living accommodation purposes or for the purpose of
storage of belongings.
CARPORT: An accessory building, attached or detached, having two (2) or more open sides, used by occupants of the
principal building for automobile shelter or storage.
CHILDCARE CENTER: A childcare facility providing care for more than twelve (12) children.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: An establishment operated and maintained for the purpose of furnishing care on a temporary
or permanent basis during the day or overnight, to five (5) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age, if
compensation is received for the care of any of those children and provided that such establishment is licensed by the
State and operated in accordance with State requirements.
CHILDCARE FAMILY HOME: A childcare facility providing care for not less than five (5) children and not more than six
(6) children.
CHILDCARE GROUP HOME: A childcare facility providing care for not less than seven (7) children and not more than
twelve (12) children.
CLINIC: A building, or part thereof, in which ambulatory patients are provided diagnostic, therapeutic or preventative
medical, surgical, dental or optical treatment by a group of doctors acting jointly, but not providing for overnight
residence of patients.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within
the site designated for planned unit residential development which is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment
of the residents of the development. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of such residents.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in zoning district regulations subject to a finding by the Planning Commission
that all special conditions and requirements imposed shall be met.
CONSTRUCTION YARD: An area on, abutting or adjacent to a major construction or demolition site used on a
temporary basis for the parking and storage of equipment used in the project, and the storage and preparation of
materials and other items used in the project, including construction offices and shops.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definition of nursing or convalescent home.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: A business enterprise, activity or use of land consisting of sales or services rendered to
patrons who normally receive the products or utilize the services while in motor vehicles upon the premises, including,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 156/640
but not limited to, gas service stations, drive-in restaurants, drive-in laundry and dry cleaning pick up, and drive-in
bank.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing only one (1) dwelling unit and which is constructed under the
Building Code in accordance with title 2 of this Code, and which also includes manufactured homes developed to
specific standards in accordance with subsection 3-2-3Q of this chapter.
DWELLING UNIT (DU): A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ERECTED: Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed or moved upon; any physical operations on a premises which are
required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like, shall be considered a part of erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by a public utility of underground, surface
or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water transmission or distribution systems, communication, supply or disposal
systems, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such public utilities for the public health, safety or general welfare, not including buildings,
electric substations and transmission towers.
EXCAVATION: Any breaking of ground, except common gardening and grounds care, and general agriculture.
FAMILY: An individual living alone; or, one (1) or more persons living together who are related by blood, marriage or
other legal bond, and their dependents; or, a group of not more than five (5) unrelated persons living together as a
single household in a dwelling unit. A "family" includes its domestic employees.
FULL FRONTAGE: All lot lines of any lot, parcel or tract of property adjacent to a road, street, alley or right-of-way, to
include lots, parcels or tracts containing multiple borders or edges, such as corner lots.
GAS SERVICE STATION: An establishment retailing motor fuels and lubricants directly to the public on the premises,
including incidental sale of minor auto accessories and services.
GRADE: The average elevation of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or base of a
structure.
HALFWAY HOUSE FOR RECOVERING ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSERS: A residence that provides housing and a
living environment for recovering alcohol and drug abusers and is operated to facilitate their reintegration into the
community, but does not provide treatment for alcohol or drug abuse. The term "halfway house for recovering alcohol
and drug abusers" does not include a facility for transitional living for released offenders.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business customarily carried on in a business establishment that is permitted to be carried
out in a residence as long as the use as a business is incidental to the primary residential purpose and the residential
character of the property is not changed. Every person permitted to carry on a home occupation shall obtain an annual
business license.
HOSPITAL: A building, or group of buildings, in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment,
examination or care, including overnight residence, together with related facilities, e.g., laboratories, training facilities,
staff residences, outpatient department and similar facilities which are an integral part of the principal use.
HOTEL, MOTEL: A building, or group of buildings, used primarily for accommodation of transient guests in rooms or
suites.
HUMANITARIAN CAMPGROUND: A designated area that serves a humanitarian purpose by allowing people, with
permission from the owner or occupier of the land, to engage in camping and that may or may not have toilets,
showers and/or other amenities for campers to use.
HUMANITARIAN PURPOSE: A use which is not for profit and which is designed to allow people who are homeless or
who cannot occupy their homes due to lack of utilities or other causes, to engage in life sustaining activities, such as
eating and sleeping.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 157/640
baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
tires, and bottles. A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and any area of more than one hundred twenty
(120) square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses confined entirely within
enclosed buildings.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be included in the planned unit
development. The holder of an option or contract of purchase, and lessee having a remaining term of not less than
thirty (30) years, or another person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land, is a "landowner" for the
purposes of this chapter.
LICENSED HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION: A licensed commercial enterprise maintained for the convenience and resort
of persons desiring lawful sexual intercourse.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space provided for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, situated on the same lot with a building and entirely outside the right-of-way of any public
street or alley.
LOT: A distinct part or parcel of land separated from other pieces or parcels by description, identified as such in a
subdivision or on a record survey map, or described as such by metes and bounds, with the intention or for the
purposes of sale, lease, or separate use, or for the purpose of building, including the following types of lots:
Corner Lot: A lot abutting two (2) or more intersecting streets.
Double Frontage Lot: A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
Interior Lot: A lot having only one (1) side abutting a street.
Key Lot: An interior lot, one (1) side of which is contiguous to the rear line of a corner lot.
LOT AREA: The total area of a lot within the lot lines as measured on a horizontal plane.
LOT COVERAGE: That part or percentage of a lot occupied by principal and/or accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The shortest distance, measured on a line parallel to the axis of the lot, between points on the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT LINE: A line bounding a lot, including the following types of lot lines:
Front Lot Line: The lot line coinciding with the street line; or, in the case of a corner lot, the shorter of two (2) lot
lines coinciding with street lines; or, in the case of a double frontage lot, both lot lines coinciding with street lines.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite and farthest from the front lot line; for a pointed or irregular lot, the rear lot
line shall be an imaginary line, parallel to and farthest from the front lot line, not less than ten feet (10') long and
wholly within the lot.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line; in the case of a corner lot, the lot line abutting the side
street is designated as the exterior side lot line and all other side lot lines are designated as interior side lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision plat or other type of map used for the purpose of dividing or
merging parcels of land, recorded in the Elko County Recorder's Office prior to the effective date hereof; or, a lot or
parcel described by metes and bounds and having its description recorded in the Elko County Recorder's Office prior
to the effective date hereof.
LOT WIDTH: A. In case of a rectangular lot or a lot abutting on the outside of a street curve, the distance between side
lot lines measured parallel to the street or to the street chord and measured on the street chord.
B. In the case of a lot abutting on the inside of a street curve, the distance between the side lot lines measured
parallel to the street or the street chord at the rear line of the dwelling, or, where there is no dwelling, thirty feet
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 158/640
(30') behind the minimum front setback line.
MAJOR ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION LINE: Any electrical line carrying an electrical load of sixty six (66) kV and
above.
METALLURGY: The reduction or extraction of metals from their ores by mechanical, physical or chemical methods,
including their refinement and preparation for use as raw materials.
MINING: The extraction from the earth of gravel, stone, sand, and metallic or nonmetallic ore, and the crushing,
washing, grading, storage and loading for transportation thereof.
MIXED USE: Combination of different uses including residential use within a shared building.
MOBILE HOME: As defined in the City of Elko mobile home ordinance1.
MOBILE HOME LOT: As defined in the City of Elko mobile home ordinance2.
MOBILE HOME PARK: As defined in the City of Elko mobile home ordinance3.
NONCONFORMING USE: Uses existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, but not in accordance with the
provisions and requirements contained herein.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: An establishment providing bed care, or chronic or convalescent care, for
one (1) or more persons, exclusive of relatives, who by reason of illness or physical infirmity are unable to properly
care for themselves; excluding, however, institutions for the care of alcoholics, drug addicts, and persons with mental
or communicable diseases.
OFF STREET: Land which is not within the right-of-way of any street or alley.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITIES: Parking lots which are intended to allow commuters to park their vehicles and then
transfer to some form of mass transportation, such as buses, trains or carpools.
PARKING LOT: An area other than for single-family dwellings used for the off street parking of more than two (2) motor
vehicles, including parking spaces, access and maneuvering aisles.
PARKING SPACE: A fully accessible space adequate for the temporary parking of permitted vehicles, situated entirely
outside the right-of-way of any public street.
PARTIES IN INTEREST: A term identifying the owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of specific property.
PERSON: Except where otherwise indicated, a natural person, any form of business or social organization and any
other nongovernmental legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, association, trust or
unincorporated organization, or a government, governmental agency or political subdivision of a government.
PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER: A business development not divided by a street and characterized by an organized
and concentrated grouping of retail and service outlets served by a common circulation and parking system.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land controlled by a landowner, which is to be developed as a single
entity for a number of dwelling units, the plans for which do not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density,
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established in any one (1) residential district created, from
time to time, under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The City of Elko Planning Commission.
PRIVATE GARAGES: An enclosed accessory building, attached or detached, used for storage of motor vehicles used
by occupants of the principal building and providing no public shop or services in connection therewith.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, municipality or Municipal board duly authorized under State or
Municipal regulations, to furnish to the public electricity, gas, steam, communications, water, drainage, flood control,
irrigation, garbage or trash disposal, or sewage disposal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 159/640
RAILROAD USE: The occupation and use of land, buildings and structures for purposes directly connected with rail
transportation of articles, goods and passengers, including such facilities as tracks, sidings, signal devices and
structures, shops and yards for maintenance and storage of rail machinery, loading platforms, passenger and freight
terminals, but excluding warehouses, stockyards, grain elevators, truck freight terminals and yards, and similar
facilities, which are maintained and operated by the owning railroad company or by a lessee for purposes auxiliary to
rail transportation.
RECREATION AND SOCIAL CLUBS: Buildings and grounds used for and operated by membership of fraternal
organizations primarily not for profit, including golf clubs, tennis clubs, riding clubs, American Legion halls, Elks Club,
and similar facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle self-propelled or otherwise, designed to temporarily shelter persons en route on
a recreational or vacation trip. "Recreational vehicle" includes truck mounted campers, and self-propelled travel vans.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A lot, parcel or tract of land, having as its principal use the rental of space of
temporary short term, transient occupancy by two (2) or more recreational vehicles, including any accessory buildings,
structures and uses customarily incidental thereto.
REPAIR GARAGE: An establishment where these services may be allowed: normal activities of a gas service station,
general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision services such as body, frame
or fender straightening and repair; general painting and undercoating of automobiles; high speed washing; auto, boat
or trailer rental; and general sales of auto parts or accessories.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A halfway house for recovering alcohol and drug abusers or a residential facility for
groups.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR GROUPS: An establishment that furnishes food, shelter, assistance and limited
supervision to unrelated person(s) with an intellectual disability or with a physical disability who is aged or infirm. The
term does not include an establishment which provides care only during the day, a natural person who provides care
for no more than two (2) persons in his own home, a natural person who provides care for one (1) or more persons
related to him within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity, a halfway house for recovering alcohol and drug
abusers, or a facility funded by a division or program of the Nevada Department of Health and Human Services.
RETAIL USE: A commercial establishment selling goods at retail; however, a home occupation shall not be considered
as a retail use.
ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION: All roadway classifications shall be determined in accordance with the Transportation
Component of the City of Elko Master Plan.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or motel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite
periods of time, lodging is provided for individuals who are not members of a resident family.
SCHOOL: A public or private building, or group of buildings, used for purposes of primary or secondary education,
meeting all requirements of the Compulsory Education Laws of the State of Nevada.
SCREEN WALL: A masonry wall or opaque fence so constructed as to prevent the view of enclosed activities or uses
from without.
SERVANT QUARTERS: An attached or detached building, or part thereof, housing persons employed on the premises.
SERVICE CLUBS: Buildings and grounds used for and operated by nonprofit organizations whose membership is open
to any resident of the community, including YMCA, YWCA, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys Club and any similar
organizations having as its primary objective the improvement of the district, neighborhood or community and its social
welfare.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the nearest point of a building, structure or use, as
the context indicates, located on a lot. "Setback" shall not include eaves of the building.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above, or
if there is no floor above, the space between the topmost floor and the roof having a usable floor area at least one-half
(1/2) that of the floor area of the floor immediately below. A basement shall be considered a story when fifty percent
(50%) or more of its cubic content is above grade.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 160/640
STREET: A dedicated public way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property.
STREET LINE: A line demarcating the limits of a street right-of-way.
STREET, PRIVATE: A nondedicated, privately owned right-of-way or limited public way that affords the principal means
of emergency and limited vehicular access and connection from the public street system to properties created through
the division or subdivision of land.
STREET, PUBLIC: A dedicated public right-of-way that is part of the public street system and which affords the
principal means of emergency and general vehicular access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE: Any constructed or erected material or combination of materials, the use of which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something located on the ground and which requires a permit as defined and regulated by
the Building Code, including buildings, stadiums, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, fences and signs.
SWIMMING POOL: Any constructed pool, used for swimming, bathing or wading, whether above or below the ground
surface and regardless of depth or water surface area.
TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING: A use or structure permitted under the terms of this chapter to exist for a limited
period of time.
TOWNHOUSE OR ROW HOUSE: A single-dwelling unit arranged side by side with other such units in a multi-family
dwelling, completely independent of all other such units in the building by reason of separation therefrom by unpierced
party walls.
USABLE FLOOR AREA: A term used in computing parking requirements, meaning the aggregate area of a building
measured to the interior area, similarly measured, or each additional story which is connected to the first story by a
fixed stairway, escalator, ramp or elevator, and the floor area of all accessory buildings, measured similarly, but
excluding that part of any floor area which is occupied by heating, ventilating, or other permanently installed equipment
required for operation of the building, and by unenclosed porches, light shafts, public corridors and public toilets. For
uses not enclosed within a building, the area for sales, display or service shall be measured to determine equivalent
usable floor area.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or
may be occupied. The principal use is the main use to which the premises are devoted and the main purpose for which
the premises exist. An accessory use is a use subordinate to the principal use on a lot and used for purposes clearly
incidental to those of the principal use.
VARIANCE: A modification of the literal enforcement of the technical provisions and requirements of this chapter. The
applicant for variance shall present adequate evidence to support the granting of a variance in accordance with section
3-2-22 of this chapter.
YARD: An open space located between any portion of a building and the nearest lot line, or the nearest adjacent
building or group of buildings, as the context indicates, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and having a depth equal to the horizontal distance
between the nearest point of the principal building and the front lot line, measured at right angles to the front lot line.
YARD, NONREQUIRED: Any yard with dimensions exceeding those required herein.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of a lot and having a depth equal to the horizontal distance
between the nearest point of the principal building and the rear lot line, measured at right angles to the rear lot line.
YARD, REQUIRED: A yard having the minimum dimensions required herein.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line between a side lot line and the principal
building, and having a width equal to the horizontal distance between the nearest point of the principal building and the
side lot line, measured at right angles to the side lot line. (Ord. 818, 4-25-2017)
3-2-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 161/640
A. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the City, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other power granted by the Nevada Revised Statutes.
B. Street And Utility Requirements: The following restrictions shall apply:
1. Generally, all lots shall abut and access a public street connecting with the public street system in order to
provide for orderly growth, vehicular circulation and to ensure accessibility to utilities and emergency services. A
condominium project shall be considered one (1) lot for purposes of this specific requirement.
2. Lots may abut and access a private street connecting with the public street system in the following
circumstances:
a. Within a PC (Planned Commercial) District in conformance with an approved concept development plan.
b. Within an IBP (Industrial Business Park) District in conformance with an approved concept development plan.
c. Within a PUD (Planned Unit Development) District in conformance with an approved site development plan.
d. Within an RMH (Residential Mobile Home) District in conformance with an approved site development plan.
e. For residential, commercial or industrial developments involving four (4) or fewer lots and where the length of
the private street, from the nearest public street to the lot being accessed, does not exceed six hundred eighty
feet (680').
3. Building permits may be issued for lots which abut undedicated portions of a partly dedicated public street.
4. A building permit shall not be issued for any lot for which City public sewerage and water supply is not available,
unless the City Council grants a waiver of the mandatory connection to public sewer requirement pursuant to
subsection 9-5-61B of this Code.
5. All utilities shall be placed underground, except for lots of record.
6. Public street and utility construction and installation is required across the full frontage of property at time of
development.
C. Use Restrictions: The following use restrictions shall apply:
1. Principal Uses: Only those uses and groups of uses specifically designated as "principal uses permitted" in
zoning district regulations shall be permitted as principal uses; all other uses shall be prohibited as principal uses.
2. Conditional Uses: Certain specified uses designated as "conditional uses permitted" may be permitted as
principal uses subject to special conditions of location, design, construction, operation and maintenance
hereinafter specified in this chapter or imposed by the planning commission or city council.
3. Accessory Uses: Uses normally accessory and incidental to permitted principal or conditional uses may be
permitted as hereinafter specified.
4. Unspecified Uses: The listing of groups of permitted uses is intended to establish the character of uses to be
permitted, but not to include each and every use which may be permitted. Unspecified uses may be imposed by
the planning commission upon evidence and determination that such uses are closely similar in character to and
not typically more objectionable than other uses actually listed as permitted.
5. Temporary Uses: Certain temporary uses such as interim administrative and sales offices, sales offices for
mobile and manufactured homes, model home sales complex for residential subdivisions, materials storage,
mixing, assembly, manufacturing of a portable nature and similar uses determined to be functionally comparable,
and, as specified in this subsection C5, temporary emergency shelters, temporary camping and temporary
campgrounds may be permitted by temporary use permit.
a. "Temporary emergency shelters" are defined as enclosed and unenclosed locations, to include structures and
portions of structures, used for temporary occupancy by individuals and families who are homeless or who
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 162/640
cannot occupy their homes due to lack of utilities or other causes. Temporary emergency shelters may be
permitted, but only within C (general commercial), LI (light industrial) and GI (general industrial) zoning districts.
b. "Temporary camping" means camping for a limited period of time.
c. "Temporary campground" means a campground that may only be used for temporary camping.
d. Temporary camping and temporary campgrounds may be permitted as temporary uses, but only within LI (light
industrial) and GI (general industrial) zoning districts.
e. For purposes of this section, "overnight" is defined as the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to
sunrise.
f. For purposes of this section, "living accommodation purposes" is defined as uses and activities needed for or
directly connected with the use of land for engaging in life sustaining activities.
g. The temporary use permit process for temporary camping and temporary campgrounds shall be subject to the
following public hearing process: the city shall set a time and place for the public hearing before the planning
commission on the application and the city shall send, by mail, notice of the time and place and purpose of the
planning commission hearing, at least ten (10) days before the hearing, to the owners of property within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior limits of the property involved, as shown by the latest assessment rolls of the
city. Notice by mail to the last known address of the real property owners, as shown by the assessor's records,
shall be sufficient. Legal notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Applications for temporary use permits must be filed at least
twenty one (21) days before the planning commission hearing.
h. Temporary use permits may be subject to such special conditions as may be imposed by the planning
commission related to time frame, location, nature and character of the use and extent of on site
improvements. Application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the planning department on a form
provided for such purpose and shall include payment of a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of
the city council.
i. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this code, following application to the city on a form provided
to the applicant for such purpose, the city council may thereafter waive permit application fees, and/or any
requirement for on site and off site improvements with respect to a parcel of land used as a temporary
emergency shelter or temporary campground, or for temporary camping, provided that the use is for a
humanitarian purpose. The waiver which may be granted pursuant to this subsection C5i may include, without
limitation, a waiver of the requirement for meeting development standards; the installation of curb, gutter and/or
sidewalk; the extension of sewer and/or water lines to the property line; or applicable permit fees. Any
waiver(s) granted under this subsection C5i shall automatically terminate upon the permittee discontinuing or
changing the use of the property from the purposes specified in the temporary use permit.
6. Site Plan Review: Certain uses, structures, activities or uses requiring planning commission review or
determination, inclusive of public buildings, public structures or other public developments such as parks, except
those submitted as part of an application for a conditional use permit or temporary use permit, may be permitted
upon formal review by the planning commission. The scope of the planning commission's review shall be limited
to location, character and extent of improvements thereof, and shall be subject to such special conditions, relative
to the defined scope of review, as may be imposed by the planning commission. Application for site plan review
shall be filed with the planning department on a form provided for such purpose and shall include payment of a
filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.
D. Site Unsuitability: No land may be used or structure erected where the land is held by the planning commission to
be unsuitable for such use or structure by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse
soil or rock formation, extreme topography, low bearing strength, erosion susceptibility, or any other features likely
to be harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The planning commission, in applying the
provisions of this section, shall state in writing the particular facts upon which its conclusions are based. The
applicant shall have the right to present evidence contesting such determination to the city council if he or she so
desires, whereupon the city council may affirm, modify or withdraw the determination of unsuitability.
E. Reduction Or Joint Use: No lot, yard, parking or loading area, building area, or other space, nor any part thereof,
hereinafter required about or in connection with any building, shall be included as part of a yard area or space
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 163/640
required for any other building, nor shall any yard or lot existing on the effective date hereof be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this title.
F. Building Height Regulations: No building shall exceed the heights allowed in the current city of Elko airport master
plan.
G. Projections Into Required Yards; Residential Districts:
1. Awnings, fire escape stairs, window type refrigeration units not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons or one
and one-half (11/2) horsepower rating, suspended or roof evaporative coolers, and forced air furnaces, may
project not more than five feet (5') over any required yard; provided, that they shall be no closer than two feet (2')
to any lot line.
2. Cornices and eaves may project over any required yard, provided, that they shall be no closer than two feet (2')
to any lot line.
3. Sills, belt courses and similar ornamental features may project not more than six inches (6") over or into any
required yard.
4. Unroofed terraces, patios, steps or similar features may project into any required yard; provided, that projections
into required front yards shall not exceed ten feet (10'). Roofed or covered terraces, patios, steps or similar
features may project into the required rear yard no closer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot line, provided two (2)
sides of the covered feature remain open.
5. Fireplaces may be allowed to encroach into required yards no closer than two feet (2') to any lot line.
6. Carports may be allowed to encroach into required side yards; provided, that two (2) sides of the carport remain
open, that no portion of the carport structure be closer than three feet (3') to any side lot line, and all drainage
from the roof of the structure shall be onto the property itself.
H. Exterior Lighting: All lighting for advertising off street parking or loading areas, or for the external illumination of
buildings, shall be directed away from and shielded from any adjacent residential district and shall not detract from
driver visibility on adjacent streets or highways, interfere with or cause driver confusion regarding traffic control
devices, interfere with driver vision or create other traffic hazards.
I. Essential Services Permitted: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the location, erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by a public utility of any "essential services", as herein defined.
J. Required Screen Walls: Under certain conditions, the planning commission may require screen walls to separate
incompatible uses; e.g., separation of abutting or industrial uses and residential uses.
K. Nonrequired Fences, Walls And Hedges:
1. No fence, wall, tree, shrub or hedge may be allowed which would obstruct vision at street intersections in any
residential district.
2. No fence or wall shall contain barbed wire, concertina razor wire, electrical current or charge of electricity, broken
glass, or similar hazardous materials or devices; provided, however, that fences enclosing storage areas in
industrial or commercial districts may use barbed wire extension arms on chainlink fences six feet (6') or higher,
or may use concertina razor wire extension arms on chainlink fences seven feet (7') or higher. In addition, fences
enclosing storage areas in industrial or commercial districts may use concertina razor wire extension arms on
chainlink fences between six feet (6') and seven feet (7') in height so long as the concertina razor wire extension
arm does not protrude more than six inches (6") out from the exterior vertical extension of the chainlink fence.
3. No nonbuilding wall or fence in any residential district shall exceed six feet (6') in height without a building permit.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 164/640
L. Trash Enclosures: A permanent enclosure for temporary storage of garbage, refuse and other waste materials shall
be provided for every use other than single-family dwellings in every zoning district, except where an approved
mechanically loaded steel bin is used for the purpose, or where a property is entirely surrounded by screen walls or
buildings. Trash enclosures shall be so constructed that contents are not visible from a height of five feet (5') above
grade on any abutting street or property.
M. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools, whether private, public or commercial, shall comply with the laws, rules and
regulations of the city and state.
N. Signs: The provisions of the sign code as set forth in chapter 9 of this title shall apply.
O. Building And Electrical Codes: In all construction hereafter made within the city, the same shall be in accordance
with title 2, chapters 2 and 6 of this code, and all other applicable provisions of this code.
P. Mobile Homes: Mobile homes are hereby expressly prohibited for living purposes outside the RMH district, except as
stated in other chapters of this title. All requirements of chapter 5 of this title and all other applicable provisions of
this code shall be adhered to with respect to standards for the RMH district.
Q. Manufactured Homes: Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code, manufactured homes are hereby
recognized as a "principal permitted use" in all zoning districts which recognize single-family dwellings as a
"principal permitted use", provided all of the following standards are complied with:
1. The manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation permanently affixed to the residential lot and qualify and
constitute real property, as established by Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 361.
2. The manufactured home shall be manufactured within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date on which
it is affixed to the residential lot.
3. The manufactured home shall utilize exterior siding consisting of or giving the appearance of stucco, masonry,
wood, metal or vinyl and affixed to the dwelling unit in a continuous horizontal or vertical pattern similar in color,
material and appearance to the exterior siding used on other single-family dwellings in the immediate vicinity.
4. The manufactured home shall utilize roofing materials consisting of asphalt shingles or equivalent roofing
materials of comparable quality, similar in color, material and appearance to the roofing used on other singlefamily
dwellings in the immediate vicinity. The manufactured home shall utilize a full height roof element with a
minimum pitch of three to twelve (3:12). The roof element shall include a minimum overhang or projecting eave of
twelve inches (12").
5. The manufactured home shall be multisectioned (doublewide or larger) with a minimum width or minimum depth
of twenty four feet (24').
6. The manufactured home shall consist of at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area. A
waiver can be filed and may be granted for a reduction of the living area based on the size or configuration of the
lot or the square footage of single-family residential dwellings in the immediate vicinity, in accordance with site
plan review procedures pursuant to subsection C6 of this section.
7. Any elevated foundations shall be masked architecturally in a manner to blend and harmonize with exterior siding
materials utilized on the manufactured home.
8. As provided in Nevada Revised Statutes, the provisions of this section do not abrogate recorded restrictive
covenants prohibiting manufactured homes, nor do the provisions apply within the boundaries of a historic district
established pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 384.005 or 384.100. An application to place a
manufactured home on a residential lot pursuant to this section constitutes an attestation by the owner of the lot
that the placement complies with all covenants, conditions and restrictions placed on the lot and that the lot is not
located within a historic district.
R. Minimum Distance Between Residential Establishments: A minimum distance of at least one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320') shall be required between residential establishments.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 165/640
S. As Built Drawing: Except for the new construction of a single-family dwelling, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any new construction, the applicant must submit to the City a complete and accurate as built drawing
with survey data on the Elko grid (NAD 83 Nevada east zone ground elevation). The as built drawing must be
submitted electronically in AutoCAD format and must be accompanied by a wet stamped and signed paper copy by
the professional of record for the project. As used herein, the term "as built drawing" means a drawing that
accurately depicts the locations of all improvements on the parcel or lot containing the new construction and any
associated utilities or other public improvements constructed on other properties, which drawing shall, without
limitation, include the structure(s) and all associated utilities and other public improvements. (Ord. 805, 12-13-2016)
3-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
The entire City is hereby divided into zoning districts, within which zoning districts all property use shall hereafter
conform to the requirements specified in this chapter, and which zoning districts are hereby classified as follows: (Ord.
547, 12-12-2000)
A. Types Of Districts:
1. Residential districts:
RS Residential Suburban District
R1 Single-Family Residential District
R2 Two-Family Residential District
R3 Multiple-Family Residential District
R Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential District
RO Residential Office District
RB Residential Business District
RMH Mobile Home Park and Mobile Home Subdivision District
2. Nonresidential districts:
PQP Public, Quasi-Public District
CC Convenience Commercial District
CT Commercial Transitional District
PC Planned Commercial District
C General Commercial District
IBP Industrial Business Park District
IC Industrial Commercial District
LI Light Industrial District
GI General Industrial District
RC Restricted Commercial District
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 166/640
3. Special districts:
AG General Agriculture District
FP Floodplain Overlay District
SA Special Area Overlay District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
(Ord. 547, 12-12-2000; amd. Ord. 819, 8-22-2017)
B. Required Conformity To District Regulations: The regulations set forth in this chapter for each zoning district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as provided in this
subsection:
1. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all regulations
specified in this subsection for the district in which it is located.
2. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
a. To exceed the heights required by the current City Airport Master Plan;
b. To accommodate or house a greater number of families than as permitted in this chapter;
c. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
d. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces, than required in this title;
or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
3. No part of a required yard, or other open space, or off street parking or loading space, provided in connection
with any building or use, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building.
4. No yard or lot existing on the effective date hereof shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth in this title.
C. Annexation Of Territory To City: Proceedings for annexation of territory to the city shall be in accordance with
Nevada Revised Statutes sections 268.610 through 268.670, inclusive. A petition for annexation, in writing, shall be
presented to the city council. The city council shall consider said petition and may refer the matter to the planning
commission for further consideration. The petitioner shall, prior to the consideration of the petition by the planning
commission, pay a filing fee to the city in an amount established by resolution of the city council.
D. Classification Of Annexed Areas: All territory which is annexed to the city after the effective date hereof shall be
zoned upon annexation AG general agriculture, unless the planning commission shall recommend and/or the city
council shall otherwise designate the zoning district after holding duly advertised public hearings in accordance with
section 3-2-21 of this chapter. As part of considering any petition for annexation of territory to the city, a review of
conformance with the city master plan, including land use designation, shall be performed by the planning
commission, with recommendations forwarded to the city council. If said annexation necessitates substantial
amendment to the master plan, the planning commission may adopt such amendment only after holding duly
advertised public hearings in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.210.
E. Detachment Of Territory From City: Proceedings for detachment of territory from the city shall be in accordance with
Nevada Revised Statutes section 268.664. A petition for detachment, in writing, shall be presented to the city
council. The city council shall consider said petition and may refer the matter to the planning commission for further
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 167/640
consideration. The petitioner shall, prior to the consideration of the petition by the planning commission, pay a filing
fee to the city in an amount established by resolution of the city council and included in the appendix to this code.
F. Classification Of Vacated Streets: Whenever a public street or alley is vacated by official action of the city council,
the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street or alley shall automatically be extended to the centerline
thereof, and all land area thus vacated shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
G. Official Zoning District Map:
1. Establishment: The areas and boundaries of zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the official city
zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this chapter.
2. Identification: The official city zoning map shall be entitled "Elko zoning map" and identified by the signature of
the mayor, attested by the city clerk, bear the notations that it was adopted on the date this zoning ordinance was
passed, and bear the seal of the city. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official city zoning
map which may, from time to time, be made or published, the official city zoning map, which shall be located in
the office of the city planner, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land areas, buildings,
and other structures in the city.
3. Changes: If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or in other
matters portrayed on the city zoning map, such changes shall be made on said map promptly after the
amendment has been approved and adopted by resolution of the city council. No changes of any nature shall be
made in the city zoning map or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this
chapter and punishable as hereinafter provided.
4. Replacement: In the event that the city zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret
due to the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may, by resolution, adopt a new city
zoning map which shall supersede the former map. The new city zoning map may correct drafting or other errors
or omissions in the former map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning
ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new city zoning map shall be identified by the signature of
the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city under the words:
"This is to certify that this Elko zoning map adopted the (date) supersedes and replaces the Elko zoning map
adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the zoning ordinance of the city of Elko, Nevada".
5. Interpretation: Where, due to scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the city zoning map, there is an uncertainty,
contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundary shown thereon, the exact location of
such boundary shall be determined by the city planner, who, in reaching a determination, shall apply the following
standards:
a. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, and
centerlines of streets, alleys and rights of way, unless otherwise fixed by dimensions shown on the city zoning
map.
b. In subdivided property, or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the exact location of such boundary
shall be indicated by dimensions shown on the city zoning map.
c. If, after application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district
boundary, the city council shall determine and fix the location of such boundary in accordance with the purpose
and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 547, 12-12-2000)
3-2-5: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. RS Residential Suburban District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the RS zoning district is to provide and preserve low density, single-family residential living
areas that are semirural or agricultural in character and transitional in relationship to more urbanized residential
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 168/640
areas of higher density, to allow for the sheltering of large domestic or farm animals on a lot or parcel in
conjunction with an established residential use and to preclude the encroachment of land use activities that may
be incompatible with the character of the semirural residential environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
Electrical power substations, sewer lift stations and water pumping stations wherein service to district residents
requires location within the district.
One single-family dwelling of a permanent character in a permanent location with each dwelling unit on its own
parcel of land and provided all area and setback requirements are met.
Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
Sheltering of farm animals:
a. The keeping of domestic horses, donkeys, llamas and alpacas under the ownership of the resident occupant
of the lot or parcel shall be considered as a permitted principal use; provided, that any combination of such
animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for the first thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of lot
area. One additional large animal may be maintained for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
of lot area contained in the same lot.
b. The keeping of domestic sheep and goats under the ownership of the resident occupant of the lot or parcel
shall be considered as a permitted principal use; provided, that any combination of such animals on any one lot
shall be limited to one animal for the first fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of lot area. One additional small
animal may be maintained for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area contained in the
same lot.
c. The keeping of such farm animals shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same, and no
animal, nor any pen, stable, barn or corral shall be kept or maintained within one hundred feet (100') of any
principal dwelling (other than that occupied by the owner of such domestic animal), any public building, park,
school, hospital, or any other public place; or within eighty feet (80') of the front property line of the lot on which
the animals are maintained, or within twenty five feet (25') of the side street of a corner lot. There shall be no
killing or dressing of any such animals for commercial purposes.
d. Poultry, rabbits or domestic fowl raised for food, education, scientific or furbearing purposes; provided, not
more than twelve (12) of any one or combination of such animals and fowl may be maintained on one lot.
e. The keeping of such domestic animals or fowl shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same,
and no fowl or animals, nor any pen or coop, shall be kept or maintained within fifty feet (50') of any window or
door of any residence, dwelling or other building used for human habitation (other than that occupied by the
owner of such domestic animals or fowl), or within sixty feet (60') of the front property line of the lot on which
the animals are maintained, or within twenty five feet (25') of the side street on a corner lot.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted as principal uses upon approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of
this chapter regarding conditional use permits. In reviewing conditional use permit applications, the Planning
Commission shall ensure that adequate light and air, ingress and egress, and compatibility with other uses in the
neighborhood are maintained.
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
Public buildings providing cultural, educational, administrative and fire and police service to residents of the
district.
4. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use
may be permitted, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Childcare family home.
Garden house, tool house, ramada; outdoor swimming pool and similar home recreational facilities; provided, that
such facilities are used solely by occupants of the premises and their guests.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 169/640
Guesthouse or servants' quarters.
Home occupations in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
Private garage or carport.
Storage parking for recreational vehicles owned by the occupant; provided, that it is located in a garage, carport,
rear or interior side yard, is not provided water or sewer service connections, and is not used for living purposes.
Storage parking of boat, utility trailer, horse trailer and similar equipment owned by the occupant; provided, that
such equipment is located in a garage, carport, rear or interior side yard.
5. Property Development Standards:
a. Development standards shall adhere to subsection G of this section.
b. Subdivisions within the RS District which are essentially independent and self-contained and, which are
characterized by lots which are no less than one-half (1/2) acre in size, may utilize rural road standards in
accordance with specifications contained within section 3-3-11 of this title.
6. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
a. Building Height: The maximum height of an accessory building shall not exceed forty feet (40') or the current
City airport master plan, whichever is the more restrictive.
b. Building Setbacks: Any detached accessory building that is erected shall conform to front and side yard
setback requirements. A minimum rear yard setback of ten feet (10') shall be required.
B. R1 Single-Family Residential District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the R1 zoning district is to provide and preserve low density residential living areas
reserved predominantly for the development of single-family dwellings and to preclude the encroachment of land
use activities that may be detrimental or injurious to the character or quality of the low density residential
environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
Electrical power substations, sewer lift stations and water pumping stations wherein service to district residents
requires location within the district.
One single-family dwelling of a permanent character in a permanent location with each dwelling unit on its own
parcel of land, and provided all area and setback requirements are met.
Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted as principal uses upon approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with provisions of this chapter and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of this
chapter regarding conditional use permits. In reviewing conditional use permit applications, the planning
commission shall ensure that adequate light and air, ingress and egress, and compatibility with other uses in the
neighborhood are maintained.
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
Public buildings providing cultural, educational, administrative and fire and police service to residents of the
district.
4. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use
may be permitted, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Childcare family home.
Garden house, tool house, ramada; outdoor swimming pool and similar home recreational facilities; provided, that
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 170/640
such facilities are used solely by occupants of the premises and their guests.
Guesthouse or servants' quarters.
Home occupations in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
Private garage or carport.
Storage parking for recreational vehicles owned by the occupant; provided, that it is located in a garage, carport,
rear or interior side yard, is not provided water or sewer service connections, and is not used for living purposes.
Storage parking of boat, utility trailer, horse trailer and similar equipment owned by the occupant; provided, that
such equipment is located in a garage, carport, rear or interior side yard.
5. Property Development Standards: Development standards shall adhere to subsection G of this section.
6. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
a. Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed twenty five feet (25'), or requirements
contained within the city airport master plan, whichever is the most restrictive.
b. Building Setbacks: Any detached accessory building that is erected shall conform to front and side yard
setback requirements. A minimum rear yard setback of ten feet (10') shall be required, which may be reduced
to zero feet (0') if the rear lot line abuts a public alley.
c. Building Area: A detached accessory building shall be limited to a maximum area of one thousand (1,000)
square feet or ten percent (10%) of the lot area, whichever is greater, but not to exceed one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
C. R2 Two-Family Residential District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the R2 zoning district is to provide and preserve medium density residential living areas
appropriate primarily for single-family and two-family dwellings, limited multiple residential uses and
neighborhood service type uses where appropriate, and to preclude uses that would detract or be detrimental to
the character of the medium density residential environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
Electrical power substations, sewer lift stations and water pumping stations wherein service to district residents
requires location within the district.
One single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling (duplex) of a permanent character in a permanent location
with each dwelling unit on its own parcel of land, and provided all area and setback requirements are met.
Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted as principal uses upon approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with provisions of this chapter and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of this
chapter. In reviewing conditional use permit applications, the planning commission shall ensure that adequate
light and air, ingress and egress, and compatibility with other uses in the neighborhood are maintained.
Childcare group home.
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
One three-family dwelling (triplex) or one four-family dwelling (fourplex) of a permanent character in a permanent
location with each dwelling unit on its own parcel of land and contingent upon any dwelling unit more than a twofamily
dwelling providing an additional two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet of lot area per unit, and
provided setback requirements are met.
Public buildings providing cultural, educational, administrative and fire and police service to residents of the
district.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 171/640
Recreational, social and service clubs.
4. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use
may be permitted, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Childcare family home.
Garden house, tool house, ramada; outdoor swimming pool and similar home recreational facilities; provided, that
such facilities are used solely by occupants of the premises and their guests.
Guesthouse or servants' quarters.
Home occupations in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
Private garage or carport.
Storage parking for recreational vehicles owned by the occupant; provided, that it is located in a garage, carport,
rear or interior side yard, is not provided water or sewer service connections, and is not used for living purposes.
Storage parking of boat, utility trailer, horse trailer and similar equipment owned by the occupant; provided, that
such equipment is located in a garage, carport, rear or interior side yard.
5. Property Development Standards: Development standards shall adhere to subsection G of this section.
6. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
a. Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed twenty five feet (25'), or requirements
contained within the city airport master plan, whichever is the most restrictive.
b. Building Setbacks: Any detached accessory building that is erected shall conform to front and side yard
setback requirements. A minimum rear yard setback of ten feet (10') shall be required, which may be reduced
to zero feet (0') if the rear lot line abuts a public alley.
c. Building Area: A detached accessory building shall be limited to a maximum area of one thousand (1,000)
square feet or ten percent (10%) of the lot area, whichever is greater, but not to exceed one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
D. R3 Multiple-Family Residential District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the R3 zoning district is to provide and preserve residential areas appropriate primarily for
multiple-family residential uses of higher density usually along or in close proximity to arterial roadway corridors,
and to preclude uses that would detract or be detrimental to the character or function of the high density
residential environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
Electrical power substations, sewer lift stations and water pumping stations wherein service to district residents
requires location within the district.
Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted as principal uses upon approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with provisions of this chapter and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of this
chapter. In reviewing conditional use permit applications, the planning commission shall ensure that adequate
light and air, ingress and egress, and compatibility with other uses in the neighborhood are maintained.
Childcare center.
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
Multiple-family residential developments which contain five (5) or more units located on a single lot or parcel;
townhouse or row house developments.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 172/640
Public buildings providing cultural, educational, administrative, and fire and police service to residents of the
district.
Recreation, social and service clubs.
4. Property Development Standards: Development standards shall adhere to subsections E6 and G of this section.
5. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings: Development standards for accessory buildings
within the R3 district shall be the same standards established by the R district.
6. General Regulations:
a. The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
b. The minimum site area necessary to establish an R3 zoning district shall be one acre.
E. R Single-Family And Multiple-Family Residential District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the R zoning district is to provide for a mixture and diversity of housing types for both
single-family and multi-family residential development where such development is desirable, and limited
institutional, office and neighborhood service type uses where appropriate, and to preclude land uses that would
be detrimental to a mixed and varied residential environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
Adult care facility which serves ten (10) or fewer.
Electric power substations, sewer lift stations, and water pump stations wherein service to district residents
requires location within the district.
Multiple-family residential units, including a duplex, triplex, or a fourplex located on a single lot or parcel, provided
area and setback requirements are met.
One single-family dwelling of a permanent character in a permanent location with each dwelling unit on its own
parcel of land and provided all area and setback requirements are met.
Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
Residential facility for groups of ten (10) or fewer.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted as principal uses upon approval of a
conditional use permit in accordance with provisions of this chapter and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of this
chapter regarding conditional use permits. In reviewing conditional use permit applications, the planning
commission shall ensure that adequate light and air, ingress and egress, and compatibility with other uses in the
neighborhood are maintained.
Adult care facility which serves eleven (11) or more.
Childcare center; childcare group home.
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
Halfway house for recovering alcohol and drug abusers.
Healing arts, healthcare facilities, but not including animal hospital.
Multiple-family residential developments which contain five (5) or more units located on a single lot or parcel;
townhouse or row house developments.
Public buildings providing cultural, educational, administrative, and fire and police service to residents of the
district.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 173/640
Recreation, social and service clubs.
Residential facility for groups of eleven (11) or more.
Teaching of creative arts.
4. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Childcare family home.
Garden house, tool house, ramada; outdoor swimming pool and similar home recreational facilities; provided, that
such facilities are used solely by occupants of the premises and their guests.
Guesthouse or servants' quarters.
Home occupations in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
Private garage or carport.
Rooms in the principal building for roomers, not exceeding two (2) such persons per dwelling unit; provided, that
adequate additional off street parking space shall be provided.
Storage parking for recreational vehicles owned by the occupant; provided, that it is located in a garage, carport,
rear or interior side yard, is not provided water or sewer, and is not used for living purposes.
Storage parking of boat, utility trailer, horse trailer and similar equipment owned by the occupant; provided, that
such equipment is located in a garage, carport, rear or interior side yard.
5. Property Development Standards: Development standards shall adhere to subsection G of this section.
6. Additional Property Development Standards For Multiple-Family Residential Developments:
a. Minimum Distance Between Buildings On The Same Lot: The minimum distance between the opposing
exterior walls of detached buildings, or parts of attached or semiattached buildings, on the same lot, shall be:
(1) If both walls are front walls, or contain main entrances or living room windows: Thirty feet (30');
(2) If one wall is a front wall, or contains a main entrance or living room windows, and one wall is a side or rear
wall containing no doors or windows: Twenty four feet (24');
(3) If both walls are side or rear walls containing windows or secondary entrances: Twenty four feet (24');
(4) If one wall is a side or rear wall containing windows or secondary entrances and one wall contains no doors
or windows: Eighteen feet (18');
(5) If neither wall contains windows or doors: Ten feet (10').
b. Additional Placement Regulations For Multi-Family Dwellings: If the front of a building, or part thereof, faces on
an interior side or rear lot line, the building, or that part thereof, shall be set back from such lot line not less
than twenty feet (20').
c. Separation Of Semidetached Dwellings Or Row Houses: When, for purposes of sale or separate ownership, a
two-family or multi-family dwelling and the land in and upon which such dwellings are situated, is to be
subdivided into separate lots having one dwelling unit per lot, such lots shall be exempt from all interior side
yard requirements.
7. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
a. Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed twenty five feet (25'), or requirements
contained within the city airport master plan, whichever is the most restrictive.
b. Building Setbacks: Any detached accessory building that is erected shall conform to front and side yard
setback requirements. A minimum rear yard setback of ten feet (10') shall be required, which may be reduced
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 174/640
to zero feet (0') if the rear lot line abuts a public alley.
c. Building Area: A detached accessory building shall be limited to a maximum area of one thousand (1,000)
square feet or ten percent (10%) of the lot area, whichever is greater, but not to exceed one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
8. Exceptions:
a. Lots Of Record: On each existing lot of record, the side yards shall have a width of not less than five and onehalf
feet (51/2'), and a front yard of not less than twelve feet (12') for single-family dwelling units.
b. Detached Guesthouse Or Servants' Quarters: Detached guesthouses and servants' quarters are permitted in
any district; provided, however, that they shall conform to all yard requirements applicable to the principal
building.
F. RO Residential Office District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the RO zoning district is to establish a residential zone that is transitional in character and
location to more intense commercial districts, and to promote a mixed pattern of compatible development
consisting primarily of residential uses and a blend of professional office, limited service and retail activities that
are recognized as low traffic generators. The RO district is intended to protect the integrity of established
residential neighborhoods from noise and excessive levels of traffic while at the same time afford the opportunity
for compatible office, service and retail development in a mixed use setting.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
Electric power substations, sewer lift stations, and water pump stations wherein service to district residents
requires location within the district.
Multiple-family residential units, including a duplex, triplex, or a fourplex located on a single lot or parcel, provided
area and setback requirements are met.
One single-family dwelling of a permanent character in a permanent location with each dwelling unit on its own
parcel of land and provided all area and setback requirements are met.
Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted:
Art studios.
Barber and beauty shops.
Florists.
Multiple-family residential developments which contain five (5) or more units located on a single lot or parcel;
townhouse, condominium or attached housing developments.
Offices, medical and professional.
Photographic studios.
Restaurants, limited in scale and hours of operation, such as ice cream parlors, sandwich and beverage shops,
delicatessens.
Retail and service establishments, limited in scale and hours of operation, such as boutiques, gift shops and
similar uses.
Schools for music, dance, teaching and creative arts.
Similar uses determined to be functionally comparable to conditional permitted uses in this zone.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 175/640
4. Property Development Standards: Development standards shall adhere to subsection G of this section.
5. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings: Development standards for accessory buildings
within the RO district shall be the same standards established for the R district.
6. General Regulations:
a. The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
b. Warehousing or the indoor storage of goods or materials beyond that normally incidental to permitted uses
shall be prohibited.
c. One wall mounted, nonilluminated sign, for each lot of record not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area or
one freestanding, nonilluminated sign for each lot of record not to exceed six feet (6') in height and twelve (12)
square feet in area may be permitted for any approved conditional use. The planning commission may modify
such regulations as part of the conditional use permit procedure.
G. Residential Zoning Districts Area, Setback And Height Schedule For Principal And Certain Accessory Use
Buildings:
1. Table Of Area Requirements:
AREA REQUIREMENTS
RS 15,000
sq. ft.
80 ft. 180 ft.
25 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.1
R1 6,500
sq. ft.
6,000
sq. ft.
60 ft. 100 ft.
15 ft.6 20 ft. 51/2 ft. 15 ft.5 35 ft.1
R2 6,500
sq. ft.
6,000
sq. ft.
60 ft. 100 ft.
15 ft.6 20 ft. 7 ft. 15 ft.5 35 ft.1
R3 12,000
sq. ft.4
80 ft. 100 ft.
20 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft.5 45 ft.1
R 6,500
sq. ft.
6,000
sq. ft.4
60 ft. 100 ft.
15 ft.6 20 ft. 10 ft.2,3 15 ft.5 45 ft.1
RO 6,000
sq. ft.4
60 ft. 100 ft.
15 ft.6 20 ft. 10 ft.2,3 12 ft. 45 ft.1
Notes:
1. Height limitations contained within the current city airport master plan shall supersede the height restrictions
indicated in the above table where more restrictive.
2. For single-family dwellings, interior side yard setbacks shall be 51/2 feet.
3. For multi-family dwellings, interior side yard setbacks shall be 7 feet.
4. For three- and four-family dwellings, a minimum of 2,200 square feet of lot area is required for each dwelling
unit.
5. For residences in existence at the time of enactment hereof (November 25, 2003), exterior side yard
setbacks shall be 12 feet.
Minimum Requirements
Building
Setbacks
Maximum
Height
Requirements
Zoning
Districts
Corner
Lot
Area
Lot
Area
Lot
Width
Lot
Depth
Front
Yard
Rear
Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Exterior
Side Yard
Building
Height
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 176/640
6. Garages, whether attached or detached, and carports shall be set back 20 feet from the front lot line;
provided, that for any garage in existence prior to March 26, 2013, the front yard setback shall be 15 feet. The
term "garage", as used in this chapter, means a covered or enclosed outbuilding (or part of a building) for
housing motor vehicles, boats or trailers.
2. Residential Lots Of Record:
a. A single lot or parcel of land of record in the office of the county recorder as of the effective date of the city
subdivision ordinance (December 9, 1975), and which does not meet minimum requirements for lot area, lot
width or lot depth shall be considered a buildable lot for one single-family dwelling, provided all other
requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
b. For existing platted subdivisions characterized by twenty five foot (25') wide lots and situated within a
residential zoning district, any lot or parcel reconfiguration or resubdivision shall adhere to a minimum lot area
of five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Ord. 805, 12-13-2016)
3-2-6: RB RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
A. Intent: This zoning district is intended to allow conversion of residential structures located along arterial and collector
roads in areas of transition to an appropriate mix of residential, light retail and service commercial uses that
provides good transitions with nearby residential uses and neighborhoods. This zone allows existing residential
uses to remain and be improved, while also allowing low scale, low intensity commercial and business operations to
be developed as part of infill projects. The district is intended to protect established residential neighborhoods from
the type of land use associated with high levels of noise, illumination and traffic that could be detrimental to the
characteristics of the residential neighborhood.
B. District Boundary: The initial district boundary includes properties within the 5th Street corridor that are located
between Pine Street and Walnut Street along the northeast side of 5th Street, and between Pine Street and Willow
Street along the southwest side of 5th Street, with at least one property line abutting the right-of-way of 5th Street,
and the following lots that are not abutting the 5th Street right-of-way: Lots 21 & 22 of Block 98 and Lots 15 & 16 of
Block 66, as shown on the Map of the First Addition to the Town of Elko, recorded as File No. 5, Elko County
records.
1. The district boundaries may be amended in accordance with section 3-2-21 of this chapter.
2. The maximum distance allowed from the east or west side of 5th Street right-of-way to the district boundary is
one hundred twenty five feet (125').
C. Principal Uses Permitted:
1. The following residential uses are permitted:
Multiple-family residential units, including a duplex, triplex, or a fourplex located on a single lot or parcel, provided
all area and setback requirements are met.
One single-family dwelling of a permanent character in a permanent location on its own parcel of land, provided
all area and setback requirements are met.
2. The following commercial uses are permitted:
Art galleries and studios.
Bakeries.
Banks, financial institutions, not including short term lending businesses such as title loans or payday lending.
Barber and beauty shops.
Bicycle repair.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 177/640
Bookstores.
Childcare centers.
Coffee shops.
Corner stores.
Florists.
Healing art, healthcare facilities, including medical and dental offices.
Laboratories: medical, dental, optical.
Laundry or dry cleaning pick up outlets.
Lodges, fraternal organizations, recreation, social and service clubs.
Offices, to include the following uses and activities: government, business and professional, including
accountants, architects, collection agencies, chiropractors, employment agencies, engineers, health services,
insurance agencies, law offices, real estate, stenographic services, title insurance firms.
Pharmacies when operated in conjunction with, and within the same building as, a medical clinic.
Photographic studios.
Schools for music, dance, teaching and creative arts.
Trade schools.
Travel agencies.
Uses determined to be functionally comparable to principal permitted uses in this zone.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted:
1. The following uses are permitted with a conditional use permit:
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
Convalescent hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, homes for the aged.
Funeral homes and mortuaries.
Mixed uses within structures containing one or more residential dwelling units in which a significant portion of the
space within the structure includes one or more principal commercial permitted uses.
Multiple-family residential developments which contain five (5) or more units located on a single lot or parcel;
townhouse, condominium or attached housing developments.
Restaurants, sandwich and beverage shops, delicatessens.
Theaters, indoor.
Uses determined to be functionally comparable to conditional permitted uses in this zone.
E. Accessory Uses Permitted:
1. Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, are permitted for the following uses:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 178/640
Childcare family home.
Garden house, tool house, ramada; outdoor swimming pool and similar home recreational facilities; provided, that
such facilities must be used solely by occupants of the premises and their guests.
Guesthouse or servants' quarters.
Home occupations in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
Private garage or carport.
Rooms in the principal building for roomers, not exceeding two (2) such persons per dwelling unit; provided,
adequate additional off street parking space(s) shall be provided.
Storage parking for a boat and/or boat trailer, a utility trailer, a horse trailer and similar equipment owned by the
occupant; provided, such equipment shall be located in a garage, carport, or rear or interior side yard.
Storage parking for recreational vehicles owned by the occupant, so long as it is located in a garage, carport, rear
or interior side yard, is not connected to water or sewer lines, and is not used for living purposes.
F. Property Development Standards:
1. Lot Area:
a. Commercial Uses: The lot area shall be of sufficient size to provide for the building, off-street parking and
landscaping.
b. Residential Uses: Residential uses less than five (5) units and not attached to a commercial use shall provide
the minimum lot area required in the R District.
2. Lot Width:
a. Commercial Uses: No requirement.
b. Residential Uses: Residential buildings less than five (5) residential units and which do not contain a
commercial use shall provide the minimum lot width required in the R District.
3. Front, Rear, Interior Side And Exterior Side Yard For New Development Or Expansion:
a. Commercial Uses: Zero feet (0').
b. Residential Uses:
(1) New development of residential buildings containing less than five (5) residential units and which do not
contain a commercial use shall conform to the yard standards required in the R District.
(2) Expansion upon existing principal permitted use shall have the following setbacks:
(A) Front: Five feet (5').
(B) Rear: Five feet (5').
(C) Interior side: Three feet (3').
(D) Exterior side: Five feet (5').
4. Building Height: Building height shall not exceed forty five feet (45'), or requirements contained within the City
Airport Master Plan, whichever is the most restrictive.
5. Landscaping:
a. Commercial uses shall provide landscaping as described in subsection 3-2-10B2a of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 179/640
b. Landscaping within an adjacent right-of-way may be used to satisfy landscaping requirements, so long as it is
maintained by the property owner.
c. With approval from the Planning Department, a lighted art element incorporated into the business signage may
be allowed in lieu of required landscaping, but only if the developed property has physical conditions that
prevent the property owner from installing the landscaping that would otherwise be required.
6. Signage:
a. Free standing signage shall be limited to a maximum height of six feet (6').
b. Signs shall be made of materials that enhance the appearance of the neighborhood, such as wood, stone,
non-reflective or patinated metals, or similar materials.
c. Illuminated signs located adjacent to any residential area shall be shielded to direct light downward and away
from adjacent properties such that there is no spillover light and shall be controlled by a rheostat or functional
equivalent to avoid excessive glare visible from residential properties.
d. Signs which contain, include, or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving light or lights are
prohibited.
e. Wall signs shall not be allowed on any facade on the interior side that faces property zoned R - Single Family
and Multiple Family Residential or that has a residential principal permitted use.
7. Off-Street Parking:
a. Commercial and residential uses must comply with applicable provisions contained in section 3-2-17 of this
chapter.
b. On-street parking adjacent to commercial property may be used to satisfy off-street parking requirements.
G. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
1. Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed either twenty five feet (25') or the maximum
height requirements contained within the City Airport Master Plan, whichever is the most restrictive.
2. Building Setbacks: A detached accessory building shall conform to front and side yard setback requirements.
Regardless of any other requirements, the minimum rear yard setback shall be five feet (5'), which may be
reduced to zero feet (0') if the rear lot line abuts a public alley.
3. Building Area: A detached accessory building shall be limited to a maximum area of one thousand (1,000) square
feet or ten percent (10%) of the lot area, whichever is greater, but not to exceed one thousand, two hundred
(1,200) square feet.
H. Building Development Standards For Commercial Uses: Buildings used for commercial purposes shall meet the
following standards:
1. Low-intensity building and site lighting shall be installed in such a manner as to minimize light spillover and glare
into residential neighborhoods.
2. Commercial storefront exterior materials and colors shall harmonize with the surrounding properties. Exterior
treatments characterized by an overly bright, shiny, reflective or artificial appearance shall not be permitted.
3. The appearance of handicap ramps and entries shall be integrated into the design of the property they serve,
minimize visual impact from the public right-of-way, provide the most direct building access possible, and comply
with the Americans With Disabilities Act.
4. The visual impact of parking and mechanical equipment from the public right-of-way shall be minimized through
the use of screening or landscaping.
5. Awnings shall not obscure the character-defining features of the building.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 180/640
I. General Regulations For Commercial Uses: Commercial uses shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. The outdoor storage of goods or materials is prohibited.
2. Warehousing or the indoor storage of goods or materials beyond that normally incidental to permitted uses is
prohibited.
3. The appearance of handicap ramps and entries shall be integrated into the design of the property they serve,
minimize impact on the public right-of-way, provide the most direct building access as possible, and comply with
the Americans With Disabilities Act.
4. Commercial buildings and associated structures and other improvements shall be designed in a manner that
minimizes conflicts between pedestrian traffic and vehicles.
5. Commercial building facades shall be designed and constructed in a manner that avoids large expanses of
undifferentiated space.
6. Commercial uses shall not have adverse impacts on the use and enjoyment of adjacent residential properties.
(Ord. 819, 8-22-2017)
3-2-7: RMH MOBILE HOME PARK AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION DISTRICT:
Mobile homes shall be regulated by chapter 5, "Mobile Home Parks, Mobile Home, Manufactured Home Subdivisions
And Recreational Vehicle Parks", of this title, in conjunction with the official zoning district map. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
3-2-8: PQP PUBLIC, QUASI-PUBLIC DISTRICT:
This district is intended to accommodate public or quasi-public institutional uses.
A. Principal Uses Permitted:
Adult care facility.
Cemeteries.
Hospitals, sanatoriums or similar healthcare facilities; provided, that:
1. The site shall contain a net land area in accordance with State law and/or occupancy tables specified in the
Uniform Building Code, latest edition.
2. All loading facilities shall be screened from adjoining properties, and insofar as practicable, from the view of
patients from the interior of the building.
Museums, convention centers and civic auditoriums.
Public administrative offices.
Public airport and associated private land uses of a light industrial nature (hangars, flight school, flight service,
etc.).
Public parks; provided, however, that existing parks shall not be encroached upon for other public or quasi-public
building purposes (i.e., no school buildings, firehouses, etc., may be allowed in parks).
Public schools, colleges or universities.
Residential facility for groups.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 181/640
B. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use,
except as otherwise provided herein.
C. Property Development Standards For Permitted Principal Uses:
1. Minimum Setback From Any Street Line: Not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the principal
building.
2. Minimum Setback From Interior Side And Rear Lot Lines: Not less than the height of the principal building, plus
one additional foot for each five feet (5') or part thereof that such building exceeds thirty five feet (35') in the
aggregate horizontal dimension of the wall generally parallel to such side or rear lot line.
3. Maximum Building Height: In accordance with requirements of the current City Airport Master Plan.
4. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total ground floor area of all buildings shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of
the net site area.
D. Conditional Use Permits Required:
1. The establishment, expansion or change of any use, including principal permitted uses, shall be governed by the
conditional use permit procedure, as set forth in section 3-2-18 of this chapter.
2. Similar uses determined to be functionally comparable to principal permitted uses in this zone.
3. For purposes of application of the conditional use permit procedure, "use expansion" shall be defined as any
building expansion involving an addition of one thousand (1,000) square feet of the gross building footprint or an
addition of five percent (5%) of the gross building footprint, whichever is greater.
E. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
1. Maximum Height: Regulations applicable to the principal building shall apply.
2. Location: Accessory buildings, whether attached or detached, shall be located in accordance with location on the
lot as approved by the planning commission.
F. General Regulations:
1. Site Plan Approval: Prior to issuance of a permit, site plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city
administrative staff.
2. Outdoor Storage Prohibited: The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited, except when enclosed
by a screen wall in a location approved by the building inspector. (Ord. 805, 12-13-2016)
3-2-9: CC, CT COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
A. CC Convenience Commercial District: This district is intended to accommodate small scale convenience centers,
which are under one roof and served by an adequate off street parking area, and which are designed to meet the
incidental daily convenience needs of immediately adjacent residential areas.
1. Principal Uses Permitted:
Barber and beauty shops.
Retail establishments selling a line of convenience goods similar to that of supermarkets but more limited in
scale.
Self-service laundry and self-service dry cleaning establishments; laundry or dry cleaning pick up outlets.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 182/640
Similar commercial-retail activities.
2. Accessory Uses Permitted: No accessory buildings, structures or uses shall be permitted, except off street
parking and loading, trash enclosures and accessory signs.
3. Property Development Standards For Permitted Principal Uses: Area, height, bulk and placement requirements:
District
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Minimum Lot
Dimensions
Minimum Setbacks
For Principal
Buildings
Maximum Building
Height
Maximum
Of Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Maximum
Width
Depth
Street
Rear
Interior
Line
Side
Yard
Convenience
commercial
15,000 30,000 150' 100' 40' 25' 15' 25', 2 stories or in
accordance with city
airport master plan,
whichever is the least
40%
4. General Regulations:
a. The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
b. Warehousing or the indoor storage of goods or material beyond that normally incidental to permitted uses shall
be prohibited.
c. The planning commission, subject to approval of the city council, may require landscaping to promote
compatibility with the neighborhood.
5. Conditional Use Permits Required: All developments in CC zoning districts shall be subject to the conditional use
permit procedure as set forth in section 3-2-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978; amd. Ord. 460, 8-22-1995)
B. CT Commercial Transitional District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the CT zoning district is to establish a transitional zone between more intense commercial
districts and residential districts, particularly along higher volume traffic corridors, and to promote a pattern of land
use suitable for the development of professional and business offices and limited service, retail and commercial
activities. The CT district is intended to protect established residential neighborhoods from the type of land use
associated with high levels of noise, illumination and traffic that could be detrimental to the characteristics of the
residential neighborhood.
2. Principal Permitted Uses:
Art studios.
Banks, financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops.
Childcare centers.
Florists.
Healing art, healthcare facilities, including medical and dental offices.
Laboratories: medical, dental, optical.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 183/640
Laundry or dry cleaning pick up outlets.
Lodges, fraternal organizations, recreation, social and service clubs.
Offices: both business and professional, including accountants, architects, collection agencies, chiropractors,
employment agencies, engineers, health services, insurance agencies, law offices, real estate, stenographic
services, title insurance firms.
Pharmacies when operated in conjunction with, and within the same building as, a medical clinic.
Photographic studios.
Schools for music, dance, teaching and creative arts.
Trade schools.
Travel agencies.
Uses determined to be functionally comparable to principal permitted uses in this zone.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted:
Churches, church facility complexes and places of religious worship.
Convalescent hospitals, sanatoriums, nursing homes, homes for the aged.
Funeral homes and mortuaries.
Multiple-family residential developments which contain five (5) or more units located on a single lot or parcel;
townhouse, condominium or attached housing developments.
Restaurants, sandwich and beverage shops, delicatessens.
Theaters, indoor.
Similar uses determined to be functionally comparable to conditional permitted uses in this zone.
4. Property Development Standards:
a. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
b. Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet (100').
c. Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty percent (50%).
d. Front Yard: A minimum setback of thirty feet (30') shall be required.
e. Rear Yard: A minimum setback of ten feet (10') shall be required.
f. Interior Side: A minimum setback of zero feet (0') to five and one-half feet (51/2') shall be required. Interior side
yards which abut any residential district shall observe the five and one-half foot (51/2') setback required as part
of the R zoning district.
g. Exterior Side: A minimum setback of thirty feet (30') shall be required.
h. Building Height: Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'), or requirements contained within the city
airport master plan, whichever is the most restrictive.
5. General Regulations:
a. The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 184/640
b. Warehousing or the indoor storage of goods or materials beyond that normally incidental to permitted uses
shall be prohibited. (Ord. 460, 8-22-1995)
3-2-10: PC, C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
A. PC Planned Commercial District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the planned commercial zoning district is to provide and preserve commercial areas
appropriate primarily for planned commercial developments or planned shopping centers.
2. Principal Permitted Uses: Planned commercial development or shopping centers inclusive of retail, commercial,
service, medical, professional office or similar business development characterized by an organized and
concentrated grouping of retail/service outlets and establishments and served by common streets, access,
circulation and parking system.
3. Standards: The following standards and policy shall apply to planned shopping centers:
a. Street Access Requirements: Such projects shall be permitted only on a site which abuts an arterial street or
highway. Curb cut requirements shall be as follows:
(1) State highways: In accordance with Nevada highway department rules and regulations.
(2) City streets: One hundred feet (100') minimum between curb cuts.
b. Required Yards: All buildings and structures, including, but not limited to, service areas and access drives shall
be set back not less than thirty feet (30') or one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the building or structure,
whichever is greater, from the future or existing street right of way line of any abutting street or as otherwise
determined by the planning commission as part of establishing a concept development plan.
c. Front And Exterior Side Yards: Required front yards and exterior side yards shall be limited exclusively for
landscaping, driveways, internal circulation, walkways, parking signs and other related streetscape features.
Materials storage within such yards shall be prohibited.
d. Landscaping:
(1) Provisions for landscaping shall be included in the development plan to be submitted for conditional use
permit approval. These may include, but are not limited to, screen planting, lawn areas, trees, shrubs, fences
and walls. Drought tolerant, low maintenance species in conjunction with decorative "hard surface" materials,
such as, but not limited to, volcanic rock, gravel or stone are encouraged and may be utilized to fulfill
landscape surface requirements.
(2) Minimum landscape area shall be provided equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the required yard areas or
equal to two and one-half (21/2) square feet per linear foot of street frontage. Additionally, landscape areas
shall be distributed throughout the project site, including required yard areas between buildings, structures
and the adjacent street right of way line.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out this program and to provide such
maintenance and care as is required to obtain the effect intended by the original plan.
e. Screening For Residential Property: In addition to other buffer requirements, when the back of the
development is across the street from or adjoining property in a residential district, then a solid fence or hedge
not less than six feet (6') in height, or an equivalent form of screening, shall be installed and maintained by the
developer to screen the back of the project from the residential property. Such screening shall be approved by
the planning commission.
f. Internal Traffic Circulation: All parking spaces within planned commercial district parking lots shall be provided
with chocks or comparable traffic control devices to prevent nondesired traffic movements and to facilitate the
channeling of vehicular and pedestrian movement.
g. Parking Lot Lighting: Lighting of parking lots shall be required for safety and security purposes and shall have
an illumination range of twenty five hundredths (0.25) of a foot-candle to one foot-candle.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 185/640
h. Pedestrian Walkways: A system of pedestrian walkways shall be provided so as to separate vehicle and
pedestrian movements.
i. Permit Required: A conditional use permit shall be required for all planned commercial developments to
establish a concept development plan or to evaluate individual commercial uses not part of an approved
development concept plan. The conditional use permit shall also evaluate other project features such as
building heights, signs, lot size, preliminary grading, including drainage, manufactured slopes and slope
restoration.
j. Parking Reduction: For planned commercial developments which by application of section 3-2-17 of this
chapter require one hundred (100) or more parking spaces, the planning commission, upon demonstration of
shared or alternating use of parking, may grant a reduction not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the collective
requirement of parking spaces. (Ord. 509, 6-23-1998)
B. C General Commercial District:
1. Principal Uses Permitted: All commercial uses customarily found in a commercial area, including, but not limited
to, the following uses:
Entertainment.
Lodging.
Offices.
Public and quasi-public.
Restaurants.
Retail sales and services.
2. Landscaping:
a. For every new construction in the C general commercial zoning district which is outside of the central business
district (CBD), minimum landscape area shall be provided in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the
surface area of the developed portion of the property for lot sizes one acre or greater and ten percent (10%) of
the surface area of the developed portion of the property for lot sizes smaller than one acre, to include property
consisting of multiple parcels which form a single development. Additionally, the city may, at its discretion,
require that landscaped areas be distributed throughout the development, including yard areas between
buildings, structures and the adjacent street right of way line. The landscaping may include, but is not limited
to, screen planting, lawns, trees, shrubs, fences and walls. Drought tolerant, low maintenance species, in
conjunction with decorative hard surface materials such as, but not limited to, volcanic rock, gravel or stone,
are encouraged and may, where appropriate, be utilized to fulfill landscape surface requirements.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out the requirements of this section and to
provide proper maintenance and care of the landscaping.
3. Planned Shopping Centers: Within the C general commercial zoning district, planned shopping centers are
permitted, subject to the following standards:
a. Street Access Requirements: A planned shopping center shall be permitted only on a site which abuts an
arterial street or highway. Curb cut requirements shall be as follows:
(1) State highways: In accordance with Nevada highway department rules and regulations.
(2) City streets: One hundred feet (100') minimum space between curb cuts.
b. Required Yards: All buildings and structures, including, but not limited to, service areas and access drives,
shall be set back not less than fifty feet (50') from side and rear property lines and not less than sixty feet (60')
from the future or existing street right of way line of an abutting street.
c. Screening For Residential Property: In addition to other buffer requirements which may be required as part of a
conditional use permit, when the rear of a planned shopping center is adjacent to property in a residential
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 186/640
district, then a solid fence or hedge not less than six feet (6') in height shall be installed and maintained by the
developer of the planned shopping center in order to screen the residential property from the planned shopping
center.
d. Internal Traffic Circulation: All parking spaces within planned shopping center parking lots shall be provided
with chocks to prevent unsafe or disorganized traffic movements and to facilitate the channelization of vehicular
circulation.
e. Pedestrian Walkways: A system of pedestrian walkways shall be designed and constructed so as to separate
vehicle and pedestrian movements.
f. Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit is required for the development of a planned shopping center,
together with any requirements incident to the development, such as screen walls, pedestrian walkways and
parking lot configuration.
4. Conditional Uses Permitted: The following uses are permitted in the C general commercial zoning district only
with a conditional use permit:
Gas stations. Businesses where gasoline and oil are sold, including businesses with facilities for repairing or
maintaining automobiles.
Mixed uses. Structures containing one or more residential dwelling units in which a significant portion of the
space within the structure includes one or more principal permitted uses.
Mobile homes. One mobile home or manufactured home used for office quarters on a trailer, recreational vehicle,
manufactured home or mobile home sales lot, provided it is properly connected to utilities. With the exception of
the uses permitted in the preceding sentence, mobile homes shall not be permitted as offices, residences,
temporary dwellings during construction projects or commercial structures in the C general commercial zoning
district.
Parking lots and garages. Areas and structures used for parking vehicles, except where located on the same lot
as and used in conjunction with another permitted use.
Recreational vehicle parks (RVPs). The rental of space for temporary short term, transient occupancy by two (2)
or more recreational vehicles, including any accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental
thereto.
Residential uses. Multiple-family residential developments which contain five (5) or more units located on a single
lot or parcel; townhouse or condominium or attached housing developments. Residential uses must meet the
setback standards in subsection 3-2-5G of this chapter and development standards applicable to multiple-family
residential developments set forth in subsection 3-2-5E6 of this chapter. Single-family residences, duplexes,
triplexes and fourplexes are not permitted in the C general commercial zoning district.
Storage units. Commercial storage units.
Other uses. All other uses which do not meet the criteria for, but are similar in function and character to any of the
principal uses permitted or to uses which are specifically identified as being permitted with a conditional use
permit.
5. Central Business District (CBD): Within the C general commercial zoning district, the central business district
(CBD) area of the city is intended to contain a high concentration of the community's commercial land use and
activity, with the objective of having a clean, safe, aesthetic, diverse, integrated and mutually compatible mixture
of commercial activities. Generally, the city CBD is bounded by the following streets: Court Street on the
northwest, 12th Street on the northeast, Silver Street on the southeast, and 2nd Street on the southwest.
a. Within the CBD, commercial activities will be permitted, provided they meet the requirements applicable to
both the C general commercial zoning district and the CBD, except where this code specifically provides
otherwise.
b. Within the CBD, construction of a new structure which is intended to be located within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of any residential zoning district will only be permitted if a conditional use permit is first issued pursuant
to section 3-2-18 of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 187/640
c. Within the CBD, any new business involving activities which are reasonably likely to discourage other
businesses through light, noise, odors, types and levels of activity, or the creation of a nuisance, such as
(without limitation) auto and truck service and repair facilities; mobile home, recreational vehicle and truck
sales lots; gas service stations; miniwarehousing facilities; veterinary clinics; bars; and other uses determined
by the city to have similar impacts, shall be required to first obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to section
3-2-18 of this chapter.
d. Within the CBD, any new business which involves light manufacturing activities, such as printing and
newspaper production, saddle manufacturing and similar uses, shall be required to first obtain a conditional
use permit pursuant to section 3-2-18 of this chapter.
e. Any use existing on the date of adoption of a new conditional use permit requirement under this section which,
prior to said adoption, satisfied all then applicable zoning requirements, shall be considered as meeting the
conditions which would otherwise be imposed upon such use by the new requirement, and its continuance
shall not be subject to the new conditional use permit requirement.
6. Public, Quasi-Public: Within the C general commercial zoning district, all uses identified as principal permitted
uses in the public, quasi-public (PQP) district shall be required to first obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to
section 3-2-18 of this chapter.
7. Height Restrictions: All structures within the C general commercial zoning district must comply with the height
and other requirements of the current city airport master plan, to the extent the plan applies to that location.
8. Commercial Zone Abutting Residential Zone: A conditional use permit pursuant to section 3-2-18 of this chapter
is required for every new development on a lot or parcel in the C general commercial zoning district which abuts
a residential zoning district. All such developments are subject to the screen wall requirements set forth in
subsection 3-2-3J of this chapter.
9. Dog Grooming Businesses: Within the C general commercial zoning district, a business may be operated and
maintained for dog grooming; provided, however, that there shall not be any overnight or other harboring of any
dogs in such businesses. (Ord. 767, 2-12-2013)
3-2-11: IBP, IC INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. IBP Industrial Business Park District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the IBP Zoning District is to provide and preserve high profile areas appropriate for
corporate office, research and development facilities, office parks and compatible light industrial uses with
emphasis on special site design features that strengthen the City's economic base and contribute to a higher
quality of appearance and standard of land use, and to preclude residential uses and also extensive commercial
uses and development that may be detrimental to the character or quality of the business/industrial park
environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted: The primary permitted uses in the IBP Zoning District are listed as follows, plus other
uses of a similar nature:
Advertising distribution.
Bakery.
Bottling plants.
Business schools, vocational and trade schools.
Catering services.
Childcare center.
Communication facilities.
Corporate and professional office, offices subordinate to and related to the principal industrial use.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 188/640
Electronic manufacturing and assembly.
Financial institutions.
Indoor light manufacturing, processing, assembly, fabricating or storage of certain specified products and
materials.
Laboratories, medical experimental and research.
Machine shops.
Newspaper and publishing plants.
Office supply stores.
Printing, blueprinting, photostating, and photo finishing facilities.
Recording studios.
Recreation and fitness centers.
Warehousing and distribution center.
Other commercial uses which are supportive and complementary to IBP uses and the intent of the district as
determined by the Planning Commission.
3. Conditions:
a. Conditional Use Permit Required: Issuance of a conditional use permit following review by the Planning
Commission and in accordance with this chapter is required for all fully integrated and planned IBP
developments as part of a concept Master Plan or for individual IBP uses not part of an approved Master Plan.
b. Outside Storage: Any outside storage shall be suitably screened from the surrounding area by walls, planting,
or other barrier to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
c. Signs: Advertising signs shall be reviewed as part of the plans submitted for conditional use permit review. The
Planning Commission may require the reduction of any height or size of sign suggested by the developer, if the
Planning Commission finds such reduction to be in keeping with the intent of this section.
d. Height Limitation: No structure may be allowed to exceed the elevation indicated in the current Airport Master
Plan of the City.
e. Required Area And Width: Five (5) acre minimum development area with ten thousand (10,000) square feet
minimum lot area within the development, one hundred fifty feet (150') average width, unless otherwise
permitted by the Planning Commission.
f. Yards: Yards shall be set as follows:
(1) Rear yard: Twenty foot (20') minimum setback unless the structure borders on an alley, in which event no
setback is required.
(2) Interior side yard: Ten foot (10') minimum setback.
(3) Exterior side yard: Fifteen foot (15') minimum setback.
(4) Front yard: Twenty foot (20') minimum setback.
g. Front And Exterior Side Yards: Required front yards and exterior side yards shall be limited exclusively for
landscaping, driveways, internal circulation, walkways, parking, signs and other related streetscape features.
Materials storage within such yards shall be prohibited.
h. Landscaping:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 189/640
(1) Provisions for landscaping shall be included in the Development Master Plan to be submitted for conditional
use permit approval. These shall include, but are not limited to, screen planting, lawn areas, trees, shrubs,
fences and walls. Drought tolerant, low maintenance species in conjunction with decorative "hard surface"
materials, such as, but not limited to, volcanic rock, gravel or stone are encouraged and may be utilized to
fulfill landscape surface requirements.
(2) Minimum landscape area shall be provided equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the required front yard and
exterior side yard equal to two and one-half (21/2) square feet per linear foot of street frontage.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out this program and to provide such
maintenance and care as is required to obtain the effect intended by the original plan. All landscaping shall
be planned and maintained to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission. A screen wall as set forth in
subsection 3-2-3J of this chapter is required for all IBP uses within one hundred fifty feet (150') of an R
district.
B. IC Industrial Commercial District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the IC Zoning District is to provide and preserve transitional areas characterized by
surrounding commercial and industrial districts appropriate for a mixture of commercial uses and small scale
industrial uses which are not associated with excessive levels of noise, dust, odor, vibration or smoke.
2. Principal Uses Permitted:
All general commercial principal permitted uses listed in subsection 3-2-10B of this chapter.
All light industrial principal permitted uses listed in subsection 3-2-12A of this chapter.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use
permit in accordance with provisions of this subsection and as set forth in section 3-2-18 of this chapter:
Gas service stations.
Mixed uses. Structures containing one or more residential dwelling units in which a significant portion of the
space within the structure includes one or more principal commercial permitted uses.
Recreational vehicle parks.
4. Development Standards:
a. Minimum Area: There is no required minimum lot area.
b. Minimum Lot Width: There is no required minimum lot width.
c. Minimum Front And Rear Yard Setback: Required minimum front and rear yard setback shall be five feet (5').
d. Minimum Side Yard Setback: Required minimum side yard setback shall be five feet (5').
5. Height Restrictions: In addition to all other applicable requirements, all structures within the IC Industrial
Commercial Zoning District must comply with the height and other requirements of the current City Airport Master
Plan, to the extent the plan applies to that location.
6. IC Industrial Commercial Zone Abutting Residential Zone: A conditional use permit pursuant to section 3-2-18 of
this chapter is required for every new development on a lot or parcel in the IC Industrial Commercial Zoning
District which abuts a residential zoning district. All such developments are subject to the screen wall
requirements set forth in subsection 3-2-3J of this chapter.
7. Outside Storage: Any outside storage of materials shall be suitably screened from surrounding area by fencing,
walls, planting, or other comparable barrier.
8. Landscaping:
a. For every new construction in the IC Industrial Commercial Zoning District which is outside of the Central
Business District (CBD), minimum landscape area shall be provided in an amount equal to fifteen percent
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 190/640
(15%) of the surface area of the developed portion of the property for lot sizes one acre or greater and ten
percent (10%) of the surface area of the developed portion of the property for lot sizes smaller than one acre,
to include property consisting of multiple parcels which form a single development. Additionally, the City may, at
its discretion, require that landscaped areas be distributed throughout the development, including yard areas
between buildings, structures and the adjacent street right-of-way line. The landscaping may include, but is not
limited to, screen planting, lawns, trees, shrubs, fences and walls. Drought tolerant, low maintenance species,
in conjunction with decorative hard surface materials such as, but not limited to, volcanic rock, gravel or stone,
are encouraged and may, where appropriate, be utilized to fulfill landscape surface requirements.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out the requirements of this section and to
provide proper maintenance and care of the landscaping. (Ord. 829, 5-22-2018)
3-2-12: LI, GI INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. LI Light Industrial District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the LI Zoning District is to provide and preserve areas reserved primarily for less intensive
industrial use and activity normally associated with previously prepared materials and with minimal levels of
noise, dust, odor, vibration or smoke, and to preclude encroachment of land uses such as residential uses that
could be in conflict with the industrial and manufacturing environment.
2. Area And Setback Requirements: All LI District uses shall be established in accordance with the following:
a. Minimum Area: In an LI District, there is no required minimum lot area for a light industrial use.
b. Minimum Lot Width: In an LI District, there is no required minimum lot width.
c. Minimum Front And Rear Yard Setback: Required minimum front and rear yard setback in the Light Industrial
(LI) District shall be ten feet (10').
d. Minimum Side Yard Setback: Required minimum side yard setback in the Light Industrial District shall be ten
feet (10').
e. Maximum Building Height: The maximum allowable building height in the Light Industrial District shall not
exceed the allowable elevation indicated in the current Airport Master Plan for the City.
3. Principal Uses Permitted: The primary permitted uses in the LI Zoning District are listed as follows, plus other
uses of a similar nature:
Ambulance service.
Appliance repair.
Assayer.
Assembly of products and materials.
Auto and truck repair garage.
Auto parking lot.
Bakery.
Bottling plant.
Bus facilities or terminals.
Business machine service.
Cabinet manufacturing.
Clinics.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 191/640
Contractor's services.
Corporate offices.
Dairy products distribution.
Drilling companies.
Electrician shop.
Equipment rentals and sales.
Fabricating of products and materials.
Financial institutions.
Fire stations.
Government facilities.
Health club.
Heavy equipment storage and sales.
Laboratories (medical, dental, optical, veterinarian, chemists).
Manufacturing of products and materials (limited in scale).
Medical offices.
Metallurgical lab.
Miniwarehousing.
Mobile homes. In the LI light industrial district, mobile homes shall be permitted as residences in accordance with
the conditional use permit procedures. A mobile home must, for purposes of this subsection, qualify and
constitute real property, as established by Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 361. In addition, there must be full
compliance with all yard requirements of the R zoning district.
Municipal buildings.
Museums.
Park and ride facilities.
Plumbing shop.
Post office.
Professional offices.
Restaurants.
Storage units.
Trucking facilities or terminals.
Utility companies.
Veterinary clinics.
Warehousing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 192/640
Other commercial uses, which are supportive and complementary to LI uses and the intent of the district as
determined by the planning commission.
4. Accessory Uses Permitted: The accessory permitted uses in the LI district are:
Residential or household units in the same building containing a permitted use in the LI district and which is
occupied by the owner or employee of the permitted use.
5. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use
permit in accordance with provisions of this subsection and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of this chapter:
Childcare center.
Gas service station.
Halfway house for recovering alcohol and drug abusers.
Humanitarian campgrounds.
Mobile homes or residential quarters for caretakers or watchmen.
6. Residential Uses: Residential uses are not allowed in the LI district as a permitted use or a conditional permitted
use. Residential uses existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified herein may be allowed to continue
in accordance with section 3-2-19 of this chapter.
7. Industrial Zone Abutting Residential Zone: When an industrial zone abuts a residential zone, a conditional use
permit is required pursuant to section 3-2-18 of this chapter. All such developments are subject to the required
screen wall in accordance with the provisions of subsection 3-2-3J of this chapter.
8. Requirements: All requirements set forth in section 3-2-17 of this chapter must be adhered to.
9. Screen Walls: A screen wall as set forth in subsection 3-2-3J of this chapter is required for all LI uses within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of an R district.
10. Provisions For Landscaping:
a. Provisions for landscaping shall be part of the development plan and shall include, but are not limited to,
screen planting, lawn areas, trees, shrubs, fences and walls. Drought tolerant, low maintenance species in
conjunction with decorative "hard surface" materials, such as, but not limited to, volcanic rock, gravel or stone
are encouraged and may be utilized to fulfill landscape surface requirements.
b. Minimum landscape area shall be provided equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the required front yard and
exterior side yard, or equal to two (2) square feet per linear foot of street frontage.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out this program and to provide such
maintenance and care as is required to obtain the effect intended by the original plan.
B. GI General Industrial District:
1. Intent: The purpose of the GI zoning district is to provide and preserve areas reserved primarily for more
intensive industrial uses engaged in basic processing or manufacturing of products from raw materials and with
tolerable levels of noise, dust, odor, vibration or smoke, and to preclude encroachment of land uses such as
residential uses that could be in conflict with the industrial and manufacturing environment.
2. Principal Uses Permitted: The primary permitted uses in the GI zoning district include all uses permitted in the LI
zoning district, plus other uses listed as follows:
Food processing facilities.
Manufacturing of products or materials.
Outdoor manufacturing, processing, assembly and fabrication.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 193/640
Other commercial uses which are supportive and complementary to GI district uses and the intent of the district
as determined by the planning commission.
3. Accessory Uses Permitted: The accessory permitted uses in the GI district are:
Residential or household units in the same building containing a permitted use in the GI district and which is
occupied by the owner or employee of the permitted use.
4. Conditional Uses Permitted: Any of the following uses may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use
permit in accordance with provisions of this subsection and those set forth in section 3-2-18 of this chapter:
Asphalt or concrete batch plant.
Gas service station.
Halfway house for recovering alcohol and drug abusers.
Humanitarian campgrounds.
Mobile homes or residential quarters for caretakers or watchmen.
Wrecking yard, salvage yard or junkyard.
Other similar uses or uses determined to be more noxious in character or operation.
5. Residential Uses: Residential uses are not allowed in the GI district as a permitted use or a conditional permitted
use. Residential uses existing at the time of adoption of this section may be allowed to continue in accordance
with section 3-2-19 of this chapter.
6. Height Regulations: In accordance with requirements of the current city airport master plan.
7. Yards:
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than ten feet (10'), or as determined through
the process of variance procedure.
b. Side Yard: No side yard is required except where the premises adjoins a residential district, in which instance,
there shall be a side yard having a width of not less than twenty five feet (25').
8. Industrial Zone Abutting Residential Zone: When an industrial zone abuts a residential zone, a conditional use
permit is required pursuant to section 3-2-18 of this chapter. All such developments are subject to the required
screen wall in accordance with the provisions of subsection 3-2-3J of this chapter.
9. Flammable And Combustible Liquids, Bulk Storage: All flammable and combustible liquids shall be governed by
title 6, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 805, 12-13-2016)
3-2-13: AG GENERAL AGRICULTURE DISTRICT:
This district is intended to comprise lands devoted to agriculture, related activities and other open uses. This district is
further intended to constitute a "hold" district to retain land in less intensive use until the time is appropriate for more
intensive development so as to prevent scattered development and the premature and costly extension of utility mains
and services related thereto, and to regulate development of the city so that it occurs in stages according to market
needs and progresses contiguously outward from the developed urban area. Regulations are designed to limit uses to
those which are compatible with agriculture, to prevent encroachment by more intensive uses, and to preserve the
open space characteristics of the district.
A. Principal Uses Permitted:
1. Agricultural Uses:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 194/640
General agriculture on parcels not less than five (5) contiguous acres in area.
Commercial breeding, raising, training and feeding principally by grazing of horses, cattle, sheep, goats and
hogs; provided, that pens, buildings, corrals and yards other than open pastures are not closer than five hundred
feet (500') to any residence, except the residence of the property owner.
Dairies; poultry and egg farms; fur farms; public stable; provided, that pens, buildings and enclosures other than
open pastures are not closer than five hundred feet (500') to any residence, except the residence of the property
owner.
Oil wells.
Soil crops.
2. General Uses:
Guest ranches, on parcels having an area not less than ten (10) acres; provided, that pens, buildings and yards
other than open pastures used for keeping of livestock are not closer than one hundred feet (100') to any street,
highway or residential district.
Veterinary clinic or animal hospital.
3. Conditional Uses Permitted:
Churches and church facility complexes.
Public recreational uses, including public or quasi-public golf courses and similar activities.
Schools.
Water pumping plants and storage tanks.
B. Accessory Uses Permitted:
1. Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to permitted principal or conditional uses.
2. Employee housing, servants' quarters, guesthouses.
3. Storage of petroleum products required for use on the premises; provided, that such storage shall not exceed
one thousand (1,000) gallons and shall be subject to all applicable health and safety laws.
4. Home occupations.
C. Property Development Standards For Principal Permitted Uses:
1. Minimum lot or site area: Five (5) acres.
2. Minimum lot or site width: Four hundred feet (400').
3. Minimum setback from all street lines: One hundred feet (100').
4. Minimum side yards: One hundred feet (100').
5. Minimum Rear Yard: One hundred feet (100').
D. Property Development Standards For Accessory Buildings:
1. Maximum Height: In accordance with requirements of the current city airport master plan.
2. Minimum Space: The minimum space between a building used for sleeping or living purposes and any other
detached building is twenty feet (20').
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 195/640
3. Minimum Side And Rear Setbacks: Minimum side and rear setbacks of buildings not used for keeping poultry or
animals is twenty feet (20').
4. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings, whether attached or detached, shall not be erected in any required
front or side yard, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
E. Maintenance Of Stock Fences: All livestock and poultry kept shall be kept confined to the premises by erection and
maintenance of a stock fence and necessary cattle guards. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
3-2-14: FP, SA OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
A. FP Floodplain Overlay District: This overlay comprises areas subject to inundation by floodwaters according to limits
established by the department of housing and urban development. It is the intent of this overlay to establish such
regulations as are necessary to protect the public from the hazards and cost which may be incurred when
unsuitable development occurs in such areas.
B. SA Special Area Overlay District: The purpose of the SA special area overlay district is to recognize certain areas as
having unique or extraordinary features, characteristics, circumstances or history related to topography, streets and
circulation, property sizes and configurations or established patterns of land use; and, to provide the opportunity to
establish special development standards and regulations suitable for qualified special areas.
1. Standards Established: Special area and special area development standards are hereby established for the
following described property:
Property zoned R on the east and west side of Lamoille Road, north of Wilson Avenue and inclusive of all R
zoned property between Front Street on the north and Wilson Avenue on the south; property zoned R on the
north and south side of Carlin Court and on the south side of Ouderkirk Avenue, west of Lamoille Road and
inclusive of all R zoned property between Wilson Avenue on the north, Ouderkirk Avenue on the south and
Lamoille Road on the east.
2. Property Development Standards:
a. Area Requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: Four thousand (4,000) square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: Forty feet (40').
(3) Minimum lot depth: Eighty feet (80').
b. Land Use:
(1) Single-family dwelling (SFD): Four thousand (4,000) square feet.
(2) SFD or duplex: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
(3) SFD, duplex or triplex: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
(4) SFD, duplex, triplex or fourplex: Eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) square feet.
3. Building Setbacks:
a. Front Yard:
(1) Single-story wall or elevation, twelve feet (12').
(2) Two-story wall or elevation, fifteen feet (15').
b. Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15').
c. Exterior Side Yard:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 196/640
(1) Single-story wall or elevation, seven and one-half feet (71/2').
(2) Two-story wall or elevation, twelve feet (12').
d. Interior Side Yard:
(1) Single story wall or elevation, five feet (5').
(2) Two-story wall or elevation, seven and one-half feet (71/2').
4. Off Street Parking:
a. Single-family dwelling, two (2) spaces.
b. Multiple-family dwelling, two (2) spaces per unit. (Ord. 512, 8-11-1998)
3-2-15: PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this section, are the
planned unit development (PUD) district regulations. The "planned unit development" is a concept as defined in section
3-2-2 of this chapter. A planned unit development may consist of attached or detached single-family units, townhouses,
chapter units, condominiums, garden apartments or any combination thereof.
A. Purpose And Objective: The purpose is to establish procedures and standards for planned unit developments within
the corporate limits of the city in order that the following objectives may be attained:
1. Accumulation of large areas of usable open space for recreation and preservation of natural amenities.
2. Flexibility in design to take the greatest advantage of natural land, trees, historical and other features.
3. Creation of a variety of housing types and compatible neighborhood arrangements that give the homebuyer
greater choice in selecting types of environment and living units.
4. Allowance of sufficient freedom for the developer to take a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical development, as well as utilizing innovative techniques to enhance the visual character of the city.
5. Efficient use of land which may result in reduction in development costs of street and utility systems.
6. Establishment of criteria for the inclusion of compatible associated uses to complement the residential areas
within the planned unit development.
7. Simplification of the procedure for obtaining approval of proposed developments through simultaneous review by
the city of proposed land use, site consideration, lot and setback considerations, public needs and requirements,
and health and safety factors.
B. Use Regulations: Uses permitted in the planned unit development may include, and shall be limited to, the following;
provided, that the uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit after
review by the planning commission and approval by the city council:
1. Public dedication to the city of the common open space. This method is subject to formal acceptance by the city.
2. Establishment of an association or nonprofit corporation of all individuals or corporations owning property within
the planned unit development to ensure the maintenance of all common open space.
3. Retention of ownership, control and maintenance of all common open space by the developer.
4. All privately owned common open space shall continue to conform to its intended use and remain as expressed
in the site plan through the inclusion of all deeds or appropriate restrictions to ensure that the common open
space is permanently preserved according to the site plan. Said deed restrictions shall run with the land and be
for the benefit of present as well as future property owners and shall contain a prohibition against partition.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 197/640
5. All common open space as well as public and recreational facilities shall be specifically included in the
development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate
than the construction of residential structures.
6. If the developer elects to administer common open space through an association or nonprofit corporation, said
organization shall conform to the following requirements:
a. The developer must establish the association or nonprofit corporation prior to the sale of any lots.
b. Membership in the association or nonprofit corporation shall be mandatory for all residential property owners
within the planned unit development and said association or corporation shall not discriminate in its members
or shareholders.
c. The association or nonprofit corporation shall manage all common open space and recreational and cultural
facilities that are not dedicated to the public, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of
said land and any other land within the planned unit development not publicly or privately owned, and shall
secure adequate liability insurance on the land.
d. If the developer elects an association or nonprofit corporation as a method of administering common open
space, the title to all residential property owners shall include an undivided fee simple estate in all common
open space.
e. Said association or nonprofit corporation shall not be dissolved nor shall dispose of any common open space
by sale or otherwise, without first offering to dedicate such common open space to the city, which offer shall be
accepted or rejected within one hundred twenty (120) days.
f. Said association or nonprofit corporation may make reasonable assessments to meet its necessary
expenditures for maintaining the common open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
planned unit development plan. The assessment shall be made ratably against the properties within the
planned unit development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space.
g. Said association or nonprofit corporation established for ownership and maintenance of common open space
and receiving payments from owners of the property within the planned unit development shall:
(1) Immediately deposit such payments in a separate trust account maintained by it with some bank or
recognized depository in this state.
(2) Keep records of all payments deposited therein and all disbursements therefrom.
7. The city, association, nonprofit corporation, developer or landowner who retains ownership, control and
maintenance of a common open space shall have all rights of assessment, enforcement of assessment lien and
other procedures available to said individual, corporation, association or other business entity as set forth in
Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278A.
C. Utilities And Services: Structures within the planned unit development shall be connected to city water and sewer
lines and all utility lines shall be placed underground except for major electrical transmission lines. The road
network of the planned unit development shall be of a suitable design and construction as to meet city
specifications. The city shall have the right to require, prior to the approval of the site plan, such easements from
the developer as are necessary for access by the city to privately owned acres of the planned unit development to
permit the city to perform necessary police, health, safety and fire services.
D. Minimum Development Standards: A planned unit development must contain five (5) or more dwelling units and all
lots within the planned unit development shall meet at least the following minimum requirements:
1. Minimum Site Area: Minimum site area shall be five (5) acres, except the planning commission, with approval of
the city council, may waive this minimum when proper planning justification is shown.
2. Minimum Lot Size For Single-Family Detached Residences: The following minimum lot sized per dwelling unit
shall apply to all lots containing a single-family detached residence, if said lots are located entirely within that
section of the planned unit development that was previously located in an R zoning district:
7,500 square feet = 5.81
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 198/640
3. Lot Coverage: Maximum lot coverage shall be fifty percent (50%) for all lots within the planned unit development.
4. Setbacks: There shall be a minimum setback of ten feet (10') between any buildings which are forty feet (40') or
less in height and all public or private access right of way designed for limited vehicular traffic, such as minor
residential streets, cul-de-sacs, or dead end type streets. A minimum setback of twenty feet (20') shall apply to
dwelling units located on collector streets and a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') shall apply to dwelling units
located on arterial streets. The setback shall be increased two feet (2') for each additional story above forty feet
(40') of height.
5. Distance Between Buildings: There shall be a minimum distance between detached buildings as follows: Twenty
feet (20') for the first forty feet (40') of height. Two feet (2') additional for each additional story above forty feet
(40') of height.
6. Access: All lots shall have access to either private or public roads within the planned unit development. Private
roads are to be allowed within the planned unit development if they meet the minimum city construction
standards. Private roads shall not be permitted along the perimeter of the planned unit development unless
approved by the planning commission. All roads must be designated to tie in effectively with the city thoroughfare
portion of the general plan. The city shall be allowed access on private roads and privately owned common open
space to ensure the police and fire protection of the area to meet emergency needs, and to conduct city service.
7. Buffer Areas And Screening: Compatible and complementary buffer areas and/or screening shall be provided
between primary residential uses and secondary nonresidential uses within the planned unit development and
between conflicting uses located on the periphery of the development and surrounding developments or zoning
districts. Sizes of buffer zones shall be determined during the process of conditional use permit approval.
8. Common Walls; Fire Resistance: Within the buildings, whenever common walls are proposed, they shall be two
(2) hour fire resistant.
9. Drainage: Drainage on the internal private and public streets shall be as required by the public works
department. All common driveways shall drain to either storm sewers or a street section.
10. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be provided and installed as required by the fire department. Fire lanes shall
be provided as required by the fire department. Fire lanes may be grass areas.
11. Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting within the development shall be provided on private common drives, private
vehicular streets and on public streets. The lighting on all public streets shall conform to the standards approved
for regular use elsewhere in the city. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
E. Open Space And Density:
1. In no instance shall the total amount of usable open space within the planned unit development be less than
twenty percent (20%) of the gross acreage of the planned unit development. The following shall not be counted
as usable open space: Land that has average slopes of greater than ten percent (10%); any streets, parking
areas or other asphaltic or paved areas except for pedestrian and bicycle paths.
2. Density of the area shall be computed in the form of dwelling units per acre. The following maximum density shall
apply to those sections of the planned unit development that were previously located in the following specified
zoning districts:
R district specific density will be determined in process of conditional use permit review, however, in no instance
shall the maximum density exceed twelve (12) units per acre.
F. Open Space And Related Incentives:
1. For each five percent (5%) increment of additional usable common open space above the twenty percent (20%)
per gross acre minimum, the developer will be allowed a corresponding increase in density of ten percent (10%)
above the density figure computed in subsection E of this section, subject to the maximum limitation of twelve
(12) units per acre.
2. For each linear mile of bicycle path provided in the planned unit development, the developer will be allowed a
corresponding increase in density of ten percent (10%) above the density figure computed in subsection E of this
section, subject to the maximum limitation of twelve (12) units per area. The route of the bicycle path and its
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 199/640
gradient must be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council and shall be constructed
according to the following specifications: width, at least eight feet (8') wide; paving, at least six inches (6") of
compacted crushed stone base with two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete, whichever is suitable to the
development. All site work, including drainage facilities, clearing and grading for the bicycle path shall be
reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council. (Ord. 336, 12-14-1982)
G. Termination Of Planned Unit Development: Any owner of land which has been designated a planned unit
development may apply to the city for the termination of the planned unit development use of that portion of his land
in which construction has not been commenced pursuant to a site plan. The petition for termination of a planned
unit development shall be accompanied by a zoning change application in accordance with the procedure specified
in this chapter.
H. Building And Occupancy Permits: All building and occupancy permits shall be issued in conformance with an
approved site plan for a planned unit development.
I. Procedures For Authorization Of Planned Unit Development: In order to provide an expeditious method for
processing a plan for a planned unit development and to avoid delay and uncertainty, it is hereby declared that all
procedures with respect to the approval or disapproval of a planned unit development and its continuing
administration shall be consistent with the provisions set out in Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278A.440
through 278A.590, inclusive. (Ord. 256, 4-22-1978)
3-2-16: RC RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
A. Principal Uses Permitted:
1. Licensed houses of prostitution and limited residential uses associated therewith, and "sexually oriented
business uses", as defined in section 3-2A-2 of this chapter, shall be permitted in restricted commercial zoned
areas.
2. Development within the restricted commercial district shall be limited to the following areas:
The westerly 1/2 of Lot 9 and Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, of Block 47 in the
Town of Elko Subdivisions; Lots 1, 2 and easterly 13.70 feet of Lot 3 of Block E of the Central Addition
Subdivision.
B. Restricted Commercial District Use Permitted: It shall be unlawful to locate or relocate any house of prostitution in
any area within the city except within a restricted commercial district.
C. Other Uses Permitted: General commercial, convenience commercial, light industrial and general industrial uses
may be permitted in the RC zone, provided all requirements of section 3-2-12 of this chapter have been adhered to.
D. General Regulations:
1. The planning commission may require, with approval of the city council, landscaping sufficient to promote the
compatibility with the neighborhood.
2. The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
E. Conditional Use Permits Required: Houses of prostitution in the RC zoning district shall be subject to the conditional
use permit procedure as set forth in section 3-2-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 439, 4-12-1994)
3-2-17: TRAFFIC, ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 200/640
It is the intent of this chapter to secure optimum coordination and interaction between land use and transportation
facilities. Preservation and improvement of the traffic function of abutting streets, and of the major street system as a
whole, are essential considerations in the project planning stage of land development. It is the purpose of this section
to establish the regulations necessary to assure that every land use will be so located and planned as to minimize
traffic congestion, hazards and vehicular pedestrian conflicts. It is the further purpose to place upon the property owner
the primary responsibility for relieving public streets of the burden of on street parking and to provide the regulations
and minimum standards essential to the planning and development of adequate off street parking.
A. Property Owner Responsibility: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the property owner to plan and develop his
property in such a way that:
1. On street space will never be required to satisfy parking or loading space needs;
2. Points of access from the public street will be minimized; and
3. Driveway openings will be so located and dimensioned as to minimize the disruption of passing traffic and the
creation of traffic hazards.
B. Regulations Pertaining To Traffic: Every use shall conform to the following general standards, in addition to the
special standards for certain specific uses as set forth in this chapter:
1. Traffic Visibility: No obstructions to visibility at any street intersection, including, but not limited to, structures,
signs, parked vehicles or vegetation, shall be allowed or permitted to remain in any zoning district between the
heights of two and one-half feet (21/2') and eight feet (8') above the ground.
2. Driveways: All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended after the effective date hereof shall be
subject to the approval of the city engineer or duly authorized representative, and shall comply with standards set
forth in this chapter, including the following requirements:
a. Driveway openings which contribute to or result in the creation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazards may
not be approved. Factors or circumstances which may represent a hazardous situation include the following:
(1) Obstructions to visibility at the intersection of a public street and proposed driveway.
(2) Traffic congestion and vehicular pedestrian conflicts at the intersection of a public street and proposed
driveway.
(3) Multiple proposed driveway openings or driveway openings combined with existing driveway openings
which increase vehicular traffic conflict points in the public street.
b. Driveway openings shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in width measured at the street line, exclusive of curb
returns or tapers, except as otherwise provided herein.
c. For commercial and industrial uses, driveway openings shall not exceed forty four feet (44') in width measured
at the street line, exclusive of curb returns or tapers. However, in special circumstances where, based upon
facts presented to the city engineer's office, the city engineer determines there is a need in the interest of
public safety for a multiple lane driveway opening configuration, the city engineer or duly authorized
representative may approve driveway openings greater than the maximum width prescribed in this section.
d. Vehicular entrances and exits to drive-in theaters, stadiums, racetracks, funeral homes and similar uses
generating very heavy, periodic traffic conflicts, shall be located not closer than two hundred feet (200') to any
intersection or any pedestrian entrance or exit to a school, college, university, church, hospital, public
emergency shelter or other place of public assembly.
3. Access:
a. Roadway Classifications: All roadway classifications shall be determined in accordance with the transportation
component of the city of Elko master plan.
b. Private Access: No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed right of way of any
freeway, interstate highway, expressway or controlled access arterial street without the express permission of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 201/640
the city or other governmental entity having jurisdiction over the location where the access is proposed.
c. Public Or Private Access: Direct public or private access shall meet the minimum standards set forth in this
section based on the applicable roadway classifications; provided: 1) the Nevada department of transportation
(NDOT) shall be granted access through existing NDOT rights of way; and 2) NDOT may be granted access
through property owned by the city; further provided, the city may, in its discretion, modify the minimum
standards set forth in this section under circumstances in which the property owner demonstrates that physical
site conditions and/or the location of existing rights of way render strict compliance impractical or impossible.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the following access standards shall apply based on the
applicable roadway classification:
(1) Private property owners may be granted access from principal/major arterial streets if there is no other
reasonable access to the parcel, in which event access shall be restricted to right turns only and shall be
located no less than three hundred fifty feet (350') from all other intersections and points of access. Access
from principal/major arterial streets shall be shared with adjacent properties where feasible.
(2) Access from minor arterial streets shall be permitted, provided it is located no less than two hundred fifty
feet (250') from intersections and other points of access.
(3) Access to collector streets from residential parcels shall be permitted, provided the design does not force or
encourage vehicles to back into streets, further provided the access is located no less than seventy five feet
(75') from intersections and twenty five feet (25') from other points of access.
(4) Access to collector streets from nonresidential parcels shall be permitted, provided the access is located no
less than one hundred feet (100') from intersections and other points of access.
(5) Access to local streets from residential parcels shall be permitted, provided the access is located no less
than thirty feet (30') from all other intersections and no less than ten feet (10') from other points of access.
(6) Access to local streets from nonresidential parcels shall be permitted, provided the access is located no
less than fifty feet (50') from intersections and thirty feet (30') from all other points of access.
d. Driveways And Parking Spaces: Except for single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings, driveway and
parking space location and design shall include a paved turning area allowing vehicles to turn around and head
into a public street. Except as provided above, under no circumstance shall any off street parking lot be so
arranged or designed as to necessitate backing a vehicle into a public street.
e. Civil Improvements Required: All civil improvements required pursuant to this code (to include, without
limitation, title 8, chapter 18, "Public Improvement Standards", of this code) shall be completed on the full
frontage of the lot, parcel or tract of real property prior to the granting of access to any city right of way or
easement. Civil improvements shall be consistent with the public improvements identified in chapter 3 or 5 of
this title whichever is applicable and satisfy all other requirements of this code. All civil improvements are to be
approved by the city of Elko and constructed by a properly licensed contractor and certified by a properly
licensed engineer.
f. Revocation Of Access: Access to city of Elko rights of way or easements may be revoked if conditions identified
in the approval of the civil improvement plans are not satisfied or if access to city of Elko rights of way or
easements is taken that has not been approved through the submittal of civil improvement plans.
4. Traffic Counts: All developers shall provide calculations in accordance with the Institute Of Traffic Engineers (ITE)
"Traffic Generation Manual" for the anticipated traffic load created by the development. In the event the city
determines that a proposed development is likely to create a traffic load exceeding one thousand (1,000) vehicles
per day (vpd), or if the city determines that the resulting increase in traffic from a proposed development will likely
decrease the level of service (LOS) of a roadway based on the current traffic counts on that roadway to an LOS
of D or worse as determined in accordance with the "Highway Capacity Manual" and the AASHTO publication
entitled "Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets", the developer shall complete and submit to the city a
traffic study prior to submitting plans for civil improvements. The city may take the traffic study into consideration
in approving or rejecting any civil improvement plans related to the proposed development.
C. General Off Street Parking Regulations: In all zoning districts, off street parking facilities must be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this section for: 1) buildings, establishments or uses of land established after the
effective date of this amendment, i.e., June 12, 2002; and 2) existing buildings, establishments or uses of land
which are extended, enlarged or altered after the effective date of this amendment.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 202/640
1. Buildings, establishments or uses of land established and in operation prior to the effective date of this
amendment shall be exempt from the requirements of this section; provided, however, that whenever such
buildings, establishments or uses of land are extended, enlarged or altered, off street parking facilities shall be
provided for the modified area or increased floor area in accordance with the provisions of this section.
2. The owner or occupant of any building, establishment or use of land subject to off street parking requirements
under this section shall not discontinue nor reduce any existing required parking without first having established
other replacement parking in accordance with provisions of this section.
3. Off street parking spaces of any establishment or business which are within any public street or right of way and
thus, nonconforming with the requirements of this section must be abandoned or relocated in accordance with
provisions of this section within ninety (90) days upon the automatic termination of the nonconforming use of
parking caused by any one of the following events:
a. A change in use of any building or land owned, leased or used by an establishment or business;
b. Any enlargement, expansion or addition to any building owned, leased or used by an establishment or
business in excess of four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area;
c. The occupancy by any establishment or business of a building that has not been occupied or used for a period
of at least nine (9) out of twelve (12) consecutive months.
4. The only way an establishment or business can prevent the automatic abandonment of the use of the parking
spaces within any public street or right of way as set forth above is for the establishment or business to obtain a
revocable permit from the city council. In order to obtain any such revocable permit, the applicant must first
appear before the planning commission for consideration. The recommendation of the planning commission must
then be submitted to the city council. If the city council grants any such revocable permit, it may be granted
subject to any terms or conditions required by the city council which the city council deems to be in the best
interest of the city.
D. Location And Placement Of Required Off Street Parking:
1. General: Every part of every off street parking facility shall be set back from every lot line a sufficient distance to
assure that no part of any parked vehicle will project over the lot line.
2. Residential Uses:
a. In any residential zoning district other than the RMH-1 district, no required off street parking space shall be
located in a required front yard or interior side yard.
b. Required off street parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use it is intended to serve;
provided, however, that:
(1) Parking for cooperative or condominium type multi-family dwellings, fraternities, sororities and rooming
houses, may be provided in a parking lot not farther than two hundred feet (200') from the entrance to the
dwelling unit it is intended to serve.
(2) Required parking for any multi-family dwellings, in excess of one space per dwelling unit, may be located on
a separate lot or parcel in a parking lot not more than three hundred feet (300') from the dwelling units it is
intended to serve.
3. Nonresidential Uses:
a. Required off street parking shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of the building or use it is intended
to serve, the distance being measured along the sidewalk from the nearest point of the building or use to the
nearest point of the parking lot; provided, however, that parking facilities for a stadium, auditorium, outdoor
sports arena, or similar use, may be located not farther than one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') from the
nearest point of such building or use.
b. Every nonresidential parking lot abutting a residential district on the same side of the street in the same block
shall be set back a distance not less than the minimum required setback for principal residential buildings in the
same block.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 203/640
4. Documentation Required: Whenever the use of a separate lot or parcel is proposed for fulfillment of minimum
parking requirements, the owner shall submit as a part of an occupancy certificate satisfactory assurance that the
separate lot or parcel is permanently committed to parking use by deed restriction or other enforceable legal
measure.
E. Methods Of Providing Required Off Street Parking: Required off street parking may be provided by any one or
combination of the following methods:
1. By providing the required parking space on the same lot as the building or use being served.
2. By the collective provision of required parking for two (2) or more buildings or uses, whereupon the total of such
parking shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for the several buildings or uses computed separately;
provided, however, that if two (2) or more such buildings or uses have operating hours which do not overlap, the
planning commission, upon appeal, may grant a reduction of the collective requirement based upon the special
circumstances involved. A written agreement for joint use of such facilities shall be executed between the parties
concerned and a copy shall be filed with the building inspector.
3. By securing the consent to use off street parking facilities under another's ownership which are not otherwise
used during the principal operating hours of the building or use in question; provided, however, that such consent
shall be in written form and a copy shall be filed with the building inspector.
4. In any zoning district and for cause shown, the planning commission may waive all or any portion of an off street
parking requirement, provided such waiver does not conflict with the purpose and intent of this chapter. In
conjunction with the review and consideration of a parking waiver, the city shall notify all adjacent property
owners as listed on the county assessor's records not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the planning
commission meeting. Any decision of the planning commission associated with a request to waive an off street
parking requirement may be appealed to the city council. Application for parking waiver shall be filed with the
planning department on a form provided for such purpose and shall include payment of a filing fee in an amount
established by resolution of the city council.
F. Schedule Of Required Off Street Parking: The minimum number of off street parking spaces required for specific
uses shall be determined according to the following schedule. Requirements for a specific use not listed shall be
the same as those for the most similar use listed, or as required by the planning commission or the city council.
Commercial recreation:
Billiard parlors 1 per 2 billiard tables, plus 1 per each 2 employees on the largest shift
Bowling alleys 4 per bowling lane, plus 1 per each 2 employees on the largest shift
Gymnasiums, health
studios
1 per 400 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 per each employee on the
largest shift
Private golf clubs,
swimming clubs, tennis
clubs and similar uses
1 per 2 member families or individuals
Skating rinks, dance halls,
dance studios
1 per 3 persons of maximum capacity permitted by fire regulations
Commercial sales and
services:
Barbershops, beauty
shops
2 per service chair
Bus depot 1 per 150 square feet of waiting room space, plus requirements for auxiliary
commercial uses as elsewhere listed
Use Minimum Spaces Required
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 204/640
Commercial recreation:
Car wash/wash line 1 per each employee on the largest shift, plus reservoir spaces equal to 5 times
the capacity
Childcare center 1 per every 10 students based on licensed occupancy, plus 1 per each
employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per each facility vehicle
Drive-through facility
(bank, fast food, retail)
Requirements for uses elsewhere specified herein, plus stacking capacity for 5
vehicles. Drive-through lanes must be independent of access lanes required for
parking space backup area and for general and emergency vehicle circulation
Furniture and appliance
stores, household
equipment and apparel
repair services
1 per 800 square feet of usable floor area
Gas convenience stations
1 per 2 gasoline pumps
Leasable spaces 1 per 175 square feet of usable floor area
Mortuaries, funeral homes
1 per 3 fixed chapel seats, or 1 per 50 square feet of assembly area, whichever
is greater, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per commercial funeral vehicle
Motor vehicle and
machinery sales, auto
repair shops
1 per 800 square feet of gross area
Open air business 1 per 500 square feet of sales area for first 2,000 square feet, plus 1 per
additional 2,000 square feet
Planned shopping centers
under unified control
Requirements for all uses elsewhere specified herein, plus 1 per 150 square
feet of remaining usable floor area
Restaurants, bars, cocktail
lounges
1 per 100 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 per each employee on the
largest shift
Self-service laundries and
dry cleaners
1 per 4 machines
Supermarkets, drugstores
1 per 300 square feet of usable floor area
Used car lots 1 per each 1,000 square feet of sales area for first 4,000 square feet, plus 1 per
additional 2,000 square feet
Hotels, motels:
For auxiliary uses, i.e.,
restaurants
1 per 100 square feet of usable floor area of dining room, bar, plus 1 per each 2
employees on the largest shift
For commercial accessory
use
1 per 400 square feet of usable floor area
For overnight guests 1 per guestroom, or suite, plus 1 per each 2 employees on the largest shift
For places of public
assembly
1 per 6 fixed seats or 1 per 24 square feet of unfixed seating space
Institutional uses:
Hospitals 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per each employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per 225
square feet of auxiliary medical office floor area
Use Minimum Spaces Required
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 205/640
Commercial recreation:
Sanatoriums, children's
homes
1 per 5 beds, plus 1 per each employee on the largest shift
Manufacturing and industrial
uses
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 per each employee on the largest
shift, whichever is greater
Offices:
Medical and dental offices
and clinics
1 per 225 square feet of usable floor area
Offices; professional,
governmental, banks,
savings and loan agencies
1 per 300 square feet of usable floor area
Places of public assembly:
Auditoriums, exhibition
halls, theaters, convention
facilities, meeting rooms
1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 40 square feet of unfixed seating space, plus 1 per
each 2 employees on the largest shift
Churches, for primary
seating only
1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 40 square feet of unfixed seating space, plus 1 per
each 2 employees on the largest shift
Social clubs such as Elks,
Moose, VFW, etc.
1 per 200 square feet of usable floor area
Stadium, outdoor sports
arenas
1 per 5 seats, plus 1 per each 2 employees on the largest shift
Public and quasi-public uses:
Elementary schools 1 per 6 students
Golf course, open to public
4 per hole, plus 1 per each employee on the largest shift
High schools 1 per 4 students, plus 1 per employee
Junior colleges, colleges
and universities
1 per 3 enrolled full time day students, plus 1 per employee
Middle school/junior high
school
1 per 10 students, plus 1 per employee
Trade schools, business
colleges
1 per 150 square feet of gross floor area
Residential uses:
Mobile home parks and
lodges
See mobile home parks, mobile home, manufactured home subdivisions and
recreational vehicle (RV) parks (chapter 5 of this title)
Multiple-family dwellings (1
and 2 bedroom unit)
11/2 per dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwellings (3
or more bedrooms)
2 per dwelling unit
Use Minimum Spaces Required
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 206/640
Commercial recreation:
Rooming houses,
fraternities, sororities,
resident clubs, lodges
1 per sleeping room or 1 per bed, whichever is greater
Single-family residence,
townhome, condominium,
duplex, triplex, fourplex
2 per dwelling unit
Wholesaling and
warehousing uses
1 per 1,700 square feet of usable floor area, or 1 per each employee on the
largest shift, whichever is greater, plus 1 per company owned motor vehicle
All other uses not specifically
listed
In accordance with the most recent applicable parking generation rates
established by the Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
G. Parking Lot Design Standards: Design standards associated with secondary access, landscaping, lighting, and
provision of snow storage and trash receptacle enclosure areas, are intended to apply to the development and
construction of new parking lots and facilities, except for parking lots and facilities located within the GI (general
industrial) zoning district.
1. Minimum Design Dimensions: The layout of every off street parking lot shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
90 24 feet 24 feet 9 feet 20 feet
75 - 89 22 feet 24 feet 9 feet 20 feet
54 - 74 18 feet 22 feet 9 feet 20 feet
30 - 53 15 feet 20 feet 9 feet 20 feet
Parallel 12 feet 20 feet 8 feet 23 feet
Parking which is adjacent to a building face, or which is adjacent to improvements such as landscaping and
sidewalks located directly adjacent to a building face shall provide access for fire equipment and personnel in
conformance with the fire code adopted in title 6 of this code.
2. Measurement Of Existing Unmarked Lots: In measuring unmarked parking lots in use or operation on the
effective date hereof, each parking space shall be considered to require a minimum of three hundred (300)
square feet, inclusive of access lanes. For single-family, duplex, triplex and fourplex residential land uses, the
square footage of each required parking space shall be not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9
feet x 20 feet).
3. Secondary Access Or Interior Turnarounds: Secondary access or interior turnarounds shall be provided for
parking lots of ten (10) or more parking spaces, interior turnarounds shall also be designed in accordance with
the currently adopted fire code set forth in title 6 of this code.
4. Landscaping: Five percent (5%) of any off street parking lot of twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall be
reserved for landscaping improvements, except for parking lots and facilities not directly associated with or
serving adjacent commercial or industrial development. Landscape areas should be distributed throughout the
project site and should contribute to the screening and softening of the off street parking lot. Landscape materials
may include, but are not limited to, screen planting, lawn areas, trees, shrubs, fences and walls. Drought tolerant,
low maintenance species in conjunction with decorative "hard surface" materials, such as, but not limited to,
volcanic rock, gravel or stone are encouraged and may be utilized to fulfill landscape surface requirements.
Use Minimum Spaces Required
Angle Of
Parking
One-Way Access Lane
Width
Two-Way Access Lane
Width
Parking Space
Width
Parking Space
Length
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 207/640
a. For off street parking lots of twenty (20) or more parking spaces, provision of the required five percent (5%) of
landscaping may be accompanied by a five percent (5%) reduction in the amount of required parking spaces.
b. Parking spaces which abut and overhang a sidewalk exceeding seven feet (7') in width or a landscape planter
area at least six feet (6') in width may reduce space lengths from the required twenty feet (20') to eighteen feet
(18').
c. Selection and installation of plant materials shall be done with the intent to screen and soften rather than
conceal in order to maintain visibility for facility security. Preference shall be given to the use of low lying
ground cover and shrubs and the use of trees with elevated canopies over the selection and use of densely
compacted trees and shrubs.
d. Planter areas should be distributed throughout the off street parking lot and are encouraged to be used as a
traffic control device to promote safe orderly vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the off street parking
lot.
e. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out this program and to provide maintenance
and care as required to obtain the effect intended by the original plan.
f. Landscaping requirements contained in this chapter are not intended to supplement or compound landscaping
provisions contained in other sections of this title.
g. The city shall not be responsible for maintenance, repair or replacement of any landscaping or related
materials placed or constructed within the public right of way.
h. No obstructions to visibility at any street intersection shall be located within a sight triangle determined in
accordance with American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials (AASHTO) publication of
"A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets", including any amendments thereto.
5. Snow Storage Areas: Snow storage areas shall be provided for parking lots of twenty (20) or more parking
spaces. Landscape areas may be utilized to fulfill this requirement.
6. Lighting: Off street parking areas shall satisfy the following lighting requirements: Eighty percent (80%) of the
parking lot shall have a minimum illumination level of twenty five hundredths (0.25) of a foot-candle. Levels of
illumination should be distributed throughout the parking lot.
7. Trash Receptacle/Dumpster Areas: Trash receptacle/dumpster areas, enclosed by a screen wall, shall be
provided for parking lots directly associated with industrial, commercial or multiple-family residential development
and which contain twenty (20) or more parking spaces.
8. Parking Lot Access:
a. Access From Alley: An alley may be used for principal access to any parking lot, and for direct access to
parking spaces; provided, however, that every such alley shall be dedicated full width to the public, fully
improved with an all weather, dust free surface, and properly drained to prevent impoundment of surface water.
b. Access From Street: No entrance or exit to a parking lot shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15') to any
abutting residential district.
9. Surfacing, Curb And Drainage: Every parking lot and parking access shall be:
a. Properly graded to prevent impoundment of surface water;
b. Surfaced with asphaltic concrete or cement concrete at least two inches (2") thick;
c. Parking spaces shall be clearly striped;
d. Continuous six inch (6") concrete curbs or a comparable alternative shall be installed as protection for planted
areas, islands and walls within the parking lot area. Noncontinuous curbing may be allowed in circumstances
where perimeter planted areas are part of the approved storm runoff and drainage plan.
10. Required Screen Walls: Where the interior side lot line or rear lot line of a nonresidential parking lot abuts a
residential district and is not separated therefrom by an alley, a solid, continuous screen wall not less than five
feet (5'), nor more than six feet (6') in height above grade, shall be installed and maintained abutting the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 208/640
residential district line; provided, however, that such wall shall extend no closer to the street line than the
minimum required setback for residential properties in the same block.
11. Plans Required For Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces: Site plans are required for off street parking and
loading and shall show how the required parking and loading spaces are to be located and arranged on the site.
In addition, such plans shall demonstrate safe and efficient internal circulation and traffic flow and show how
drives and parking lots are to be graded and drained, as well as the location and design of all screen walls,
landscaping and lighting. Such plans must be reviewed and approved by the planning and engineering
departments.
H. Park And Ride Facilities: Park and ride facilities shall satisfy the design standards set forth in subsection G of this
section, unless specifically discussed in this subsection H, as follows:
1. Location: Park and ride facilities shall be located in either light industrial (LI) or general industrial (GI) zoning
districts and shall be located adjacent to roadways classified as commercial/industrial collector, arterial or
principal arterial in the city of Elko master plan.
2. Stand Alone Use: A park and ride facility shall be a stand alone use located on a single parcel that does not
contain any other use.
3. Area Requirements: Park and ride facilities shall be located on lots with a minimum lot size of three (3) acres and
not more than fifteen (15) acres.
4. Lighting: Park and ride facilities shall satisfy the following lighting requirements: Fifty percent (50%) of the parking
lot shall have a minimum illumination level of twenty five hundredths (0.25) of a foot-candle. Levels of illumination
must be distributed throughout the parking lot.
5. Trash Receptacle/Dumpster Areas: Every park and ride facility must contain at least one area, enclosed by a
screen wall, for the placement of trash receptacles and/or dumpsters. There must be no less than one trash
receptacle for every acre of a park and ride facility. The trash receptacle areas shall be evenly placed through the
park and ride facility. In addition to the foregoing, trash receptacles shall be located at each bus loading zone and
at least one enclosed dumpster must be placed in a location that can be accessed from a paved surface.
6. Traffic Study: All developers of new park and ride facilities shall provide calculations in accordance with the
Institute Of Traffic Engineers (ITE) "Traffic Generation Manual" for the anticipated traffic load created by the park
and ride facility. In the event the city determines that a proposed park and ride facility is likely to create a traffic
load exceeding two thousand (2,000) vehicles per day (vpd), or if the city determines that the resulting increase in
traffic from a proposed park and ride facility will likely decrease the level of service (LOS) of a roadway based on
the current traffic counts on that roadway to an LOS of D or worse as determined in accordance with the
"Highway Capacity Manual" and the AASHTO publication entitled "Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets",
the developer of the proposed park and ride facility shall complete and submit to the city a traffic study prior to
submitting plans for civil improvements. The city may take the traffic study into consideration in approving or
rejecting any civil improvement plans related to the proposed development.
7. Surfacing And Drainage: Every new park and ride facility shall:
a. Be properly graded to prevent impoundment of surface water;
b. Be surfaced with compacted type II road base with a minimum thickness of six inches (6");
c. Contain parking spaces which are clearly delineated either with striping on paved surfaces or with the use of
parking bumpers on unmarked areas;
d. Contain asphaltic surfacing with a minimum thickness of two inches (2") over the route leading from each
entrance into the parking lot for a minimum of forty feet (40'); and
e. Contain asphaltic surfacing with a minimum thickness of two inches (2") over the route intended for the loading
and unloading of commuters on and off buses (if applicable).
I. Exceptions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 209/640
1. In the case of a multi-family residential development which contains five (5) or more units proposed to be
occupied by elderly persons or individuals with disabilities, the planning commission may grant a twenty five
percent (25%) reduction in the required off street parking.
2. All principal permitted uses occupying basement floor area, ground level or first story floor area or second story
floor area, or any combination thereof, and which are situated on property located within four hundred feet (400')
of the Central Business District (CBD) public parking corridor, are exempted from providing required off street
parking. Residential uses shall provide required off street parking in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
3. Overnight parking in conjunction with occupancy of recreational vehicles within the Central Business District
(CBD) public parking corridor shall be prohibited.
4. Parking of all unlicensed or unregistered vehicles within the Central Business District (CBD) public parking
corridor shall be prohibited.
5. Parking of any type of trailer that is disconnected from the pulling vehicle within the Central Business District
(CBD) public parking corridor shall be prohibited unless otherwise authorized by special event or other permit.
6. Within the Central Business District (CBD) public parking corridor, parking or storage of any properly licensed
vehicle shall be temporary and limited to seventy two (72) hours, unless an exemption is authorized pursuant to a
special event permit or other permit issued in advance by the City.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person, including a business, to utilize the Central Business District (CBD) public
parking corridor for the purposes of storing or parking a vehicle while shuttling employees or car pooling to or
from places of employment.
8. It shall be unlawful to store, park, or idle any semis with trailers within the Central Business District (CBD) public
parking corridor.
9. Police officers are authorized to remove vehicles parked in violation of this Code from the Central Business
District (CBD) subject to the provisions of this section.
10. Whenever any police officer determines that a vehicle is parked in violation of this Code, such officer may cause
to be moved or remove such vehicle in any manner provided by law, or require the driver or person in charge of
the vehicle to move the vehicle to a location or in such a manner as to render it no longer in violation.
11. Any police officer may cause to be removed any vehicle or part of a vehicle parked in violation of this Code, or
may cause such vehicle to be removed, to the nearest garage or other location for storage if:
a. The vehicle has been involved in an accident and is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or
impractical and/or the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury
or other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or are not in the
immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle; or
b. The person driving or in actual physical control of the vehicle is arrested for any alleged offense providing that
the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay.
12. In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this subsection I, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was found in violation thereof, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint or citation was at the time of such complaint or citation the registered owner, owner or party in the care
or custody of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner,
owner or party in the care or custody of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the
point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
13. To the extent there should exist any actual conflict with other traffic laws of the City, the provisions of this
subsection I shall be controlling concerning the parking of vehicles within the Central Business District (CBD)
public parking corridor. (Ord. 801, 2-24-2016)
3-2-18: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
It is the intent of this section to provide for the issuance of conditional use permits to allow for the specialized use
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 210/640
within zoning districts of certain normal and complementary uses to that of the principal use of the zoning district.
A. General Regulations:
1. Certain uses of land within designated zoning districts shall be permitted as principal uses only upon issuance of
a conditional use permit. Subject to the requirements of this chapter, other applicable chapters, and where
applicable to additional standards established by the Planning Commission, or the City Council, a conditional use
permit for such uses may be issued.
2. Any building, structure or use existing on the effective date of this chapter for the zoning district in which it is
located shall be considered as meeting the conditions which would otherwise be imposed upon such use by the
zoning district, and its continuance shall not be subject to issuance of a conditional use permit; however, to the
extent that such use fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district, it shall be considered
nonconforming and its continuance shall be governed by all nonconforming use regulations applicable thereto.
3. Conditional use permits for development or for the extension, enlargement or change of a nonconforming use or
which are otherwise required under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable and shall run with the land
upon the issuance of an occupancy permit signifying that all zoning and site development requirements imposed
in connection with the permit have been satisfied. The maintenance of special conditions imposed by the permits,
as well as compliance with other provisions of the zoning district, shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
4. Every conditional use permit issued, including a permit for a mobile home park, shall automatically lapse and be
of no effect one (1) year from the date of its issue unless the permit holder is actively engaged in developing the
specific property to the use for which the permit was issued.
5. Every conditional use permit issued shall be personal to the permittee and applicable only to the specific use and
to the specific property for which it is issued. However, the Planning Commission may approve the transfer of the
conditional use permit to another owner. Upon issuance of an occupancy permit for the conditional use, signifying
that all zoning and site development requirements imposed in connection with the permit have been satisfied, the
conditional use permit shall thereafter be transferable and shall run with the land, whereupon the maintenance or
special conditions imposed by the permit, as well as compliance with other provisions of the zoning district, shall
be the responsibility of the property owner.
6. Conditional use permits shall be reviewed from time to time by City personnel. Conditional use permits may be
formally reviewed by the Planning Commission. In the event that any or all of the conditions of the permit or this
chapter are not adhered to, the conditional use permit will be subject to revocation.
B. Conditional Use Permit Application Filing: Application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the City
Planning Department by the owner or lessee of the proposed building, structure or use, on forms furnished for the
purpose; provided, however, that the owner must "approve" lessee's application. A filing fee shall be paid by the
applicant to defray the costs for reviewing and reporting of the facts, in accordance with a fee schedule maintained
by the City.
C. Conditional Use Permit Application Filing: The application shall be full and complete and shall be accompanied by a
detailed site plan showing all information necessary to demonstrate that the proposed use will comply with special
conditions as well as other regulations and requirements of this chapter. If the property is developed, the application
shall include a site plan prepared by a properly licensed surveyor depicting the proposed conditional use permit
site, drawn to scale and showing property lines, existing and proposed buildings, building setbacks, distances
between buildings, parking and loading areas, driveways and other information needed to demonstrate that the
proposed use will be compliant with this Code. If the property is not developed, the application shall include a site
plan provided by a properly licensed design professional, drawn to scale and showing property lines, proposed
buildings, building setbacks, parking and loading areas, driveways and other information needed to demonstrate
that the proposed use will be compliant with this Code. In addition the applicant shall furnish the Planning
Commission any additional information it may consider relevant to its investigation of the application.
D. Planning Commission Review And Investigation: The Planning Commission shall review the application and
supporting data, and make such site inspections and other investigations as it deems necessary.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 211/640
E. Planning Commission Findings And Actions: It is the express intent of this chapter that any use for which a
conditional use permit is required shall be permitted as a principal use in the particular zoning district; provided, that
all special conditions and requirements of this chapter are met. Therefore, the action of the Planning Commission
shall be one of recommending approval or denial based upon its judgment as to whether the specific conditions
have been or will be met. The Planning Commission may consider not only the nature of the use and the special
conditions influencing its location in the particular district, but also the proposed location of buildings, parking and
other facilities within the site, the amount of traffic likely to be generated and how it will be accommodated, and the
influence that such factors are likely to exert on adjoining properties. The Planning Commission may make such
suggestions it considers desirable and may provide guidance to the applicant in his preparation of application,
plans, and data in such a manner as to satisfy the intent of this section. The Planning Commission shall make the
final determination on the conditional use permits, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in section 3-2-25 of this
chapter.
1. If the Planning Commission approves the application, it shall issue a conditional use permit setting forth all
conditions and requirements governing such use, and shall make the approved site plan a part of the record of
the case. Failure of the applicant to comply with the conditions and safeguards which are a part of the terms
under which a conditional use permit is granted shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and grounds for
revocation of the conditional use permit.
2. If the Planning Commission finds that the application and supporting data does not indicate that all applicable
conditions and requirements for a conditional use permit will be met, it shall deny the permit. Notice of denial,
including reasons therefor, shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown in the application.
3. At any time following receipt of notice of denial of application for conditional use permit, the applicant shall have
the privilege of reactivating the case by making such modifications of proposal or plans or submitting such
additional information, as the Planning Commission may have determined was required for approval, or shall
have the right to appeal to the City Council as set forth in section 3-2-25 of this chapter.
F. Public Hearing Required: The Planning Commission shall first hold a public hearing prior to approval or denial of a
conditional use permit other than a home occupation permit. Upon the filing of an application for a conditional use
permit other than a home occupation, the City staff shall set the matter for hearing not later than thirty five (35) days
thereafter. After the time and place have been established by the City staff, notice of the hearing shall be sent by
mail at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owners of the property within three hundred feet (300') of the
exterior limits of the property involved as shown by the latest assessment roles of the City. Notice by mail to the last
known address of the real property owners as shown by the Assessor's records shall be sufficient. Applications
must be filed at least twenty (20) days before the Planning Commission hearing. Legal notice shall be placed in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
G. Conditional Use Permit For Home Occupation:
1. Every conditional use permit issued for a home occupation shall be personal to the permittee and applicable only
to the specific use and to the specific property for which it is issued. Conditional use permits for home
occupations are not transferable, do not run with the land, and must satisfy all other applicable requirements set
forth in this Code.
2. All applications and application fees for home occupation conditional use permits, as established by resolution of
the City Council, shall be filed with the Planning Department and reviewed to determine conformance with the
criteria as set forth in subsection G3 of this section.
a. The City Planner or a duly authorized representative shall make a determination on the application no later
than ten (10) days after receipt of a complete application.
b. All decisions of an application for home occupation shall be attested by the City Clerk, or a duly authorized
representative. Any denial of an application by the City Planner or duly authorized representative shall include
in writing the reason for such denial.
c. The decision to grant or deny a home occupation permit may be appealed by the applicant to the City
Manager. A written appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the ruling. The
City Manager shall make a determination on the appeal no later than ten (10) days after filing of the written
appeal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 212/640
d. The decision of the City Manager may be further appealed to the City Council. A written appeal shall be filed
with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the ruling of the City Manager to the City Council for a final ruling. In
the event of such an appeal, the notice requirements and procedures set forth in section 3-2-25 of this chapter
shall be followed.
e. The City Council shall hear and consider evidence and form facts from any persons and shall consider written
communications from any persons relative to the home occupation request. The City Council shall make a
decision on the application after hearing all evidence and facts presented.
3. Permits issued for home occupation shall adhere to the following criteria:
a. Not more than one (1) home occupation is allowed in any dwelling unit.
b. The permitted use shall be confined to the dwelling unit and shall not include areas outside the dwelling unit,
such as yards or accessory structures.
c. Only natural persons who are occupants of the permitted dwelling unit may be permittees; provided, nothing
herein shall prevent a permittee from being affiliated with a business association or other entity that is not a
natural person in connection with the home occupation.
d. No employee, other than the permittee or other occupants of the permitted dwelling unit, shall be permitted to
report to work or perform work related to the home occupation in the permitted dwelling unit.
e. Permittees shall not allow more than five (5) customers or other business invitees to enter the permitted
dwelling unit to examine or purchase goods or services on any single day. The foregoing prohibition applies to
promotional events and business related parties at the permitted dwelling unit. The foregoing prohibition does
not apply to or limit transaction conducted by telephone or over the internet.
f. No forms of advertising related to the home occupation may be placed on the exterior of the dwelling unit or in
a location visible from a public street, sidewalk or alley. This prohibition includes, without limitation, yard signs
or signs visible from windows.
g. No addition, alteration or remodeling that changes the residential character of the dwelling unit shall be
permitted in connection with a home occupation.
h. The home occupation shall not generate additional vehicular traffic at the or in the vicinity of the permitted
dwelling unit that is measurably in excess of that normally associated with the residential use.
i. No home occupation which produces noise, odors, dust, smoke or electrical disturbances or in any way
interferes with the quiet, peace, and enjoyment of surrounding residential uses shall be permitted.
j. The appearance of the property upon which the home occupation is permitted shall be maintained in a clean
and orderly manner.
k. There shall be no commercial delivery of products or materials to or from the property upon which the home
occupancy is permitted more than once every two (2) days or through the use of vehicles with three (3) or more
axles.
l. A permittee may park or use no more than one (1) motor vehicle in connection with a home occupation on the
property subject to the conditional use permit; provided, in no event shall the permittee utilize on-street parking
for the aforementioned motor vehicle; further provided, the permittee must comply with all off-street parking
requirements as set forth in section 3-2-17 of this chapter. The foregoing parking restrictions do not limit
permitted nonconforming uses allowed under section 3-2-19 of this chapter.
4. Home occupation permits may be periodically reviewed at the discretion of the City Planner or its designee in
order to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the home occupation permit and the provisions of
this section. In the event a permittee violates the terms and conditions of the home occupation permit or the
provisions of this section, the City Planner or its designee may suspend or revoke the permit. The decision of the
City Planner or its designee may thereafter be appealed to the City Council. The notice requirements and
procedures set forth in section 3-2-25 of this chapter apply to and shall be followed for an appeal of a decision by
the City Planner or its designee to suspend or revoke a home occupation permit. (Ord. 818, 4-25-2017)
3-2-19: NONCONFORMING USES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 213/640
A. Permitted: Uses existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, but not in accordance with the provisions and
requirements contained herein, shall be known as nonconforming uses and may be allowed to continue; provided,
however, that such nonconforming uses may not be extended, enlarged or changed to other nonconforming uses,
except by conditional use permit.
B. Uses Included: A nonconforming use is a property use which existed lawfully at the effective date of the enactment
of the City zoning ordinance and has been continued since that time. Nonconforming uses are not limited to, but
may include and consist of the following:
A nonconforming use of property, such as any commercial, industrial or residential use not listed as a principal,
permitted use within the existing underlying zoning district; nonconforming structures or buildings such as any
building or structure that is noncompliant with area, height or setback requirements of the existing underlying zoning
district; and nonconforming development standards, such as noncompliant off street parking, including:
1. Quantity of spaces;
2. Paving;
3. Security lighting; and
4. Landscaping.
C. Nuisance Declared: It shall be unlawful for any person to continue a nonconforming use of any kind in any zoning
district established by this chapter more than one (1) year after its passage when such nonconforming use has
been declared to constitute a nuisance or to be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare by a majority vote of
the City Council. The City Council shall have written notice served on the person last known to be the owner of the
property on which such nonconforming use exists or which constitutes a nonconforming use. The written notice
shall order the nonconforming use to be discontinued within one (1) year thereafter. If the owner does not reside in
the City at the time, the notice may be mailed to the person by registered mail at the last known address. This
subsection shall not be construed as limiting the right of the City of any person to abate a nuisance under any
existing laws or ordinances.
D. Abandonment Or Discontinuance: A nonconforming use of a building or land which is operationally abandoned or
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more shall be considered abandoned and shall not
be resumed. Nonconforming buildings which have been damaged or destroyed by natural calamity may be repaired
or reconstructed within one (1) year from the date of damage, provided the repaired building is appropriate to the
previous use. (Ord. 623, 10-12-2004)
3-2-20: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the building inspector as the City Council so direct.
A. Duties Of Building Inspector: The building inspector shall:
1. Receive and examine applications for and issue zoning compliance certificates and occupancy permits;
2. Make such inspections of buildings, structures and premises as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter;
3. Revoke any zoning compliance certificate or occupancy permit wherein he may have erroneously authorized a
use not permitted in the district or a structure which does not meet the regulations of this chapter, whereupon
such permit shall be void; and
4. Carry out the orders of the city council and/or the planning commission issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
5. Under no circumstances shall the building inspector:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 214/640
a. Grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order or regulation contained in this chapter;
b. Make changes in or vary the terms of this chapter.
B. Zoning Compliance Certificates Required: It shall be unlawful to commence any excavation for, or erection,
alteration, enlargement, extension or moving of, any building or structure, or part thereof, or to change or extend the
use of any lot, or to change the use or type of occupancy of any building or structure, except as may be provided
elsewhere in this chapter until a zoning compliance certificate for such action has been issued by the building
inspector. It shall also be unlawful to change the type of use on any lot on which there is a nonconforming use, until
the building inspector has issued a zoning compliance certificate for such intended use. Accessory buildings or
structures, when proposed for erection at the same time as the principal building and included on the application
therefor, shall not require a separate certificate. No zoning compliance certificate shall be issued except in
conformity to the provisions of this chapter, and by written order of the city council.
1. Applications:
a. Applications for zoning compliance certificates shall be filed with the building inspector on forms provided for
the purpose. In cases where a building permit is also required by the city building code, application for a zoning
compliance certificate shall be made coincidentally with application for building permit. In all other cases, it
shall be made prior to the date when a new or enlarged use of a building or premises, or part thereof, is
intended to begin.
b. When the building inspector receives an application for a zoning compliance certificate for a use which
requires a permit from the city council, such application, together with all supporting data, shall be transmitted
by the building inspector to the planning board and the city council.
c. When the building inspector receives an application for a zoning compliance certificate for a use which
required a conditional use permit, or for which site plan approval by the planning commission is required, such
application shall be transmitted to the planning commission and a zoning compliance certificate shall not be
issued by the building inspector until the planning commission and the city council have approved the site
plans.
2. Site Plan Required: Application for zoning compliance certificates shall be accompanied by site plans, which
shall be filed in the building inspector's office, showing the following and any such additional information as may
be required to assure conformity of the proposed building, structure or use to the provisions of this chapter:
a. Legal description of the property by township, range and section coordinates, and by metes and bounds, or if
the property is a part of a recorded plat, by name, book and page number of plat and lot number or parcel
designation;
b. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner of the person who prepared the site plan;
c. Dimensions of all lot and property lines showing the relationship of the property to abutting properties;
boundaries of all lots or parcels under separate ownership contained therein, or abutting thereon;
d. Precise location, dimensions, height and use of all buildings and structures existing on the property;
e. Location, alignment and right of way width of all streets, alleys and utility easements existing in or abutting the
property;
f. Location and dimensions and number of spaces contained in all existing and proposed off street parking lots
and loading areas;
g. Location, right of way width and alignment of all proposed public streets, alleys and utility easements in or
abutting the site, and location and width of all access drives to the property from public streets;
h. Precise location, size and height of all buildings and structures proposed to be erected or altered;
i. Proposed uses of buildings, structures and land, including the number of dwelling units, amount of usable floor
area, etc.; and
j. Any additional information required to show how all special regulations pertaining to the proposed use are to be
met.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 215/640
3. Site Plans For Part Of Complex: In the case of an application for a zoning compliance certificate for any part of a
building complex or use of land, which complex or use is proposed to be completed at a later date, a preliminary
site plan drawn to scale for the entire complex or use shall be submitted for approval in addition to and at the
same time as the submission of detailed site plans required above. Such preliminary site plans shall show how
the part for which a zoning compliance certificate is sought will be related to the part(s) to be constructed at a
later date.
4. Site Plan Review And Approval: All site plans, except those submitted as part of an application for a conditional
use permit, a special use permit, a temporary use permit, or indicated as requiring planning commission
approval, shall require review and approval by the building inspector prior to issuance of a zoning compliance
certificate. If site plans are found to be deficient or require modification in any respect to meet the requirements of
this chapter, the building inspector shall call in the applicant and/or the person preparing the plan for clarification
of site plan requirements and regulations pertaining to the particular use.
5. Issuance Of Zoning Compliance Certificates:
a. If review of the application and site plan indicates that the proposed use will meet all requirements and comply
with all regulations pertaining thereto, the building inspector shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of the
application, issue a zoning compliance certificate to the applicant.
b. If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the proposed use will not meet all requirements and comply with all
regulations pertaining thereto, he shall within ten (10) days after receipt of the application, refuse to issue a
zoning compliance certificate. When a certificate is refused, the building inspector shall so inform the applicant
in writing stating his reasons for refusal, and shall retain a copy of the action in his files.
c. The building inspector shall return one copy of submitted site plans to the applicant marked either "approved"
or "disapproved" and attested by his signature. The second copy of plans, similarly marked and signed, shall
be retained in the files of the building inspector.
d. A zoning compliance certificate shall remain in force until the building, structure or use has been completed
and an occupancy permit has been issued therefor. All buildings must be completed within two (2) years from
the date of issuance of the occupancy permit.
6. Site Plan Revisions: From time to time, before or during the course of construction, the person holding a zoning
compliance certificate may request and the building inspector may approve minor revisions of an approved site
plan; provided, however, that such revisions shall not propose any change in standards nor reduce the degree of
compliance with any requirements of this chapter. All such revisions shall be approved in writing by the building
inspector and a complete record of such action shall be filed in his office.
C. Occupancy Permits: It shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of, any building or
structure, or any change or extension of a use of land, unless and until an occupancy permit has been issued
therefor by the building inspector.
1. Issuance Of Occupancy Permits: Within five (5) regular workdays after receipt of notice that the building,
structure or premises, or part thereof, has been completed and is ready for use of occupancy, the building
inspector shall make a final inspection thereof to determine whether construction has been completed in
conformity with provisions of this chapter. If he finds construction in conformity, he shall issue an occupancy
permit to the owner of the building, structure or premises.
2. Temporary Occupancy Permits: The building inspector may issue a temporary occupancy permit for a part of a
building, structure or use prior to completion of the entire building, structure or use; provided, that such part has
been completed in conformity with all provisions of this chapter and is considered safe and suitable for use or
occupancy. Such temporary occupancy permit shall then remain in force until the entire building, structure or use
has been completed and inspected, and an occupancy permit has been issued therefor. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978;
amd. Ord. 274, 5-22-1979)
3-2-21: AMENDMENTS:
The city council may, from time to time as the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice
requires, change the district boundaries or amend, change, repeal or supplement the regulations herein established.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 216/640
Such change or amendment may be initiated by the city council or the planning commission on its own motion, or by
application of one or more owners of real property within the area proposed to be changed.
A. Application To Be Filed: Applications for change of district boundaries or amendment of regulations shall be filed
with the planning department by an owner of real property within the area proposed changed. Such application shall
be filed on a form provided for the purpose and shall be complete.
1. Payment of a filing fee in an amount established by a schedule adopted by resolution of the city council and filed
in the office of the city clerk.
2. No part of the filing fee shall be returnable. Payment of filing fee shall be waived when the change or amendment
is initiated by the city council or the planning commission or when the petitioner is the city, county, state or federal
government. (Ord. 477, 12-17-1996)
B. Planning Commission Public Hearing:
1. Notice Of Hearing:
a. The planning commission shall set a date for public hearing of the petition by the planning commission. Such
hearing shall be held only after a public notice of the time, date and place of such hearing has been published
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing date
and the requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241 have been complied with. Such notice shall
include a legal description and a physical description of, or a map detailing the property proposed to be
rezoned, a statement of existing and proposed zoning of the property, including a brief summary of the intent of
the proposed zone change, and a general description of any regulations proposed to be amended. (Ord. 535,
12-14-1999)
b. In addition to publication of such notice, a notice shall be sent by mail at least ten (10) days before the hearing
to the following:
(1) The applicant.
(2) Each property owner, as listed on the county assessor's records, of real property located within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the property being considered for zone change.
(3) Each property owner, as listed on the county assessor's records, of at least thirty (30) parcels nearest to the
exterior boundary of the property being considered for zone change, to the extent that notification required
pursuant to subsection B1a(2) of this section is not duplicated.
(4) Each tenant of a mobile home park if said park is located within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior
boundary of the property being considered for zone change.
(5) Any advisory board which has been established by the governing body for the affected area or area within
three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the property being considered for zone change.
2. Hearing: The planning commission shall hold its public hearing on the application at which it shall review all
proposed changes and amendments, and shall hear all evidence offered by the petitioner and parties in interest.
Such hearing shall be held within forty five (45) calendar days from date of application filing.
3. Planning Commission Action: Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the
planning commission shall file a written report with the city council that the application be granted as requested,
granted subject to specific conditions, or denied. The planning commission's recommendation shall be
transmitted to the city clerk and a copy mailed to the applicant. Failure by the planning commission to file a report
with the city council shall be deemed approval by the planning commission.
C. City Council Public Hearing:
1. Notice Of Hearing: Subsequent to receipt of the planning commission's recommendation on the application, a
date shall be set for public hearing of the matter before the city council. The public hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with publication and notification requirements contained in subsection B1 of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 217/640
2. Consideration: The city council shall at such public hearing on the application, consider the planning
commission's recommendation, and hear all evidence offered by the applicant and parties in interest.
3. Approve Or Deny Petition:
a. At the conclusion of the public hearing, or within fifteen (15) calendar days thereafter, the city council shall
approve or deny the petition. If the city council's decision is to approve an amendment to change zoning district
boundaries, without conditions, or subject to conditions agreed to by the petitioner, the amendment shall be
adopted by resolution of the city council and shall become effective as provided by law. Such resolution shall
contain a description and map of the property approved for zone change and any conditions agreed to by the
petitioner.
b. If the city council's decision is to approve an amendment to change, repeal or supplement regulations
contained within the city zoning ordinance, the amendment shall be adopted by passage of an ordinance by
the city council, pursuant to sections 2.100 and 2.110 of the city charter.
4. Reconsideration Of Denied Amendment: In the event that an application for an amendment is denied by the city
council, or is withdrawn after the planning commission hearing, the planning commission or city council shall not
reconsider the application or any other application for the same amendment of this chapter as it applies to the
same property described in the original application, or any part thereof, within a period of one year from the date
of such denial action. (Ord. 477, 12-17-1996)
3-2-22: VARIANCES:
The planning commission shall hear and decide variances from regulations and requirements and all matters referred
to it or properly of concern in the administration of this chapter. All actions of the planning commission shall be limited
to administrative actions only in order to ensure the intent and purpose of this chapter shall apply in special cases as
herein defined. Any action that has in effect changed the uses or overall density permitted in any zoning district of this
chapter shall be deemed a violation of their powers and be of no force and effect; however, the planning commission
may recommend to the city council that an amendment of this chapter be considered, in accordance with procedures
specified in this chapter for amendments. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
A. City Planner, Powers And Duties: The city planner shall submit to the planning commission a written report of his
findings on each application for variance.
B. Procedure: Any person requesting a variance by the planning commission shall include:
1. The provision or regulations of this chapter from which the property or building is sought to be excepted.
2. A legal description of the property involved.
3. Plot plans showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings.
4. Elevations of all proposed buildings or alterations in sufficient detail to meet the requirements of the planning
commission.
5. Evidence of the ability and intent of the applicant to proceed with actual construction in accordance with
submitted plans within one year of the date of approval of the variance.
6. Filing fees shall be deposited in accordance with procedures adopted by the city.
C. Application Requirements: Each such application shall be signed by the owner of the land and/or buildings affected
by, or by his acknowledged agent. In order for the planning commission to grant a variance, adequate evidence
demonstrating conformance to the following criteria shall be presented by the applicant:
1. There are special circumstances or features, i.e., unusual shape, configuration, exceptional topographic
conditions or other extraordinary situations or conditions applying to the property under consideration.
2. The special circumstance or extraordinary situation or condition results in exceptional practical difficulties or
exceptional undue hardships, and where the strict application of the provision or requirement constitutes an
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 218/640
abridgment of property right and deprives the property owner of reasonable use of property.
3. Such special circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district.
4. The granting of the variance will not result in material damage or prejudice to other properties in the vicinity, nor
be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety and general welfare.
5. The granting of the variance will not substantially impair the intent or purpose of the zoning ordinance or effect a
change of land use or zoning classification.
6. The granting of the variance will not substantially impair affected natural resources. (Ord. 474, 8-13-1996)
D. Hearing:
1. Notice: Upon the filing of an application, the city staff shall set the matter, not later than thirty five (35) days
thereafter, for a public hearing. After the time and place have been established by the city staff, the city shall
send, by mail, notice of such time and place and purpose of hearing, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to
the owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior limits of the property involved, as shown by
the latest assessment rolls of the city. Notice by mail to the last known address of the real property owners, as
shown by the assessor's records, shall be sufficient. Applications must be filed at least twenty (20) days before
the planning commission hearing on the variance. Legal notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The planning commission
shall comply with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241 "notice requirements" in calling the meeting. (Ord. 367,
10-14-1986)
2. Evidence: The planning commission shall hear and consider evidence and facts from any person at the public
hearing, or shall consider written communications from any person relative to the variance. The right to present
such evidence shall not be denied because of nonrequirements of notification as herein stipulated. (Ord. 362, 4-
9-1985)
E. Findings: The planning commission shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing, return a decision. Any
decision of the planning commission to grant a variance shall adhere to variance criteria as set forth in subsection C
of this section. Whenever the planning commission denies a variance, written notice of denial, including reasons
therefor, shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown in the application. Failure to render such a decision
shall be deemed approval of the application. (Ord. 474, 8-13-1996)
F. Conditions: The planning commission, in approving any variance, may require conditions under which the lot or
parcel may be used or the buildings constructed, which in the planning commission's opinion will prevent material
damage or prejudice to adjacent properties. Any such conditions as required must be complied with and violation of
the same shall result in revocation of the permission granted by variance. Further use shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and shall be punishable as herein provided. All variances shall carry the following conditions: (Ord.
256, 4-44-1978)
1. Commencement within one year and completion within eighteen (18) months. (Ord. 474, 8-13-1996)
2. Conformance to plans approved as a part of the variance.
3. Subject to review in two (2) years if determined necessary by the planning commission.
G. Rehearing: Not later than five (5) days after the planning commission renders its decisions, the applicant, or any
person who was notified at the hearing or who appeared and testified or presented written testimony at the original
public hearing, may apply for rehearing. As a basis for the request for rehearing, such petition shall set forth in
detail new facts or conditions not previously known or considered. Applications for a rehearing shall be
accompanied by a fee prior to rehearing. Said fee shall be set by the city council.
H. Appeal: The applicant or any person or entity with standing shall have a right to appeal any decision made by the
planning commission, in regard to an application for a variance, to the city council as set forth in section 3-2-25 of
this chapter. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 219/640
3-2-23: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Any structure upon which construction is started, or any structure which is altered, enlarged or repaired,
or any use of land which is begun or changed after enactment of this chapter, and which is in violation of any of its
provisions, may be declared a nuisance. Any court of competent jurisdiction may order such nuisance abated and
the owner or agent in charge of such building or premises shall be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Any
person who violates any provision of this chapter, the owner of any structure or land or part thereof, and any
person, architect, builder, contractor, plumber or agent employed in connection therewith, who has assisted
knowingly in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalties herein provided.
B. Penalties: Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in title
1, chapter 3 of this code. Each day that a violation is wilfully permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
3-2-24: REPEAL AND SAVING CLAUSE:
Ordinance 78 and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed. All rights or remedies of the city are expressly saved
as to any and all violations of ordinance 78 and all amendments thereto. As to all violations that have accrued to the
effective date of this ordinance, the court shall have all the powers that existed prior to the effective date of this
ordinance. All existing violations of ordinance 78 and all amendments thereto, which may otherwise become
nonconforming uses under this ordinance, are hereby declared to be violations of this ordinance in the same manner
that they were violations of ordinance 78. (Ord. 256, 4-11-1978)
3-2-25: APPEALS:
A. Time Limit; Fee: Any decision of the planning commission or any other person appointed or employed by the city
who is authorized to make administrative decisions regarding the use of land, may be appealed in writing to the city
council by any person aggrieved by such a decision. All appeals shall be filed, in writing specifying with particularity
the grounds for appeal, with the city clerk no later than ten (10) calendar days after the decision. Appeals shall
include payment of a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council and a statement therein of
the reasons why the decision should be amended, modified or reversed. All appeals, once filed, may not be
withdrawn from consideration and decision by the city council. The city council shall hear and render a decision on
any properly made appeal within sixty (60) calendar days after the city clerk has received the written appeal.
B. Hearing:
1. On appeals of planning commission decisions granting or denying conditional use permits or variances, the city
council shall hold a public hearing prior to rendering any decision. After the time and place for the public hearing
has been established by the city clerk, notice of the hearing shall be sent by mail at least ten (10) calendar days
before the hearing to the appellant, applicant, property owner, property owners located within three hundred feet
(300') of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, and any person who presented oral or written
testimony, if any, before the planning commission. Said hearing notice shall also be published one time in a
newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing.
2. On appeals of all other decisions regarding the use of land, the city clerk shall give notice of the time and place of
the hearing by mailing a notice of hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing to the appellant,
applicant, property owner, and any other person who presented oral or written testimony.
3. The procedures pursuant to which the city council will hear an appeal are as follows:
a. The appellant shall be first to provide comment and present the grounds for appeal.
b. Other persons shall be given an opportunity to speak and provide comment.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 220/640
c. The city may respond to appellant's appeal, after which appellant may present any rebuttal argument or
evidence.
d. Appellant and the city are entitled to be represented by counsel, present testimony, evidence and argument on
all issues raised on appeal.
e. The city council may, if it appears helpful to a clear understanding of the issues, consider evidence or other
matters not raised at the planning commission level or with the administrative officer.
C. Conduct Of Hearing; Decision: The city council shall consider all evidence presented to the planning commission or
administrative officer at the original hearing, including oral and written testimony, and any recommendations and
findings of the planning commission or administrative officer as shown by the official record, and may affirm, modify
or reverse the decision of the planning commission or administrative officer. In reviewing a decision on an appeal,
the governing body will be guided by the statement of purpose underlying the regulation of the improvement of land
expressed in Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.020. Decisions of the city council shall be considered the final
decision for the purpose of judicial review.
D. Judicial Review: Any person who:
1. Has appealed a decision to the city council in accordance with this section; and
2. Is aggrieved by the decision of the city council, may appeal that decision to the fourth judicial district court, in and
for the county of Elko, state of Nevada, by filing a petition for judicial review within twenty five (25) days after the
date of filing of notice of decision with the city clerk. (Ord. 577, 12-11-2001)
3-2-26: AGREEMENTS CONCERNING DEVELOPMENT OF LAND:
A. Intent: This section applies only to developments of five (5) acres or more in the aggregate or residential
subdivisions with twenty five (25) or more lots. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for the
development of land which permits the developer to rely on existing city code provisions and obtain limited
deviation from city code requirements, while ensuring that the city will receive certain commitments from developers
consistent with the overall intent of the applicable zoning codes.
B. Application: Upon application of any person having a legal or equitable interest in land, the city may enter into an
agreement with that person concerning the development of that land.
1. Applications to enter into agreements concerning the development of land must be filed with the city clerk.
Applications shall be filed on a form provided for such purpose and shall be complete.
2. Applications shall include payment of a filing fee in an amount established by a schedule adopted by resolution of
the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk.
C. Content And Form Of Agreements: At a minimum, agreements concerning the development of land shall include the
following:
1. A description of the land which is the subject of the agreement.
2. The duration of the agreement.
3. The permitted uses of the land.
4. The density or intensity of use of the land.
5. The maximum height and size of proposed buildings.
6. Any provisions for the dedication of any portion of the land for public use.
7. Provide for a period of time within which construction must commence and provide for an extension of that
deadline.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 221/640
D. Commitments And Safeguards: The following commitments and safeguards shall apply to any agreement
concerning the development of land:
1. Unless the agreement otherwise provides, or permits or requires a deviation from an otherwise applicable city
code requirement, the ordinances, resolutions or regulations applicable to that land and governing the permitted
uses of that land, density and standards for design, improvements and construction are those in effect at the time
the agreement is made.
2. Entering into an agreement concerning the development of land does not prohibit the city from adopting new
ordinances, resolutions or regulations applicable to that land which do not conflict with those ordinances,
resolutions and regulations in effect at the time the agreement is made. However, any subsequent action by the
governing body must not prevent the development of the land as set forth in the agreement. The governing body
is not prohibited from denying or conditionally approving any other plan for development pursuant to any
ordinance, resolution or regulation in effect at the time of that denial or approval.
3. An agreement may include provisions which supersede limitations on time for action on tentative or final maps or
for presentation and recordation of a final map or series of final maps.
E. Procedure: Consideration of an agreement concerning the development of land by the planning commission:
1. The planning commission shall set a date for public hearing of the application to enter into an agreement
concerning the development of land. Such public hearing shall be held after a public notice of time, date and
place of such hearing has been given in accordance with any requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes. Such
notice shall include a legal description of the land which is the subject of the agreement, a statement of existing
zoning and current use of the property, and a general description of the proposed content of the agreement.
2. Within forty (40) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall file a written
report containing the commission's recommendation to the city council, which shall include a finding of
conformance or nonconformance with the master plan.
3. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation to the city council, the council shall set a date for
public hearing of the matter concerning the agreement for the consideration of the city council, subject to the
same notice requirements contained within this section.
4. At the conclusion of the public hearing, or within thirty (30) days thereafter, the city council may, if it finds that the
provisions of the agreement are consistent with the master plan, approve the agreement by ordinance.
5. Within a reasonable time after approval of the agreement, the city clerk shall cause the original agreement and a
certified copy of the local ordinance adopting the agreement to be filed with the county recorder for record. Upon
recordation, the agreement binds all parties and their successors in interest for the duration of the agreement.
F. Amendment Or Cancellation:
1. The agreement for development of land may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of
the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest, except that if the governing body determines, upon a
review of the development of the land held at least once every twenty four (24) months, that the terms or
conditions of the agreement are not being complied with, it may cancel or amend the agreement without the
consent of the breaching party.
2. Notice of intention to amend or cancel any portion of the agreement shall be subject to any notice requirements
required by Nevada Revised Statutes. The governing body, after conducting a public hearing, may approve any
amendment to the agreement by ordinance if the amendment is consistent with the master plan. The original of
the amendment must be filed for recording with the county recorder. (Ord. 753, 7-10-2012)
3-2-27: OPERATION OF FACILITIES UTILIZING EXPLOSIVES:
A. Conditional Use Permit Required: Operation of a facility where an explosive, or other similar substances listed in
Nevada Revised Statutes section 459.3816 will be used, manufactured, processed, transferred or stored, shall first
obtain a conditional use permit therefor from the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 222/640
B. Application; Hearing: An application for a conditional use permit must be filed with the planning commission. The
planning commission shall, within ninety (90) days after the filing of an application, hold a public hearing to consider
the application.
C. Notice Requirements:
1. The planning commission shall, at least thirty (30) days before the date of the hearing, cause notice of the time,
date, place and purpose of the hearing to be sent by mail to or, if requested by a party to whom notice must be
provided pursuant to this subsection, by electronic means if receipt of such an electronic notice can be verified,
to:
a. The applicant;
b. Each owner or tenant of real property located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property in question;
c. The property owner, as listed on the county assessor's records, of each of the thirty (30) separately owned
parcels nearest the exterior boundary of the property in question, to the extent this notice does not duplicate
the notice given pursuant to subsection C1b of this section;
d. If a mobile home park or multiple-unit residence is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property in
question, each tenant of that mobile home park or multiple-unit residence;
e. Any advisory board that has been established for the affected area by the governing body;
f. The administrator of the division of environmental protection of the state department of conservation and
natural resources;
g. The state fire marshal; and
h. The administrator of the division of industrial relations of the department of business and industry; and
2. The notice required by subsection C1 of this section must:
a. Be written in language that is easy to understand;
b. Include a physical description or map of the property in question and a description of all explosives, and all
substances that will be located at the facility; and
c. Be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or county in which the property in question is
located.
D. Consideration By Planning Commission:
1. In considering the application, the planning commission shall consult with:
a. Local emergency planning committees, if any;
b. The administrator of the division of environmental protection of the state department of conservation and
natural resources;
c. The state fire marshal;
d. The administrator of the division of industrial relations of the department of business and industry; and
e. The governing body of any other city or county that may be affected by the operation of the facility; and
2. The planning commission shall consider fully the effect the facility will have on the health and safety of the
residents of the city, county or region.
E. Recommendation: The planning commission shall, within a reasonable time after the public hearing, submit to the
governing body its recommendations for any actions to be taken on the application. If the planning commission
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 223/640
recommends that a conditional use permit be granted to the applicant, it shall include in its recommendations such
terms and conditions for the operation of the facility as it deems necessary for the protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the city, county or region.
F. Hearing; Decision: The governing body shall, within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the recommendations of the
planning commission, hold a public hearing to consider the application. The governing body shall:
1. Cause notice of the hearing to be given in the manner prescribed by subsection C of this section; and
2. Grant or deny the conditional use permit within thirty (30) days after the public hearing. (Ord. 577, 12-11-2001)
3-2-28: HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES:
A. Purpose: It is the intent of this section to recognize that certain areas of the city are characterized by steep terrain,
native vegetation, natural drainage courses and other physical features, and to establish standards of development
for these areas that help to protect the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing potential for erosion,
sedimentation, flooding and landslides, while at the same time protecting and enhancing the visual quality of the
city's natural landscape. Specific regulations and guidelines are intended to address the following:
1. To protect the public and property from hazards and problems associated with storm water runoff, flooding and
erosion.
2. To minimize the threat and consequential damage of landslides in hillside areas.
3. To minimize the threat and consequential damage of fire in hillside areas.
4. To control and minimize the infestation of noxious weeds into the community and outlying neighboring areas.
5. To control and mitigate dust and other nuisances that may have adverse affects on neighboring properties and
the air quality of the community.
6. To provide for safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation, including transportation linkages
to outlying areas.
7. To enhance the visual and aesthetic quality of the city through the use of grading, revegetation and development
techniques that help to improve the appearance of slopes exposed to roadways, preserve prominent natural
features and vistas and provide for adequate open space in hillside areas.
8. To offer, promote and encourage a variety of alternative development designs and concepts appropriate for
hillside areas.
B. Definitions:
AVERAGE SLOPE: Average slope shall mean and be determined by the use of the following formula:
AS = .00229 (I) (L)
A
AS = Average slope in percent.
.00229 = The conversion factor of square feet to acres.
I = Contour interval in feet. The contour interval may not exceed ten feet (10').
L = Summation of the length of all contour lines, in feet, within the parcel.
A = Total number acres in the parcel.
BUILDABLE LOT AREA: That portion of land within a lot or development site, exclusive of building setback area,
and manufactured or natural slope area in excess of thirty percent (30%) gradient.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 224/640
CAP: A concrete or cement feature placed on top of a wall that promotes watershed and limits infiltration of water
into concrete cells.
CLEARING: The removal of vegetation and topsoil or other surface materials from a site.
CONSTRUCTION: Any grading or clearing of land, installation of improvements, erection or placement of
structures, or assembly of equipment or materials to be used in any of those activities.
CUT: The removal of earth material by artificial or mechanical means.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or any division of land.
EROSION: The process whereby soil particles are detached and transported by water, wind, ice or gravity.
EXCAVATION: The mechanical removal of earth material.
FILL: The deposit of earth material by artificial or mechanical means.
GRADIENT: The vertical rise of a slope over a horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage (rise over run).
GRADING: Any excavating, cutting, filling or other earth moving operation.
HILLSIDE AREA: Any parcel having an average slope of fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Roads, buildings, tennis courts, roofs, driveways, patios, decks, parking lots and other
similar water shedding surfaces.
MANUFACTURED SLOPE: Any slope created through cut, fill or excavation and which is steeper than 5:1.
NATURAL SLOPE: The form of the land surface within a hillside area as it exists before clearing or grading.
NATURAL VEGETATION: Plant materials which exist on the site before clearing or grading.
OPEN SPACE: Land area which is not covered by buildings, parking lots, accessory structures or other similar
impervious surfaces.
RETAINING WALL HEIGHT: The vertical height as measured from the lowest finished grade to the top of the
retaining wall.
REVEGETATION: The stabilization of disturbed or graded soils after construction by replanting with indigenous
plant species or other drought tolerant, low water consumptive plant materials appropriate for the climatic zone.
RUNOFF: That part of precipitation which flows over the land without filtering into the soil.
SEDIMENTATION: The process of depositing soil particles detached and transported by erosion.
SLOPE: A natural slope or manufactured slope steeper than 5:1.
C. Development Standards:
1. Slopes Adjacent To Streets And Roadways:
a. Manufactured slopes shall not be steeper than 3:1.
b. Maximum continuous slope height shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). Continuous slope heights may be broken
by bench areas having a minimum horizontal dimension of not less than ten feet (10'); and provided said bench
areas are placed within the middle one-third (1/3) of the slope.
c. Retaining wall heights shall not exceed ten feet (10').
d. No slope or retaining wall may be placed or constructed in a street right of way.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 225/640
e. No retaining wall may be placed or constructed within a public utility, access or drainage easement which abuts
a public street right of way.
f. Slopes five feet (5') or less in height shall observe a two and one-half foot (21/2') setback from the back edge of
sidewalk. Slopes greater than five feet (5') in height shall observe a five foot (5') setback from the back edge of
sidewalk.
g. Retaining walls adjacent to streets and roadways must be capped with an architecturally compatible concrete
or cement material.
h. Guard railings, when required by the uniform building code, shall be installed on the top of any retaining wall.
i. All manufactured slopes adjacent to streets and roadways shall be subject to an erosion control and
revegetation program.
2. Other Interior Slopes:
a. Manufactured slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1.
b. Maximum continuous slope height shall not exceed thirty feet (30'). Continuous slope heights may be broken
by bench areas having a minimum horizontal dimension of not less than fifteen feet (15'); and provided said
bench areas are placed within the middle one-third (1/3) of the slope.
c. Retaining wall heights for walls abutting interior property lines shall not exceed six feet (6'). Retaining wall
heights for other walls shall not exceed twenty feet (20').
d. Retaining walls greater than six feet (6') in height shall observe an interior property line setback equivalent to
the height of the retaining wall.
e. The toe of any slope shall observe an interior property line setback equivalent to one-half (1/2) of the height of
the slope.
f. The top of any slope shall observe an interior property line setback equivalent to one-fifth (1/5) of the height of
the slope.
g. All manufactured interior slopes shall be subject to an erosion control and revegetation program.
3. Lot Dimensions:
a. For all residential zoning districts subject to a six thousand (6,000) square foot minimum lot size or greater, a
minimum buildable lot area of three thousand (3,000) square feet shall be required.
b. For hillside area subdivisions, minimum residential lot size shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
exclusive of any manufactured slope area contained within the lot.
c. For hillside area subdivisions, minimum interior side yard setbacks shall be ten feet (10').
4. Exceptions:
a. Manufactured slopes intended and designed to be located within a public street right of way and associated
with the construction or widening of the roadway or other related public improvements.
b. Minor deviations from maximum manufactured slope heights associated with rounding, meandering or
blending tops or bottoms of slope sections with adjacent ungraded areas.
5. Modification Of Standards: Regulations contained within this section may be varied or modified by the planning
commission, where just cause and circumstance warrants, in conjunction with a review of a conditional use
permit, subdivision preliminary plat, final plat or an application for site plan review, pursuant to subsection 3-2-
3C6 of this chapter.
D. Erosion Protection, Slope Stabilization, Slope Revegetation: Any development requiring a grading permit shall be
required to submit a specific area restoration and landscape plan to address erosion, slope stabilization and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 226/640
revegetation for the review and approval of the engineering and planning departments.
1. Slopes Adjacent To Streets And Roads:
a. Landscaping improvements shall be required to include the following material: ground cover consisting of plant
material, appropriate seed mix or landscape rock, gravel or comparable material; shrubs, consisting of not less
than one minimum two (2) gallon sized planting for each fifty (50) square feet of slope area; trees consisting of
not less than one minimum fifteen (15) gallon sized planting for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of slope
area. (Note: Tree plantings may be clustered.)
b. Installation of permanent irrigation system.
c. Slope revegetation permanently established.
2. Interior Slopes:
a. Installation of appropriate seed mix with jute mat, or installation of rip rap, landscape rock, gravel or
comparable material.
b. Satisfy uniform building code requirements for paved interceptor drains and terrace swales.
c. Drains down the face of slopes are to be discouraged; but, if used, are to include rip rap or concrete three feet
(3') wide by one foot (1') deep, or other acceptable means. Thickness and size of rip rap or concrete is to be
based on water velocity.
d. Application of seed mix during fall months (September through December) with or without installation of an
irrigation system.
e. Slope revegetation permanently established.
3. Nonslope Areas Affected By Clearing, Grading Or Excavation In Excess Of One Acre:
a. Installation of native grass mix (crested wheat).
b. Installation of temporary irrigation system or application of seed mix during fall months (September through
December) without installation of irrigation system.
c. Revegetation permanently established on affected areas.
4. Performance Guarantee:
a. Revegetation of slopes and other areas affected by clearing, grading or excavation are considered
permanently established when more than fifty percent (50%) of area coverage has been achieved.
b. Revegetation of slopes and other areas affected by clearing grading or excavation must be permanently
established in accordance with one of the following time frames:
(1) Prior to final occupancy of the building or premises.
(2) Within two (2) years after issuance of final occupancy of the building or the premises subject to execution of
a performance agreement with the city to include bonding or other form of security to guarantee completion
of the required work.
(3) Prior to final certification of grading compliance.
(4) Within two (2) years after completion of grading activity subject to execution of a performance agreement
with the city to include bonding or other form of security to guarantee completion of the required work.
E. Development Guidelines: The following items are recommended guidelines and standards to help achieve the
purpose of this section:
1. Locate property lines at tops of slopes, when feasible.
2. Vary steepness of the slope.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 227/640
3. Meander tops and toes of slopes.
4. Round and blend top and bottom sections of slopes with adjacent ungraded area.
5. Lay back top one quarter section of the slope.
6. Use of terracing and retaining or slough walls when appropriate.
7. Establish thirty foot (30') fire protection zone surrounding all combustible structures in hillside areas.
8. Fire protection zones should include fire resistant landscaping and/or hardscape material.
9. Increase side yard building setbacks in hillside subdivisions to fifteen feet (15').
10. Minimize steepness of slopes adjacent to streets as a means of improving access for emergency and fire
personnel.
11. Recommend and encourage the installation of drought tolerant, low maintenance ground cover, shrubs and
trees in combination with installation of a permanent drip type irrigation system to promote low water usage. (Ord.
579, 2-26-2002)
3-2-29: MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, marijuana establishments and medical marijuana establishments
are not allowed, and shall be unlawful as a permitted use, conditional use or accessory use in any zoning district
within the incorporated area of the City of Elko. For purposes of this section, the term "marijuana establishment"
shall have the definition ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030, as amended from time to time, and
the term "medical marijuana establishment" shall have the definition ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes
453A.116, as amended from time to time.
B. The prohibitions of marijuana establishments and medical marijuana establishments, respectively, are not intended
to interfere with the individual rights of persons to the lawful use and possession of marijuana as permitted by
chapters 453A and 453D of the Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 825, 2-13-2018)
ARTICLE A. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING
ORDINANCE
3-2A-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the ELKO SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 439, 4-12-1994)
3-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE: A. The offering of retail goods for sale which are classified as sexually
oriented business uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services
offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines, the sale and/or rental of
adult motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like.
B. Dancing or live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on the presentation of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", if such live entertainment is only presented as an occasional activity of the business
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 228/640
operation.
C. Occasional activity as used in connection with an accessory sexually oriented use means dancing or live
entertainment characterized by an emphasis on presentation of "specific sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" if such live entertainment is only presented as an occasional activity of the business operation
as herein regulated.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PRINCIPAL SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as sexually
oriented business uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. Sexually Oriented Adult Video And/Or Adult Bookstore: A building or portion of a building used for the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape or motion
picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more
classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
B. Sexually Oriented Barbershop: Any barbershop which is licensed to cut hair, but features sexual exhibits or
displays:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
C. Sexually Oriented Beauty Salon: Any beauty salon which is licensed to cut hair, or hairstyling or manicuring, but
features sexual exhibits or displays:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
D. Sexually Oriented Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of applying
paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is
wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas".
E. Sexually Oriented Cabaret: A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live
entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age and if such dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction
or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 229/640
F. Sexually Oriented Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment which excludes minors by
reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
G. Sexually Oriented Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age,
or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
H. Sexually Oriented Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
I. Sexually Oriented Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage
and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
J. Sexually Oriented Massage Parlor, Health Club Or Studio: A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors
by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
K. Sexually Oriented Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than
fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
L. Sexually Oriented Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of
figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such
customers.
M. Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or
slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image reproducing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
N. Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more
persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes
minors by virtue of age or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
O. Sexually Oriented Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which
stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
P. Sexually Oriented Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Q. Sexually Oriented Soda Pop Or Nonalcoholic Beverage Clubs: A night club, bar, restaurant or other commercial
establishment that does not serve alcoholic beverages but features sexual exhibits or displays:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 230/640
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
R. Sexually Oriented Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam
bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of
age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USES: Sexually oriented business uses include adult bookstores, adult motion
picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna
facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets,
adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting
studios, "soda pop" or nonalcoholic beverage club, adult barbershops, adult beauty salons, and other premises,
enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an
emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by
Nevada Revised Statutes section 201.235 et seq., are not included. As used in this article, for zoning purposes,
"sexually oriented business uses" do not include houses of prostitution which are zoned, licensed, controlled and
operated under title 4, chapter 9 of this code.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oralanal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a
sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following
sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia,
pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing
costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical
restrain of any such persons; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (Ord. 439, 4-12-1994)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 231/640
3-2A-3: ZONING OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USES:
A. General: "Sexually oriented business uses", as defined in section 3-2A-2 of this article, shall be subject to the
following general provisions:
1. Activities classified as obscene as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes section 201.235 et seq., are not permitted
and are prohibited.
2. Sexually oriented business uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building
which is also utilized for residential purposes.
3. Principal sexually oriented business uses, except sexually oriented cabarets, nightclubs or bars, shall be
prohibited from locating in any building which is also used to dispense or consume alcoholic beverages.
4. A sexually oriented business use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as principal
sexually oriented use.
B. Principal Sexually Oriented Uses:
1. A person commits an offense if that person operates or causes to be operated a principal sexually oriented
business in any zoning district other than the areas zoned light industrial, general industrial or restricted
commercial, as defined and described in the general zoning ordinance, chapter 2 of this title.
2. A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a principal sexually oriented
business in a light or general industrial zoned district within one thousand feet (1,000') of:
a. A church; or
b. A public or private elementary or secondary school; or
c. A public or private daycare center, preschool, nursery, kindergarten or similar use; or
d. A public park.
This distance restriction does not apply to the location of a sexually oriented business in a restricted
commercial zoned district.
3. A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a principal sexually oriented
business in a light or general industrial zoned district within five hundred feet (500') of any existing single- or
multiple-family dwelling structure. This distance restriction does not apply to the location of a sexually oriented
business in a restricted commercial zoned district.
4. For the purposes of subsections B2 and B3 of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of
the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a public or private daycare center, preschool, nursery,
kindergarten or school bus stop or similar use, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential
district or residential lot. The presence of city, county or other political boundaries shall be irrelevant for purposes
of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this article.
5. Any principal sexually oriented business that fails to comply with subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section on the
date of the adoption hereof, but which was lawfully operating before this article took effect, shall not be deemed
to be in violation of this article when this article takes effect and shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Any such
nonconforming use may be allowed to continue; provided, however, that such a nonconforming use may not be
extended, enlarged or altered and may not be changed to any other nonconforming principal sexually oriented
business use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue any such nonconforming use more than one year after its passage
when such nonconforming use has been declared to constitute a nuisance or to be detrimental to public health,
safety or welfare by a majority vote of the city council. This section shall not be construed as limiting the right of
the city or any person to abate a nuisance under any existing laws or ordinances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 232/640
A nonconforming sexually oriented business use which is operationally abandoned or discontinued for a period of
six (6) consecutive months or more shall be considered abandoned and shall not be resumed.
6. A principal sexually oriented business lawfully operating is not rendered in violation of this article by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district or residential lot within one thousand feet (1,000')
or five hundred feet (500'), whichever is applicable, of the principal sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted
after a license has been revoked or not renewed.
7. Principal sexually oriented business uses shall, in addition to other sign requirements established by this code,
also adhere to the following sign regulations:
a. Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the type of business which is being conducted.
b. Shall not contain material classified as advertising as to building content or activities.
c. Shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located.
C. Accessory Sexually Oriented Business Uses And Location Thereof:
1. Accessory sexually oriented business uses shall:
a. Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located and
comprise no more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of the entire business operation; and
b. Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise; or
c. Not involve any dancing or live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on the presentation of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", unless such live entertainment is only presented as an
occasional activity of the business operation. To qualify as an accessory sexually oriented business use, said
activity or event shall be limited to no more than ten (10) consecutive days taking place at minimum thirty (30)
day intervals following a similar activity or event and such activities or events occurring no more than four (4)
times within a calendar year.
2. Accessory sexually oriented business uses shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical
separation of such items from areas of general public access:
a. Movie Rentals: Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate
room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation or
shall be in catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the operation.
b. Magazines: Publications classified or qualifying as sexually oriented business uses shall not be physically
accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material
other than the publication title.
c. Other Uses: Accessory sexually oriented business uses not specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this
section subject to the approval of the chief of police.
3. Accessory sexually oriented business uses shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and
signage of sexually oriented materials and products.
4. Accessory sexually oriented business uses activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan,
circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are
admitted.
5. A person commits an offense if that person operates or causes to be operated an accessory sexually oriented
business use in any zoning district other than the areas zoned light industrial, general industrial, general
commercial, convenience commercial or restricted commercial, as defined and described in the general zoning
ordinance, chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 439, 4-12-1994)
3-2A-4: INJUNCTION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 233/640
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business use without having a valid permit due to
locational restrictions is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation
shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or thirty (30) days' imprisonment, and if an
injunction must be sought, attorney fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the sexually
oriented business use. (Ord. 439, 4-12-1994)
3-2A-5: EXEMPTION FROM LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Request: If the city denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented
business use is in violation of section 3-2A-3 of this article, then the applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar
days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city clerk a written request for an exemption from the locational
restrictions of section 3-2A-3 of this article.
B. Hearing: If the written request is filed with the city clerk within the ten (10) day limit, the city council shall hear and
consider the request. The city council shall set a date for the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the written
request is received.
C. Conduct Of Hearing: The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal
rules of evidence do not apply.
D. Findings: The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 3-2A-3
of this article if it makes the following findings:
1. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business use will not have a detrimental effect on nearby
properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; and
2. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business use will not downgrade the property values or quality of
life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of blight; and
3. The location of a sexually oriented business use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood
conservation, nor will it interfere with any efforts of neighborhood renewal or restoration; and
4. All other applicable provisions of this article and the city code will be observed.
E. Validity Of Exemption: If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for two (2) years from the date
of city council action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business use is in violation of the
locational restrictions of section 3-2A-3 of this article until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
F. Reapplication Upon Denial: If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption
until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the city council action. (Ord. 439, 4-12-1994)
Chapter 3
DIVISIONS OF LAND
3-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the City; to ensure
adequate traffic circulation through coordinated subdivision street systems in relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining
subdivisions, and public facilities to achieve individual property lots of optimum utility and livability; to secure adequate
provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to facilitate reservation of
adequate sites for schools, recreation areas, and other public facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate
legal description and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of this purpose; safeguard the public health,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 234/640
safety and general welfare; and to ensure development in conformance with the City master plan. In its interpretation
and application, this chapter is intended to provide a common understanding and a sound and equitable working
relationship between public and private interests so that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in
the division of the land. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terms defined in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278, to include Nevada Revised Statutes 278.010 through
278.0195, are incorporated herein by this reference unless the terms are otherwise defined in this chapter.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless their context clearly indicates that they are intended to have some
other meaning.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is always
mandatory; the word "may" denotes a use of discretion in making a decision; and the words "used" or "occupied" shall
be considered to be followed by the words "or intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied".
AGREEMENT TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS: An agreement that satisfies the requirements of section 3-3-21 of this
chapter and other applicable provisions of this chapter, typically requiring a subdivider to install public improvements,
dedicate rights-of-way and perform other acts for the benefit and protection of the City and the public in relation to a
subdivision.
ALLEY: A passage or way, open to public travel and dedicated to public use, affording generally a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting lots and not intended for the general traffic circulation.
BLOCK: A piece or parcel of land, or group of lots, entirely surrounded by natural or artificial barriers, such as public
rights-of-way, streams or watercourses, railroads, parks, or a combination thereof.
BUILDING: Any structure, regardless of whether it is affixed to real property that is used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any human use or occupancy.
BUILDING LINE: A line demarcating the area between a building or other structure and the street right-of-way line
beyond which no building or structure or portion thereof shall be erected, constructed, or otherwise established.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Elko.
CODE: The Elko City Code.
COMMISSION: The City of Elko Planning Commission.
COMMUNICATION LINES: Conduit, cables, fiber and/or other apparatus for the distribution and provision of
telecommunications and/or broadband communications.
COMMUNICATION SERVICE LINES: Communication lines.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL: A decision by the Planning Commission or City Council to approve a tentative map,
provided certain specified conditions are satisfied.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: Plans, profiles, cross-sections and other drawings showing required details for the
construction of subdivision improvements, prepared in conjunction with the final map, and submitted by a properly
licensed engineer in compliance with standards of design and construction approved by the City.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street opening at one end and having a turnaround at the other end.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general or public use, reserving unto himself no
other right than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property
has been appropriated.
DENSITY: A number, represented in units of lots per acre, calculated by dividing the number of lots in the subdivision
by the total acreage of the subdivision.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 235/640
DEVELOPER: A real property owner who divides land into two (2) or more parcels for transfer or development.
DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN: A comprehensive long-term strategic planning document for a subdivision prepared
in accordance with section 3-3-4 of this chapter.
EASEMENT: An interest in land that confers a right of use for a special purpose.
ENGINEER'S ESTIMATE: An estimate of the total cost of public improvements prepared by the subdivider's engineer
and provided to the City.
EXCEPTION: Any parcel of land that is located within the exterior boundaries of a subdivision but which is not included
in the tentative or final map.
FINAL MAP: A map prepared in accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 278.325, 278.360 to
278.460, inclusive, 278.472, 278.4725 or 278.4955 and any applicable provisions of this Code, which, after approval
and certification by the City, is recorded with the Office of the Elko County Recorder.
FINAL MAP APPROVAL: Final or conditional authorization by the City Council to obtain final map certification;
provided, all applicable requirements of this chapter, to include sections 3-3-21 and 3-3-22 of this chapter, must be
satisfied prior to final map certification; further provided, if final map approval is conditional, all conditions imposed by
the City Council in conjunction with the approval must by satisfied prior to final map certification.
FINAL MAP CERTIFICATION: Unconditional approval of the final map by the City Council as evidenced by certification
on the map by the Mayor of the City of Elko. Final map certification constitutes authorization to record the map with the
Elko County Recorder.
FULL FRONTAGE: All lot lines of any lot, parcel or tract of property adjacent to a road, street, alley or right-of-way, to
include lots, parcels or tracts containing multiple borders or edges, such as corner lots.
GRADING: The removal of the vegetative cover from the surface of any land, and is a result of activity associated with
new construction.
LED: Light-emitting diode.
LOT: A distinct part or parcel of land which has been divided, including the following:
A. Corner Lot: A lot abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets.
B. Double Frontage Lot: A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
C. Interior Lot: A lot having but one side abutting on a street.
D. Key Lot: An interior lot, one side of which is contiguous to the rear line of a lot.
LOT DEPTH: The shortest distance, measured on a line parallel to the axis of the lot, between points on the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT LINE: A line bounding a lot, including the following types of lot lines:
A. Front Lot Line: The lot line coinciding with the street line; or, in the case of a corner lot, the shorter of two (2) lot
lines coinciding with street lines; or, in the case of a double frontage lot, both lot lines coinciding with street lines.
B. Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite and farthest from the front lot line; for a pointed or irregular lot, the rear lot
line shall be an imaginary line, parallel to and farthest from the front lot line, not less than ten feet (10') long and
wholly within the lot.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 236/640
C. Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line; in the case of a corner lot, the lot line abutting the
side street is designated as the exterior side lot line; all other side lot lines are designated as interior side lot
lines.
LOT WIDTH: A. In the case of a rectangular lot or a lot abutting on the outside of a street curve, the distance between
side lot lines measured parallel to the street or to the street chord and measured on the street chord.
B. In the case of a lot abutting on the inside of a street curve, the distance between the side lot lines measured
parallel to the street or the street chord at the rear line of the dwelling, or, where there is no dwelling, thirty feet
(30') behind the minimum front setback line.
MASTER PLAN: A comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of the City prepared in
accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 278.150, et seq.
OWNER: Any person who holds title to land or who is contractually obligated to purchase land.
PARCEL MAP: A map required for the division of land for transfer or development into four (4) lots or less in the
manner set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 278.461, 278.462, 278.463, 278.464 or 278.466, and this Code.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public or private walk through a block from street to street or from a street to a school, park,
recreation area or other public facility.
PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT: An agreement to install improvements.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY: The financial security required to guarantee the construction of public improvements
and other matters as set forth in section 3-3-22 of this chapter.
PERSON: A natural person, any form of business or social organization and any other nongovernmental legal entity
including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, association, trust or unincorporated organization. The term
does not include a government, governmental agency or political subdivision of a government.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Street work, utilities and other improvements to be installed on land dedicated or to be
dedicated for streets and easements as are necessary for local drainage, local traffic and the general use of property
owners in the subdivision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS: A set of standards adopted by the City Council regulating the design and
construction of public improvements. These standards are contained in the latest edition of the "Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction" also known as the "Orange Book", which is distributed to the cities and
counties of northern Nevada by the Regional Transportation Commission of Washoe County.
PUBLIC UTILITIES: Underground, aboveground or overhead facilities furnishing to the public, electricity, gas, steam,
communications, water, drainage, sewage disposal, flood control, irrigation or refuse disposal, owned and operated by
any person, firm, corporation, Municipal department or board duly authorized by State or Municipal regulations. The
term "public utilities", as used herein, may also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments or boards, as
the context indicates.
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS: Enhancements to land to make the land more usable for public and/or private
purposes, as more specifically set forth in section 3-3-20 of this chapter.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY: All public and private rights-of-way and all areas required for public use in accordance with any
master plan or parts thereof.
SETBACK LINE: Building line.
STREET: Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement
for public vehicular access; or, a street shown in a map heretofore approved pursuant to law; or, a street in a map duly
filed and recorded in the County Recorder's Office. A street includes all land within the street right-of-way, whether
improved or unimproved, and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulder, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking
space, bridges, viaducts, lawns and trees. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply to specific types
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 237/640
of streets:
Alley: A public way providing secondary vehicular access and service to properties which also abut a street.
Arterial And Minor Arterial Streets: A general term describing large major streets, including freeways,
expressways and interstate roadways, and State and/or County highways having City and regional continuity.
Collector Residential And Local Residential Streets: City streets serving the primary function of providing access
to abutting property:
A. Cul-De-Sac Street: A short collector residential and local residential street having one end permanently
terminating in and including a vehicular turning area.
B. Marginal Access Street: A collector residential and local residential street parallel to and abutting an arterial
street which provides access to abutting property, intercepts other collector residential and local residential
streets, and controls access to the arterial street.
Collector Street: A street generally with limited continuity serving the primary function of moving traffic between
arterial streets and local residential streets, and the secondary function of providing access to abutting properties.
STREET LINE: A line demarcating the limits of a street right-of-way.
STREET, PRIVATE: A nondedicated, privately owned right-of-way or limited public way that affords the principal means
of emergency and limited vehicular access and connection to and from the public street system to properties created
through the division of land.
STREET, PUBLIC: A dedicated public right-of-way that is part of the public street system and which affords the
principal means of emergency and general vehicular access to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER: A developer who commences or is engaged in the process required by Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 278 and this chapter for dividing land into parcels or creating a subdivision.
SUBDIVIDER'S ENGINEER: A professional engineer, properly licensed by the State of Nevada and retained,
contracted or employed by the subdivider for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of section 3-3-21 of this
chapter, and to oversee and certify the subdivision in the manner required by this chapter.
SUBDIVISION: Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into five (5) or more lots,
parcels, sites, units or plots, for the purpose of any transfer or development, or any proposed transfer or development,
unless exempted by Nevada Revised Statutes 278.320 or any other applicable statute.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT: An improvement to land that a subdivider is required to construct and complete at its
own expense, pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and an agreement to install improvements.
SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE: A committee consisting of representatives of the City Manager's Office, the City
Engineering Department, the City Utility Department, the City Planning Department, the City Development Department,
the City Public Works Department, the City Fire Department, and the Planning Commission Chair or Vice Chair.
TENTATIVE MAP: A map made to show the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and
around it.
TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL: Approval of a tentative map by the City Council. Tentative map approval constitutes
authorization to proceed with preparation of construction plans and the final map.
TRACT: An area of land proposed to be divided pursuant to this chapter.
TRANSPORTATION COMPONENT OF THE MASTER PLAN: A plan adopted by the Planning Commission and City
Council which provides for development of a system of major streets and highways. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 238/640
3-3-3: STAGES OF SUBDIVISION PLANNING AND APPROVAL:
Any person who divides or proposes to divide land into five (5) or more lots, parcels, sites, units or plots, for the
purpose of any transfer or development, or any proposed transfer or development, unless exempted under chapter 278
of the Nevada Revised Statutes or this Code, must follow the three-stage approval process outlined in this chapter.
These stages, among other things, set forth specific requirements pertaining to the preparation, submission and review
of, and official action on, maps and other documents.
These stages are as follows:
A. Stage I - Preapplication Stage: During stage I, the subdivider provides preliminary information about the proposed
subdivision to the City, some of which is provided to City staff in a conference held to discuss land use, street and
lot arrangement, lot sizes, buildable lot areas, conformity with the master plan, easements, the provision of utilities,
storm drainage, street improvements and other issues pertinent to the proposed development.
B. Stage II - Tentative Map Stage: Stage II includes preparation, submission, revision, and Planning Commission and
City Council action on the tentative map. During this stage, the City will review the tentative map submittal to ensure
that it conforms to all applicable requirements. At the conclusion of this stage, the City Council determines whether
to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. The City uses the tentative map submittal to
evaluate the subdivision. Approval of the tentative map permits the subdivider to proceed with stage III, but does
not authorize the subdivider to commence construction activities.
C. Stage III - Final Map Stage: Stage III includes the final design and engineering of the subdivision, official action on
the construction plans, and official action on the final map. During this stage, except as otherwise permitted in this
chapter, the subdivider must post security for completion and maintenance of public improvements, and the
subdivider and the City must enter into a performance agreement. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-4: PREAPPLICATION STAGE (STAGE I):
A. Overview And General Requirements: The preapplication stage of subdivision planning (stage I) includes an
investigatory period that takes place prior to submittal of the tentative map by the subdivider. During this stage, the
subdivider must meet with the City to discuss and provide general information about the proposed subdivision, and
the City will provide the subdivider with general information about City subdivision requirements. During this stage,
the City will also determine whether a change in zoning will be required for the proposed subdivision. If the City
determines that a zoning change is required for the proposed subdivision, the subdivider must initiate the necessary
application for a change of zoning district boundaries. This process must be commenced prior to the submission of
the tentative map (stage II). In addition, during stage I the subdivider and the City shall satisfy the following
requirements:
1. Conference: During stage I, the subdivider shall schedule and attend a conference with the Subdivision Review
Committee for the purpose of discussing the proposed subdivision. At least five (5) business days prior to the
conference, the subdivider shall provide the City with plans, sketches and other documentation showing
proposed land uses, street and lot configuration, proposed lot sizes and the proposed density of the
development. At the meeting, the subdivider and/or his/her authorized representative shall present the
Subdivision Review Committee with tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, storm
drainage, street improvements and any potential changes to zoning district boundaries.
2. General Information Provided: During the conference with the Subdivision Review Committee, the City will
provide general information to the subdivider regarding the requirements of this chapter, to include required
procedures, design and improvement standards, and tentative and final map requirements, together with the
following:
a. Check existing zoning of the location of the proposed subdivision and of abutting properties, and determine
whether a change of zoning district boundaries is necessary or desirable.
b. Determine conformance of the proposed subdivision to the land use component of the Master Plan.
c. Examine the adequacy of parks and other public facilities.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 239/640
d. Determine the relationship of the site to major streets, utility systems and adjacent land uses, and determine
whether there are any potential problems related to topography, utilities, drainage or flooding.
e. Determine Fire Department access and suppression requirements.
f. Determine whether a Development Master Plan must be approved by the City prior to consideration of a
tentative map.
B. Development Master Plan: The Planning Commission may, in its discretion, determine that the proposed subdivision
has certain characteristics that necessitate the preparation of a Development Master Plan. These characteristics
may include size, impact on neighborhoods, density, topography, utilities, and/or existing and potential future land
uses. If a Development Master Plan is required, it must be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and
possible approval at least twenty one (21) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the
Development Master Plan will be reviewed.
1. Preparation: The Development Master Plan shall be prepared on a sheet twenty four inches by thirty six inches
(24" x 36"), shall be accurate in accordance with industry standards, and shall clearly indicate:
a. General street patterns, with particular attention to the location and general alignment of collector streets and
to the maximization of convenient circulation throughout the neighborhood.
b. General locations and sizes of schools, parks and other public facility sites.
c. Locations of shopping centers, multi-family residential units and other proposed land uses.
d. Methods proposed for sewage disposal, water supply and storm drainage.
2. Approval: A tentative map must be consistent with a Development Master Plan that encompasses its territorial
limits. The Development Master Plan shall establish the general approach to the subdivision design in the
tentative map. Accordingly, the subdivision must be compatible with and not frustrate the goals and policies set
forth in the approved Master Plan. If development of a subdivision is proposed to take place in several stages,
the Development Master Plan shall be submitted as supporting data for each tentative map. The Development
Master Plan shall be kept up to date by the subdivider as modifications occur or become necessary. (Ord. 834,
11-27-2018)
3-3-5: TENTATIVE MAP STAGE (STAGE II):
The tentative map stage (stage II) includes preparation, submission, review, and Planning Commission and City
Council action on the tentative map. The subdivider can help expedite processing of the tentative map by submitting all
information needed to determine consistency with this Code and the Elko Master Plan.
A. Zoning Amendments: The tentative map shall be designed to meet the specific requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located. However, in the event a change of zoning district boundaries is necessary, an application for a
change in zoning consistent with section 3-2-21 of this title shall be submitted and processed in conjunction with the
tentative map. If a change in zoning district boundaries is required, the City will not continue processing the
tentative map until the application for change of zoning district boundaries is submitted.
The application for change of zoning district boundaries shall be heard by the Planning Commission at the same
meeting as the tentative map is considered, but shall be acted upon as a separate item. The application for change
of zoning district boundaries shall be heard prior to the action item for possible approval of the tentative map. When
a tentative map constitutes only one unit of a larger development intended for progressive maps, the change of
zoning district boundaries may be limited to the area contained in the tentative map application. Any required
change of zoning district boundaries shall have been approved by the City Council prior to tentative map approval.
A change of zoning district boundaries required under this section must, without limitation, conform to all applicable
master plan(s) adopted by the City.
B. Sanitary Sewerage, Water Supply, Storm Drainage And Solid Waste Disposal: As a prerequisite to tentative map
review by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall provide adequate information to enable the City to
determine whether it conforms to this Code, to include, without limitation, all applicable requirements for public
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 240/640
improvements, such as grading, installation of a sanitary sewer and sewerage disposal, water supply, storm
drainage, solid waste disposal and the provision of other public utilities to the proposed subdivision.
C. Tentative Map Submittal: The following requirements apply to submission of the tentative map for review and filing of
the tentative map:
1. Tentative Map Submittal; Application: Three (3) copies of the tentative map and any required supporting
information and/or data in readable pdf format (unless otherwise requested by the City), prepared in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter, together with any required filing fee (collectively referred to as the "tentative
map submittal"), shall be filed with the City Planning Department at least forty two (42) calendar days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting at which the recommendation to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
tentative map will be considered. Upon receipt of the tentative map submittal, the City Planning Department will
record the date of receipt and filing. The tentative map submittal shall be deemed the subdivider's application for
approval of the tentative map.
2. Initial Review Of Tentative Map Submittal For Completeness Upon Filing: Upon filing, the City will perform an
initial review of the tentative map submittal to determine if it is complete and satisfies the requirements of the
Nevada Revised Statutes, the Nevada Administrative Code and section 3-3-6 of this chapter. The tentative map
submittal must be consistent with the information provided by the subdivider to the City at the preapplication
stage (stage I) meeting. The Planning Commission will not consider the application for tentative map approval
unless adequate information has been submitted to permit the City to determine that the tentative map complies
with this Code. Upon request by the City, the subdivider shall furnish additional copies of any documents required
by the City to perform its review.
3. Information Required Under Nevada Administrative Code For Review Of Tentative Map: In addition to any other
requirements set forth in this Code, without limitation, a subdivider shall submit the following documents or other
information to the City:
a. A map showing the topographic features of the subdivision, including contours at intervals of two feet (2') for
slopes of ten percent (10%) or less and intervals of five feet (5') for slopes of over ten percent (10%).
b. Two (2) copies of the map showing the tentative design of the subdivision, including the arrangement of lots,
the alignment of roads and easements.
c. A statement of the type of water system to be used and the water source, for example, private wells or a public
water system.
d. Unless water for the subdivision is to be supplied from an existing public water system, a report of the
analyses, performed pursuant to NAC 278.390, of four (4) samples taken in or adjacent to the subdivision from
different wells. The analyses must show that the water meets the standards prescribed in NAC 445A.450 to
445A.492, inclusive.
e. A map of the 100-year floodplain for the applicable area. The map must have been prepared by recognized
methods or by an appropriate governmental agency for those areas subject to flooding.
f. A description of the subdivision in terms of 40-acre parts of a designated section, township and range, or any
other description which provides a positive identification of the location of the subdivision.
g. A map of the vicinity of the subdivision, showing the location of the proposed subdivision relative to the City of
Elko or a major highway.
h. The names and addresses of the owners and developers of the subdivision.
i. A master plan showing the future development and intended use of all land under the ownership or control of
the developer in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision.
4. Filing; Acceptance Or Rejection: If, following the initial review, the tentative map submittal is determined to
conform to the foregoing requirements, the City will accept the tentative map submittal for filing and will assign it
a file number. Otherwise, the City will reject the tentative map submittal and inform the subdivider of the
deficiencies that resulted in the rejection. If the subdivider does not correct an incomplete tentative map submittal
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date of filing with the City, the tentative map submittal will automatically
expire and may not be re-filed without payment of a new filing fee.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 241/640
5. Filing Fee: The subdivider shall, at the time of filing a tentative map submittal, pay to the City a filing fee based
upon the number of lots shown on the tentative map. The filing fee shall be set by resolution by the City Council.
D. Tentative Map Review By Departments: Upon filing, the tentative map will be distributed and reviewed as follows:
1. Departmental Review Of Tentative Map Submittals: Unless the tentative map submittal is rejected in accordance
with subsection C2 of this section, following the initial review, the Planning Department will transmit copies of the
tentative map submittal to the City Engineering, Utility, Public Works, Fire and Development Departments for their
respective reviews. In reviewing the tentative map submittal, these departments will each make a determination
as to the completeness and adequacy of the tentative map submittal and its conformity to the requirements of this
Code, to include any standardized codes adopted by reference. If any reviewing department determines that a
tentative map submittal is incomplete, inadequate or noncompliant with this Code, the application will be rejected
and the subdivider will be notified of the deficiencies that resulted in the rejection.
2. Distribution Of Tentative Map Submittals To Other Governmental Entities, Irrigation Ditch Owners And Utilities: If,
following the foregoing departmental review, the City determines that the tentative map submittal is complete,
adequate and in conformity with the requirements of this Code and the stage I submittal, the City Planning
Department will transmit copies of the tentative map submittal for review to the following, if required by Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 278 or this Code: a) the Division of Water Resources and the Division of Environmental
Protection of the State Department of Conservation and Natural Resources; b) the District Board of Health acting
for the Division of Environmental Protection to review and certify proposed subdivisions and to conduct
construction or installation inspections; c) if the subdivision is subject to the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes 704.6672, the Public Utilities Commission of Nevada; d) the Board of Trustees for the Elko County
School District; e) the Board of Trustees for any general improvement district or irrigation district in which the
subdivision is located; f) the owner of an irrigation ditch located within the proposed subdivision to the extent
required under Nevada Revised Statutes 278.3485; g) the Nevada Department of Transportation, if the
subdivision encompasses or is adjacent to any State roads, highways or rights-of-way; h) Elko County, if the
proposed subdivision is adjacent to property located outside the Elko City Municipal boundaries; i) any public
utilities that are reasonably likely to provide service to the subdivision. All comments received in response to the
foregoing distributions will be provided to the Planning Commission and the City Council at the respective
meetings during which the application is considered.
3. Planning Commission Review: The Planning Commission shall review the tentative map submittal for compliance
with applicable provisions of the Nevada Revised Statutes, the Nevada Administrative Code and this Code, to
include this chapter and this title, and shall consider the recommendations of City departments, non-City
governmental agencies and others that have reviewed the tentative map submittal pursuant to this chapter. It
shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide any necessary data and any other information necessary
for the Planning Commission to conduct a comprehensive review of the proposed subdivision.
4. Public Hearing; Notices: Prior to taking any action to recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of
a tentative map, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to receive information about the proposed
subdivision and to consider modifications to the tentative map. The public hearing shall be set not later than sixty
(60) days from the date a complete tentative map submittal that satisfies the requirements of this Code is filed
with the City. At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing, notices of the public hearing shall be sent
by mail to all property owners adjacent to the area proposed to be subdivided. The names and addresses of the
adjacent property owners shall be determined by examining the latest assessment rolls of the Elko County
Assessor. Notice by mail to the last known addresses of the real property owners as shown by the Elko County
Assessor's records shall be sufficient for purposes of this subsection. Legal notice shall be placed in a newspaper
of general circulation within the City at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing.
5. Modifications To Tentative Maps: In the event the Planning Commission requires modifications to the tentative
map prior to making a recommendation of approval or conditional approval, the Planning Commission shall so
inform the subdivider. The Planning Commission may, in its discretion, provide recommendations to the
subdivider regarding the correction of any deficiencies in the tentative map submittal. The Planning Commission
may, in its discretion, table or continue a public hearing on a tentative map for a period of time sufficient to permit
the subdivider to make any required modifications to the tentative map submittal. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
in the event the Planning Commission requests that a subdivider make modifications to a tentative map submittal,
the subdivider must present to the Planning Commission a modified tentative map submittal that complies with
the Planning Commission's request no more than sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the request.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the failure of a subdivider to present a properly modified
tentative map submittal to the Planning Commission in accordance with the preceding sentence shall result in the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 242/640
automatic expiration of the application for tentative map approval and the subdivider shall not be entitled to any
refund or credit of the filing fee.
E. Action On Tentative Map By Planning Commission And City Council: Upon review by City and other agencies and
entities as set forth in the preceding subsection, the Planning Commission and City Council will take action on the
tentative map as follows:
1. Planning Commission Recommendation: Unless modifications to the tentative map are required pursuant to
subsection D of this section, after accepting a tentative map submittal as a complete application, the Planning
Commission shall, within sixty (60) days of the date the tentative map submittal is filed, recommend approval,
conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map in a written report filed with the City Council.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, unless a longer time is provided in a development agreement entered into
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201, the time limit for acting and reporting on a tentative map may be
extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission; provided, if no action is taken within
the time limits set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 278.010 to 278.630, inclusive (subject to any permitted
extensions), a tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved without conditions, and the Planning
Commission shall certify the tentative map as approved. If the Planning Commission recommends conditional
approval or disapproval of a tentative map, the Planning Commission's report to the City Council shall either state
the conditions under which the tentative map would have been approved or state that approval was withheld
because the land proposed to be subdivided is not suitable for the proposed development, stating the reasons
why the land was not considered suitable.
2. Action By City Council To Approve, Conditionally Approve Or Disapprove Tentative Map; Factors Considered:
Except as otherwise provided in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278 and this chapter, the City Council shall
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a tentative map within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the
Planning Commission's recommendations. Before approving a tentative map, the City Council shall make such
findings as are not inconsistent with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through
278.630, inclusive, or this Code, which findings shall include consideration of the following factors:
a. Environmental and health laws and regulations concerning water and air pollution, the disposal of solid waste,
facilities to supply water, community or public sewage disposal and, where applicable, individual systems for
sewage disposal;
b. The availability of water which meets applicable health standards and is sufficient in quantity for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the subdivision;
c. The availability and accessibility of utilities;
d. The availability and accessibility of public services such as schools, police protection, transportation, recreation
and parks;
e. Conformity with the zoning ordinances and the City's master plan, except that if any existing zoning ordinance
is inconsistent with the City's master plan, the zoning ordinance takes precedence;
f. General conformity with the City's master plan of streets and highways;
g. The effect of the proposed subdivision on existing public streets and the need for new streets or highways to
serve the subdivision;
h. Physical characteristics of the land, such as floodplain, slope and soil;
i. The recommendations and comments of those entities and persons reviewing the tentative map pursuant to
this chapter and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.330 to 278.3485, inclusive;
j. The availability and accessibility of fire protection, including, but not limited to, the availability and accessibility
of water and services for the prevention and containment of fires, including fires in wild lands; and
k. The submission by the subdivider of an affidavit stating that the subdivider will make provision for payment of
the tax imposed by chapter 375 of Nevada Revised Statutes and for compliance with the disclosure and
recording requirements of subsection 5 of Nevada Revised Statutes 598.0923, if applicable, by the subdivider
or any successor in interest.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 243/640
3. Approval Of Tentative Map Without Conditions: The City Council may approve the tentative map without
conditions; provided, the approval must include findings that the tentative map meets all requirements of this
chapter and the applicable requirements set forth in the Nevada Revised Statutes and Nevada Administrative
Code.
4. Approval Of Tentative Map With Conditions: The City Council may approve the tentative map with conditions, in
which event the City Council shall, as a requisite to final approval, require the subdivider to submit proof that the
conditions have been satisfied to either or both City staff and/or the City Council at a subsequent meeting. The
City Council may place a deadline on the time required to satisfy the conditions, after which, unless: a) the
subdivider has submitted proof to the City that the conditions have been satisfied, b) the subdivider and the City
have entered into a development agreement pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.0201 and this chapter
that extends the time for satisfying the conditions, or c) the City has granted an extension of time to satisfy the
conditions consistent with this chapter, the tentative map will be automatically deemed disapproved.
5. Disapproval Of Tentative Map: The City Council may disapprove a tentative map, in which event the City Council
shall state the reasons for the disapproval. In the event a tentative map is disapproved, any new filing of a
tentative map for the same property, or any part thereof, shall follow the procedure set forth in this chapter for a
new tentative map application, to include payment of a new filing fee.
F. Limited Authorization To Proceed Upon Approval With Conditions: If the City Council approves a tentative map with
conditions, the subdivider may commence preparing a final map and engineering construction plans; provided,
nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as a waiver of any conditions imposed by the City Council or a
commitment that the City will approve a final map or construction plans.
G. Intent To Serve Letters: Upon approval of a tentative map with or without conditions, the City Utility Department shall
provide a water and sewer "intent to serve" letter to the applicable State agencies.
H. Construction Of Subdivision Improvements: Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, approval of a
tentative map, with or without conditions, does not constitute authorization to commence any construction activities
associated with the subdivision to include, without limitation, public improvements. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-6: CONTENT AND FORMAT OF TENTATIVE MAP SUBMITTAL:
A. Form And Scale: The tentative map must be graphically depicted on one or more plan sheets with supporting data
either placed directly on the tentative map or attached to the tentative map in drawings, spreadsheets or other
documents that comply with the requirements of this chapter and are consistent with industry standards. All maps
accompanying the tentative map shall be drawn to the same standard engineering scale; provided, the scale shall
not be more than one hundred feet (100') to one inch (1"). Whenever practicable, the plan scale shall result in an
overall sheet measuring twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36").
B. Identification Data: The tentative map shall contain the following information:
1. Proposed subdivision name, location and section, township and range, with reference by dimension and bearing
to a section corner or quarter-section corner.
2. Name, address, telephone number and email address of subdivider(s).
3. Name, address, telephone number, email address and Nevada State Board of Professional Engineers and Land
Surveyors license number for each professional engineer or land surveyor who prepared the tentative map.
4. Scale.
5. North point.
6. Date of initial preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
7. A small scale location map showing the relationship of the tract to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it, including: arterial streets, railroads, shopping centers, parks and playgrounds, and churches.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 244/640
8. Legal description defining the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
C. Physical Conditions: The tentative map shall contain the following information about existing physical conditions:
1. Topography shown with contours at intervals of no more than two feet (2') and corresponding to the coordinate
system maintained by the City. Topographic information shall be adequate to show the character and drainage of
the land.
2. Location of water wells, streams, private ditches, washes and other water features, including direction of flow,
and the location and extent of areas subject to frequent periodic or occasional inundation.
3. The location of flood zones designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and/or any
special flood hazard areas.
4. Within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the locations, widths and names of all streets, railroads, utility
rights-of-way of public record, public areas, permanent structures that will remain after development of the
subdivision, and Municipal corporate boundaries.
5. Dimensions of all subdivision boundaries.
6. Gross and net acreage of the subdivision.
D. Recorded Map Information: The tentative map shall indicate the title or description, book and page number(s) of
each recorded map for property adjacent to the proposed subdivision, to include property adjacent to boundary
roads, streets and rights-of-way.
E. Existing Zoning: The tentative map shall indicate the existing zoning classification of the proposed subdivision and
adjacent properties.
F. Proposed Improvements And Other Features: The tentative map shall show the following planned improvements
and other features within and, where indicated, adjacent to the subdivision:
1. Street layout, including location and width of each street, right-of-way, alley, sidewalk, pedestrianway and
easement, together with access routes to adjacent existing subdivisions (including routes through parcels that are
not subdivided), the proposed names of all streets, and the approximate grades of all rights-of-way.
2. Lot layout with consecutively numbered lots, indicating the dimensions and area of each lot, and the total number
of lots.
3. Location, width and proposed use of easements.
4. Location, extent and proposed use of all land to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including school sites or
parks.
5. Locations and boundaries of all proposed zoning districts.
G. Proposed Deed Restrictions: All proposed deed restrictions shall be indicated on or appended to the tentative map.
H. Preliminary Grading Plan: The subdivider shall provide to the City a preliminary grading plan indicating areas
proposed for cut-and-fill, the type and estimated quantity of material to be graded, the estimated finished grades
(which must be adequate to establish the general grading trend), the proposed methods of erosion control, and the
general location of and specifications for any manufactured (cut or fill) slopes.
I. NPDES Permit Compliance: The subdivider shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit for discharges from small Municipal separate storm sewer
systems, permit no. NV040000.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 245/640
J. Utility Methods And Requirements:
1. Sewage Disposal: The subdivider shall provide the City with a proposed design for sewage disposal that
connects to the City sewer system.
2. Water Supply: The subdivider shall provide the City with information sufficient to demonstrate adequate volume
and quality of water from the City water system.
3. Storm Drainage: The subdivider shall provide the City with preliminary drainage calculations and a proposed
layout of the storm drainage system, including the locations of outlets. The proposed storm drainage system shall
comply with the City's NPDES permit requirements, this Code and all applicable Federal and State laws and
regulations.
4. Communication, Electrical And Natural Gas Lines: The subdivider shall provide the City with a proposed layout
for the locations of communication lines, electrical lines and natural gas lines.
5. Traffic Impact Study: The City may, in its discretion, require a traffic impact study if it determines that additional
traffic in the area due to the subdivision may exceed existing roadway capacities, warrant traffic signal
improvements, warrant the construction of additional travel lanes or impact State highways. (Ord. 834, 11-27-
2018)
3-3-7: FINAL MAP STAGE (STAGE III):
A. Overview: The final map stage (stage III) includes the final design and engineering of the subdivision, and the
preparation, submission and review of and official action on the final map and construction plans.
B. Requirements For Presentation Of Final Map Or Series Of Final Maps; Extensions Of Time:
1. Unless a longer time is provided in an agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter, or unless the time is
extended by mutual agreement of the subdivider and the City Council, the subdivider shall present to the City
Council within four (4) years after the approval of a tentative map: a) a final map, prepared in accordance with the
tentative map, for the entire area for which a tentative map has been approved; or b) the first of a series of final
maps covering a portion of the approved tentative map. If the subdivider elects to present a successive map in a
series of final maps, each covering a portion of the approved tentative map, the subdivider shall present to the
City Council on or before the second anniversary of the date on which the subdivider recorded the first in the
series of final maps: 1) a final map, prepared in accordance with the tentative map, for the entire area for which
the tentative map has been approved; or 2) the next final map in the series of final maps covering a portion of the
approved tentative map. If the subdivider fails to comply with the provisions of the preceding sentence, all
proceedings concerning the subdivision are terminated.
2. The City Council may grant an extension of not more than two (2) years for the presentation of any final map
after the 2-year period for presenting a successive final map has expired.
3. Any request for an extension of time to present a final map, to include a map presented in a series of final maps,
shall be submitted in writing to the City prior to the expiration of time for presenting the final map.
C. Pre-Submission Requirements: Before a final map is submitted to the City for approval, the following requirements
must be satisfied:
1. Zoning: The final map shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and any necessary
changes to zoning district boundaries shall have been adopted by the City Council;
2. Preparation Of Final Map: The subdivider shall prepare a final map that does not materially differ from the
approved tentative map and conforms to all applicable requirements of the Nevada Revised Statutes, the Nevada
Administrative Code and this chapter.
D. Utility Easements: The subdivider shall obtain a letter or letters from all public utilities with utility easements located
within the proposed subdivision indicating approval of the subdivision, which approvals shall be indicated in an
affidavit on the final map.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 246/640
E. Proposed Agreement To Install Improvements: The City shall provide to the subdivider a proposed agreement to
install improvements prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
F. Final Map Submittal; Filing: The final map submittal shall consist of three (3) copies and a readable electronic file in
pdf format of the final map and any required supporting information and/or data, and a proposed agreement to
install improvements (to include exhibits thereto), prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The
final map submittal shall be filed with the City Planning Department at least forty two (42) calendar days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting at which the final map will be considered.
G. Review Of Final Map:
1. Review By City Departments: Upon receipt of the final map submittal, the City Planning Department shall record
the receipt and date of filing, and shall thereafter transmit copies of the final map to the City Engineering, Utility,
Public Works, Fire and Development Departments for their respective reviews. In reviewing the final map
submittal, these departments shall each make a determination as to the completeness and adequacy of the final
map submittal and its conformity to the requirements of this Code, to include any standardized codes adopted by
reference. If any reviewing department determines that a final map submittal is incomplete, inadequate or
noncompliant with this Code, the application will be rejected and the subdivider will be notified of the deficiencies
that resulted in the rejection. If the subdivider does not correct an incomplete final map submittal within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date of filing with the City, the final map submittal will automatically expire and may
not be re-filed without payment of a new filing fee.
2. Distribution Of Final Map Submittals To Other Governmental Entities, Irrigation Ditch Owners And Utilities: If,
following the foregoing departmental review, the City determines that the final map submittal is complete,
adequate and in conformity with the requirements of this Code and the stage II submittal, the City Planning
Department will transmit copies of the final map submittal for review to: a) the Bureau of Water Pollution Control
Nevada Division of Environmental Protection of the State Department of Conservation and Natural Resources; b)
if the subdivision is subject to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 704.6672, the Public Utilities
Commission of Nevada; and c) the Division of Water Resources of the State Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources. All comments received in response to the foregoing distributions shall be provided to the
Planning Commission and the City Council at the respective meetings during which the application is under
consideration.
3. Review By Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall review the final map for conformity with the
tentative map, this Code and the approved construction plans, and shall thereafter make a recommendation to
the City Council to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final map.
H. Final Map Approval, Certification And Recordation:
1. Upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final
map, the City shall, within sixty (60) days, place the item on the agenda for the meeting of the City Council.
2. During the meeting at which the final map is presented to the City Council, the City Council shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the final map.
3. If the City Council disapproves the final map, it shall state the reasons for the disapproval and the same shall be
placed in the minutes and communicated to the subdivider.
4. Prior to a decision by the City Council to approve the final map, the City Council shall: a) accept or reject on
behalf of the public any parcel of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer
of dedication, b) if applicable, it shall determine that a public street, easement or utility easement that will not
remain in effect after a merger and re-subdivision of parcels conducted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
278.4925, has been vacated or abandoned in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 278.480, c) find that the
final map substantially complies with the tentative map and all conditions have been met; and d) approve an
agreement to install improvements that satisfies the requirements of this chapter.
5. Following approval of the final map by the City Council, the City Clerk shall place upon the final map a certificate,
signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk, stating that: a) the City Council approved the map; b) the City Council
accepted or rejected on behalf of the public any parcel of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity
with the terms of the offer of dedication; c) if applicable, the City Council determined that a public street,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 247/640
easement or utility easement that will not remain in effect after a merger and re-subdivision of parcels conducted
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.4925, has been vacated or abandoned in accordance with Nevada
Revised Statutes 278.480; d) the final map substantially complies with the tentative map and all conditions have
been met; and e) a performance agreement is in place that satisfies the requirements of this chapter.
6. Upon approval of a final map with or without conditions, the City Utility Department shall provide a water and
sewer "intent to serve" letter to the applicable State agencies.
7. If the City Council conditionally approves a final map, the conditions shall be satisfied before the final map is
certified. The City Council may, in its discretion, direct that the conditions be satisfied within a specified period of
time, after which the conditional approval shall expire and the final map shall be automatically deemed
disapproved.
8. The City shall not issue any building permits for a subdivision until certification and recordation of the final map.
9. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection H9, the City shall not issue any certificates of occupancy prior to
completion, certification and acceptance by the City Council of the required improvements as shown on the
construction plans and the State has authorized the City to place the subdivision utilities into service.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon application by the subdivider, the City Council may waive or modify
requirements applicable to one or more individual improvements in order to permit the earlier issuance of one or
more certificates of occupancy upon a showing that completion of the improvements is delayed due to inaction on
the part of a Federal or State agency and based on proof of no fault of the subdivider. Nothing herein shall be
interpreted as permitting the waiver or modification of any requirement contained in Federal Statutes or
regulations, the Nevada Revised Statutes or the Nevada Administrative Code.
10. Following certification, the City Clerk shall cause the approved final map to be presented to the Elko County
Recorder for recording. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-8: CONTENT AND FORMAT OF FINAL MAP SUBMITTAL:
The final map submittal shall contain the following information and comply with the following requirements and
standards:
A. Form And Content: The final map, including affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments, shall be clearly and legibly
drawn with black, waterproof India ink upon Mylar of good quality. Each sheet shall be twenty four inches by thirty
two inches (24" x 32") in size. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet showing an entirely
blank margin of one inch (1") at the bottom, top and right edges, and two inches (2") on the left edge on the twenty
four inch (24") dimension. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The
sheet number and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be so stated on each sheet, and the sheet
number in relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. The title sheet shall state the location of the
property being subdivided with references to maps which have been previously recorded or by referring to the
National Coordinate System or a comparable and generally recognized method of mapping managed and
maintained by the National Geodetic Survey or other Federal agency. Copies of the final map shall be reproduced
in blue line or black line prints on a white background.
B. Identification Data And Other Information: The final map shall contain the following identifying and other information:
1. Name of subdivision and location by section, township, range and County.
2. Name, address and license number of the professional land surveyor, licensed in the State of Nevada, who
prepared the final map.
3. Scale, north point and date of map preparation.
C. Survey Data: The final map shall contain the following survey information:
1. Boundaries of the tract fully balanced and closed, showing all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate
survey in the field, with all dimensions expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 248/640
2. Any exceptions within the map boundaries located by bearings and distances expressed in feet and decimals
thereof, determined by an accurate survey in the field.
3. Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the map
are referenced, and a subdivision traverse tied by course and distance to a section corner or quarter-section
corner.
4. Location and description of all physical encroachments upon the boundaries of the tract.
D. Descriptive Data: The final map shall contain the following descriptions:
1. Names (where applicable); right-of-way lines; courses, lengths and widths of all streets, alleys, pedestrianways
and utility easements; radii, points of tangency and central angles of all curvilinear streets and alleys; and radii of
all rounded street line intersections.
2. All drainageways, which shall be designated as such.
3. All utility and public service easements, including designation of whether for public access or utilities.
4. Locations and dimensions of all lots, parcels and exceptions.
5. All residential lots numbered consecutively throughout blocks.
6. Locations, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of boundaries of all sites to be dedicated to the
public, including each designation of proposed use.
7. Location of all adjoining subdivisions with name, date, and book and page number of recordation noted, or if
unrecorded, so noted, along with the names of adjoining landowners of unsubdivided property.
8. Any private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the final map, or any part hereof, written on or attached to the
map and each copy thereof.
E. Dedication And Acknowledgment: The final map shall contain the following information regarding dedications:
1. Statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, sidewalks, pedestrianways, and easements for public purposes by
the person holding title of record, by persons holding title as vendees under land contract, and by spouses of
such persons. If lands to be dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the map. Dedication shall
include a written description by section, township and range of the tract. If the map contains private streets, public
utilities shall be deemed to have reserved the right to install and maintain utilities in such street rights-of-way.
2. Execution of a dedication acknowledged and certified by a notary public.
F. Additional Information: The final map shall contain the following additional information:
1. Where the centerline has been established for any street, highway, alley or public way within an adjoining
subdivision, all monuments along the portion of the street, highway, alley or public way within the proposed
subdivision shall be located with reference to the foregoing centerline, which centerline and monuments shall be
shown on the final map.
2. The centerline of each highway, street, alley or way within the proposed subdivision and width on each side of
the centerline, showing the width to be dedicated. All centerlines shall be shown with the corresponding bearing
and length of each radius, the central angle and the length of each curve within the proposed subdivision.
3. The location of monuments or other evidence formed upon the ground and used in determining the boundaries of
the subdivision. If other subdivisions adjoin the tract, the map shall show corners of such adjoining subdivisions
sufficiently identified in such a manner as to locate precisely the limits of the proposed subdivision.
4. The length and bearing of each block line, lot line and boundary line; the length, radius and central angle of each
curve or the length of curve and that portion of the central angle lying within each lot. The foregoing data shall be
shown in a manner satisfactory to the City.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 249/640
5. Each City boundary line crossing or adjoining the subdivision with adequate ties to monuments set or found
within the subdivision.
6. Section lines, one-quarter (1/4) section lines and one-sixteenth (1/16) section lines crossing or adjoining the
subdivision boundaries.
G. City To Check: The City will independently review and check the following information in the final map submittal:
1. The City shall check the final map for accuracy of dimensions, the placing of monuments, the existence of survey
records referenced on the final map, and the conformance of the final map to the tentative map. The final map
shall be accompanied by:
a. A worksheet showing the closure of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision and of the closure of
lots and blocks therein;
b. A complete set of construction plans showing site grading, lot grading, street sections, centerline and curb
grades, water infrastructure, water meters, sanitary sewer and storm drain locations and invert grades and
elevations, street lighting, and other private or public improvements required by the City. The construction
drawings must be stamped and dated by a licensed professional engineer, qualified to practice the discipline of
civil engineering, and so registered in the State of Nevada;
c. Construction plans for manholes, catch basins and other appurtenant structures; and
d. An engineer's estimate of quantities and costs required to complete the improvements. Labor costs shall be
based on prevailing wages in accordance with the requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 338 and
local rates. The City will check the engineer's estimate and shall thereupon approve or disapprove the estimate
based upon its accuracy. Upon approval by the City, the engineer's estimate shall provide the basis for the
calculating of the performance guaranty required under section 3-3-22 of this chapter.
2. The City will check the final map to determine whether it satisfies the minimum allowable error of closure of one
per ten thousand (1/10,000).
H. Required Certifications: The following certifications shall appear on the final map:
1. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided,
consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map. A lien for State, County, Municipal or local taxes
and for special assessments or beneficial interest under deeds of trust, or trust interests under bond indentures
shall not be deemed to be an interest in land for the purpose of this section.
2. A certificate, signed and acknowledged as above, offering for dedication for certain specified public uses (subject
to such reservations as may be contained in any such offer of dedication) those certain parcels of land which the
parties desire so to dedicate. The certificate may state that any certain parcel or parcels are not offered for
dedication; but a local ordinance may require as a condition precedent to the approval of any final map that any
or all of the parcels of land shown thereon and intended for any public use shall be offered for dedication for
public use, except those parcels other than streets intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in such
subdivision, and for the use of their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants.
3. A certificate for execution by the Clerk of each approving Governing Body stating that the body approved the
map and accepted or rejected on behalf of the public any parcels of land offered for dedication for public use in
conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.
4. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title in the land subdivided, evidencing
their grant of permanent easements for utility installations and access, as designated on the final map, together
with a statement approving such easements, signed by each public utility company or agency in whose favor the
easements are created or whose utility services are to be required for the mapped parcels.
5. A certificate by the licensed professional land surveyor responsible for the survey and final map, which certificate
must be in the following form:
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 250/640
I (name of licensed professional land surveyor), a Professional Land Surveyor licensed in the State of Nevada,
certify that:
1. This map represents the results of a survey conducted under my direct supervision at the instance of
(Owner, Trustee, Etc.).
2. The lands surveyed lie within (sections, township, range, meridian, and, if required by the City Council, a
description by metes and bounds for any subdivision which is divided into lots containing 5 acres in area or less)
and the survey was completed on (date);
3. This map complies with the applicable state statutes and any local ordinances in effect on the date that the
governing body gave its final approval.
4. The monuments depicted on the map are of the character shown, occupy the positions indicated and are of
sufficient number and durability.
(OR)
4. The monuments depicted on the map will be of the character shown and occupy the positions indicated by
.............................. (a day certain) and an appropriate financial guaranty will be posted with the governing body
before recordation to ensure the installation of the monuments.
(Date, name of surveyor, license number and stamp)
6. A certificate by the appropriate City official stating that he or she has examined the final map, that the subdivision
as shown thereon is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map, and any approved alterations
thereof, that all applicable provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278, inclusive, and of any requirements
of this Code applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied with, that he or she is
satisfied that the final map is technically correct and that the monuments as shown are of the character and
occupy the positions indicated or that the monuments have not been set and that a proper performance guaranty
has been deposited guaranteeing their setting on or before a day certain. The foregoing certificate shall be dated,
signed and certified by a licensed professional land surveyor or a licensed professional engineer qualified by the
State of Nevada to practice the discipline of civil engineering.
7. A certificate by the Division of Environmental Protection of the State Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources stating as follows:
This final map is approved by the Division of Environmental Protection of the State Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources and is approved concerning sewage disposal, water pollution, water quality
and water supply facilities in accordance with the Nevada Revised Statutes. This approval predicates
(community, individual) water supply and (community, individual) sewage disposal.
8. A copy of the review by the Division of Environmental Protection of the State Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources required by subsection H7 of this section shall be furnished to the subdivider who, in turn,
shall provide a copy of such review to each purchaser of land prior to the time the sale is completed. No
statement of approval or review as required in subsection H7 of this section shall be deemed a warranty or
representation by the City in favor of any person as to the safety or quantity of such water.
9. A certificate by the Division of Water Resources of the State Department of Conservation and Natural Resources
as follows:
Division of Water Resources Certificate: This final map is approved by the Division of Water Resources of the
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources concerning water quantity subject to the review of approval
on file in this office.
10. The City Council shall not approve any final map for a subdivision served by the City Municipal water system
unless the subdivider has submitted plans which provide for the installation of water meters or other devices
which will measure the quantity of water delivered to each water user in the subdivision. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 251/640
A. Conformance With Master Plan And Other Requirements: Every subdivision shall conform to the requirements and
objectives of the City master plan, this title, and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the City, together
with all other applicable planning documents or plans approved or adopted by the City Council (to include, without
limitation, the Airport Master Plan, Wellhead Protection Plan, Development Feasibility, Land Use, Water
Infrastructure, Sanitary Sewer Infrastructure and Annexation Report) and together with the statutes and regulations
of the State of Nevada, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. Provision Of Public Facility Sites: Whenever the Statutes of the State permit the dedication of school sites or parks,
the City Council may require the subdivider to dedicate such sites.
C. Land Unsuitability: No land shall be subdivided which is determined by the Planning Commission to be unsuitable
for use by reason of flooding, concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, extreme
topography, erosion susceptibility or similar conditions which are likely to prove harmful to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community or the future property owners. The Planning Commission, in applying the
provisions of this section, shall state the particular facts upon which its conclusions are based, and shall also define
any conditions under which the land may, in its opinion, become suitable for the proposed development. Land
located within any floodway as designated on the City flood insurance rate maps shall be deemed unsuitable for
development. Any subdivider proposing development of land that is deemed unsuitable for development shall have
the right to present evidence to the City Council contesting such determination of unsuitability, whereupon the City
Council may affirm, modify or withdraw the restriction. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-10: STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT:
A. Conformance With Plan: Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces part of a street designated in a street and
highway plan adopted by the City, such street shall be mapped in conformance therewith.
B. Layout: Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such streets as necessary to provide traffic and pedestrian
access throughout the community and as the Planning Commission may designate.
C. Extensions: Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Planning Commission, shall be extended to the tract
boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unmapped lands. Such extensions shall generally not be
farther apart than the maximum permitted length of a block, as hereinafter provided.
D. Arrangement Of Residential Streets: Residential streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by traffic
originating outside the immediate neighborhood.
E. Protection Of Residential Properties: Lots intended for single-family residential use shall not front or have access
from arterial streets, except as otherwise permitted by the City due to site-specific conditions. Where a proposed
subdivision abuts an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access
streets or reverse property frontage with nonaccess easements abutting the arterial street, or such other treatment
as may be justified for protection of residential properties from the nuisance and hazard of high volume traffic, and
for protection of the traffic function of the arterial street.
F. Parallel Streets: Where a residential subdivision abuts the right-of-way of a railroad, a limited access highway, or a
commercial or industrial land use, the Planning Commission may require the design and construction of a street
approximately parallel to such right-of-way or use at a location and configured in such a manner as to take into
account approach grades, drainage, bridges and future grade separation.
G. Topography: Streets shall be so arranged in relation to topography as to produce desirable lots, provide for
maximum utility and streets of reasonable gradient, and facilitate adequate surface drainage.
H. Alleys: Alleys, if any, shall be aligned and arranged in a manner that minimizes backtracking and single-tier service
by trash collection forces, and that avoids the facing of residences directly into alley openings.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 252/640
I. Half-Streets: Half-streets are prohibited unless approved by the Planning Commission where necessary to provide a
right-of-way in the manner indicated on the official street and highway plan, to complete a street pattern already
begun, or to ensure reasonable development of an adjoining unmapped parcel. Where a mapped half-street exists
in a location abutting to residential lots, the remaining half-street shall be mapped within the subdivision.
J. Dead End Streets: Dead end streets in excess of six hundred eighty feet (680') in length are prohibited unless a
modification is granted by the Planning Commission in locations necessary for future street connection to adjacent
unmapped lands. This foregoing qualified prohibition shall also apply to cul-de-sacs.
K. Intersection Design: Whenever any proposed street or highway requires a separation of grades or any special form
of intersection design at its intersection with any street, highway or railway, the subdivision shall be designed to
conform to any plan adopted by the City for the intersection design and all lots within the subdivision shall, when
necessary, be provided with suitable access from another public way. Any street or highway intersecting another
street or highway shall intersect it at any angle as close to a right angle as is practicable. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-11: STREET DESIGN:
A. Right-Of-Way Widths: Right-of-way widths for streets and roads are as follows:
1. Arterial streets: One hundred feet (100').
2. Minor arterial streets: Eighty feet (80').
3. Collector streets: Seventy feet (70').
4. Collector residential streets: Sixty feet (60').
5. Local residential streets: Fifty feet (50').
6. Collector rural residential streets: Seventy feet (70').
7. Local rural residential streets: Sixty feet (60').
B. Rural Roads: All rural roads shall conform to the following requirements and standards:
1. All infrastructure associated with a rural road shall be constructed at the time of road development; including but
not limited to culvert installation and pedestrian way, sidewalk or pathway construction.
2. All rural roads shall include a minimum ten foot (10') wide public utility and slope easement located on one or
both sides of the road right-of-way; provided, the City may, in its discretion, increase the required width of the
foregoing easement if warranted under the circumstances.
3. Rural roads which are projected through a traffic study or similar analysis to serve more than six hundred (600)
average daily vehicle trips shall satisfy the collector rural residential street design standard.
4. Pedestrian ways, sidewalks or pathways associated with rural roads shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt.
Sidewalks or pathways shall be constructed on both sides of the road and outside of the public utility and slope
easement(s).
5. On-street parking on rural roads, except for temporary or emergency parking, is prohibited, and the subdivider
shall install appropriate signage to notify the public of this prohibition.
6. To minimize excessive culvert installation and associated maintenance, access approaches for rural roads shall
be limited to either: a) one driveway, not to exceed thirty feet (30') in width or b) two (2) separated driveways,
each of which shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in width. Culvert installation is required at the time of roadway
construction and, without limitation, shall not be deferred.
7. Rural roads are prohibited in subdivisions not meeting the criteria set forth in subsection 3-2-5A5b of this title.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 253/640
8. Rural roads are prohibited in areas within capture zones as delineated in the City's Wellhead Protection Plan.
9. Maximum cul-de-sac length for rural roads may be increased in dimension to serve no more than twenty (20)
residential dwelling units; provided, under no circumstance shall such cul-de-sacs exceed a length of one
thousand three hundred sixty feet (1,360').
C. Private Streets: Private streets within a subdivision shall satisfy the requirements and standards applicable to
streets with local street classifications, functions and characteristics. Private streets shall only serve an area
contained entirely within the exterior boundaries of the subdivision and shall provide access to the public street
system at an intersection, the design of which shall be subject to the review and approval by the City. All private
streets shall conform to the following requirements and standards:
1. Minimum total width for private streets accessing five (5) or more lots: Fifty feet (50').
2. Minimum total width for private streets accessing four (4) or fewer lots: Thirty two feet (32').
3. Minimum paved section for private streets accessing five (5) or more lots: Forty feet (40').
4. Minimum paved section for private streets accessing four (4) or fewer lots: Twenty six feet (26').
5. All residential private streets accessing twenty (20) or fewer lots shall have a four foot (4') wide sidewalk on at
least one side of the street.
6. All residential private streets accessing more than twenty (20) lots shall have four foot (4') wide sidewalks on both
sides of the street.
7. All commercial and industrial private streets accessing four (4) or fewer lots shall have a five foot (5') wide
sidewalk on at least one side of the street, or as otherwise determined as part of an approved concept
development plan.
8. All commercial and industrial private streets accessing more than four (4) lots shall have five foot (5') wide
sidewalks on both sides of the street, unless otherwise provided in a development plan entered into between the
subdivider and the City.
9. All private streets shall provide for adequate storm drainage and employ the use of curb and gutter sections to
convey runoff, the design of which shall be subject to the review and approval of the City.
10. Parking spaces, inclusive of back up areas as required by section 3-2-17 of this title, shall not be located within
a private street, unless otherwise provided in a development plan entered into between the subdivider and the
City.
11. All infrastructure associated with private streets shall be constructed at the time of street development.
D. Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way not less than fifty feet (50') in radius with
an improved turning circle with a radius of at least forty five feet (45'). The Planning Commission may approve a
functionally equivalent form of turning space if justified by unusual conditions. The maximum length of cul-de-sac
streets, as measured along the centerline of the street and between the centerline of the intersecting street and the
center point of the cul-de-sac, shall not exceed six hundred eighty feet (680').
E. Marginal Access Streets: Marginal access streets shall conform to all applicable requirements and standards set
forth in this Code.
F. Alleys: Where permitted or required, alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and shall conform to the
following requirements and standards:
1. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided; provided, where such features are
necessary, corners shall be cut off ten feet (10') on each side to permit safe vehicular movement.
2. Dead end alleys are prohibited.
3. "Half" alleys are prohibited.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 254/640
G. Dead End Streets: Dead end streets are only permitted with the approval of the City, which approval, if given, may
contain conditions applicable to the subsequent development of the street; provided, if a dead end street is
approved by the City, the street shall include easements permitting the subsequent construction of a temporary
turning circle with a fifty foot (50') radius or a functionally equivalent design.
H. All Streets: The design and construction of all streets within the City, including both public and private streets, shall
conform to the public improvement standards set forth in section 3-3-17 of this chapter.
I. Model Code Standards: All streets shall conform to any model codes adopted by reference in this Code, to include
the Fire Code.
J. Street Grades: Streets shall be designed and constructed subject to the following grade requirements and
standards:
1. Maximum Grades:
a. Arterial and minor arterial streets: Maximum grades will be determined by the City based on site-specific
conditions.
b. Collector streets: No more than seven percent (7%).
c. Collector residential and local residential streets: No more than nine percent (9%).
2. Minimum Grades: New asphalt streets with concrete gutters shall have a minimum longitudinal slope of 0.50
percent. Minimum grades for the rehabilitation of existing streets will be determined by the City based on sitespecific
conditions.
3. Exceptions: The Planning Commission may, in its discretion, grant an exception to the minimum and maximum
grade requirements contained in this subsection if the cost to the subdivider substantially outweighs the public
benefit.
K. Vertical Curves: Streets shall be designed and constructed subject to the following vertical curve requirements and
standards:
1. Arterial And Minor Arterial Streets: Vertical curves standards for arterial and minor arterial streets will be
determined by the City based on site-specific conditions.
2. Collector And Local Streets: Collector and local streets will be designed and constructed with minimum k values
of 30 for crests and 40 for sag curves. Vertical curves are not required when the algebraic difference between the
two (2) slopes is less than two percent (2%).
L. Horizontal Alignment: Streets shall be designed and constructed subject to the following horizontal alignment
requirements and standards:
1. Horizontal alignment standards for arterial and minor arterial streets will be determined by the City based on sitespecific
conditions.
2. When tangent centerlines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees (10) and less than ninety degrees
(90), they shall be connected by a curve having a minimum centerline radius of two hundred feet (200') for
collector streets, or one hundred feet (100') for collector residential and local residential streets.
3. Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent section of centerline not less than one hundred feet (100') long.
4. Streets shall intersect arterial streets at ninety degree (90) angles. Intersecting collector streets, collector
residential streets and local residential streets typically intersect at ninety degree (90) angles, but in no case
shall such an angle of intersection be less than seventy five degrees (75).
5. Street jogs are prohibited unless the City grants an exception based on site-specific conditions.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 255/640
6. Local residential streets or collector residential streets intersecting a collector street or arterial street shall have a
tangent section of centerline at least one hundred fifty feet (150') in length measured from the right-of-way line of
the more major street, except that no such tangent shall be required when the local residential or collector
residential street curve has a centerline radius greater than four hundred feet (400') measured from a center
located on the more major street right-of-way line.
7. Street intersections with more than four (4) legs and Y-type intersections with legs meeting at acute angles are
prohibited.
8. Intersections of street lines shall be rounded by a circular arc having a minimum tangent length of fifteen feet
(15'). (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-12: BLOCK DESIGN:
A. Maximum Length Of Blocks: Within the following maximums, blocks shall be as long as reasonably possible to
achieve the greatest possible street economy, and to reduce the expense and increased safety hazard arising from
excessive street intersections. Maximum block length, measured along the centerline of the street and between
intersecting street centerlines, shall not exceed one thousand three hundred sixty feet (1,360').
B. Sidewalks Or Pedestrianways: Sidewalks or pedestrianways with a right-of-way width of eight feet (8') are required if
the Planning Commission determines they are essential for pedestrian circulation within the subdivision or will
enhance access to schools, playgrounds or other community facilities. Rights-of-way for sidewalks and
pedestrianways may be used for utility purposes so long as those purposes do not unreasonably interfere with
pedestrian traffic.
C. Hillside Areas: Subdivisions or portions of subdivisions with hillside areas must satisfy the applicable requirements
set forth in section 3-2-28 of this title. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-13: LOT PLANNING:
A. Lot Width, Depth And Area: Except as otherwise provided in this section, lot width, depth and area shall comply with
all applicable zoning requirements, shall be appropriate for the location and character of the proposed subdivision,
shall comply with the provisions of any development agreement entered into pursuant to section 3-2-26 of this title,
and shall be appropriate for the type and extent of public improvements being installed. Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence, where steep topography, unusual soil conditions or drainage problems render the cost of
complying with these requirements excessive in light of the benefit to the public, the Planning Commission may, in
its discretion, permit a greater lot width, depth and/or area than is otherwise allowed for the zoning district or which
would otherwise be required under this section.
B. Lot Depth And Width: Lot depths shall be at least one hundred feet (100') and widths at least sixty feet (60');
provided, the Planning Commission may, in its discretion, permit narrower lot widths on cul-de-sacs upon a showing
of good cause by the subdivider.
C. Building Setback: Minimum building setbacks shall conform to all applicable requirements set forth in this Code.
D. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be at or near right angles or radial to street lines, unless the Planning
Commission, in its discretion, permits a different alignment upon a showing of good cause by the subdivider.
E. Accessibility: Every lot shall abut a public street or private street that is connected to the public street system.
F. Prohibitions: Single-family residences are not permitted on double frontage lots, except that, subject to the approval
of the Planning Commission for good cause shown, such lots may be permitted in locations abutting an arterial
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 256/640
street so long as all dwellings front on local or collector streets and there is no access from the arterial street. (Ord.
834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-14: EASEMENT PLANNING:
Utilities shall be placed underground unless the Planning Commission approves a modification to permit overhead
utilities based on unique site conditions, in which event the Planning Commission may impose conditions on the
modification.
The following easement requirements shall apply to all new subdivisions:
A. Utility Easements:
1. Where alleys are shown on a final map, utility easements four feet (4') wide on each side of each alley shall be
dedicated for aerial overhang. Where alleys are not shown on the final map, utility easements six feet (6') wide on
each side of rear lot lines shall be delineated on the final map and offered for dedication. In addition, guy and
anchor easements one foot (1') wide on each side of a side lot line and thirty five feet (35') in length measured
from the rear lot line, in locations selected by the City, or as required by the serving utility, shall be shown on the
final map and dedicated.
2. Utility easements five feet (5') wide adjacent to each side of side lot lines, and where service to street lighting is
required, one foot (1'), on each side of such lot lines, or as required by the serving utilities, shall be shown on the
final map and dedicated.
B. Underground Utilities: Where all utilities are underground:
1. Rear Lot Lines: Where alleys are shown on the final map, corresponding easements required by the serving
utilities shall be shown on the final map and dedicated. Where alleys are not shown on the final map, utility
easements five feet (5') wide along each side of rear lot lines shall be shown on the final map and dedicated.
2. Side Lot Lines: Easements for utilities and lot drainage on all side lot lines shall be shown on the final map and
dedicated. All utility service lines, including service lines for gas, electricity, telephone, communications, and
street lighting shall be channeled in easements five feet (5') wide on each side of the lot line separating pairs of
lots to the extent required by the serving utilities.
3. Street Rights-Of-Way: Easements for utilities and lot drainage on lot lines abutting street rights-of-ways shall be
shown on the final map and dedicated. All such easements shall be a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2')
wide.
C. Lots Facing Curvilinear Streets: For lots with fronts facing curvilinear streets and alleys, easements for overhead
utilities shall consist of either:
1. A series of straight lines with points of deflection not less than one hundred twenty feet (120') apart, such points
of deflection always occurring at the junction of side and rear lot lines on the side of the exterior angle; or
2. A curvilinear easement, provided the minimum radius of the centerline shall be not less than eight hundred feet
(800').
D. Public Drainage Easement: Where a stream or major surface drainage course abuts or crosses the subdivision, the
subdivider shall show on the final map and dedicate a public drainage easement sufficient to permit widening,
deepening, relocating or protecting the drainage course. The subdivider's engineer shall provide the City with
sufficient information about the drainage to evaluate the adequacy of the easement.
E. Easement Land Not Considered And Considered In Minimum Lot Area Calculation: Land within a public street or
drainage easement, or land within a utility easement for major power transmission lines or pipelines, shall not be
included in the calculation of the minimum required lot area. However, land included in utility easements to be used
for distribution or service purposes within the subdivision, and land included in the five foot (5') wide and seven and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 257/640
one-half foot (71/2') wide drainage easements along lot lines and street rights-of-way, shall be included in the
calculation of the minimum required lot area.
F. Lots Backing Onto Arterial Streets: Lots arranged to back of arterial streets, railroads, canals or Commercial or
Industrial Districts, as provided in this chapter, shall have a minimum depth of one hundred ten feet (110'), the rear
one foot (1') of which shall be recorded as a nonaccess private easement.
G. Water And Sewer Utility Lines: Municipal water and sewer utility lines shall be installed within the City street rightsof-
way, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council based on special
circumstances. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-15: STREET NAMING:
At the tentative map stage (stage II), the subdivider shall propose names for all streets in the subdivision. A street
name may be disapproved by the Planning Commission, in which event the subdivider must receive approval from the
Planning Commission for a new street name. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-16: STREET LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Requirements: Street lighting shall be installed in a subdivision in accordance with the following requirements:
1. The subdivider shall install streetlights, shall make all necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility
company for the installation of streetlights, and shall bear all costs relating to the purchase and placement of
streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed by a properly licensed contractor possessing a valid City business
license.
2. Street lighting plans are prepared by the utility company providing electricity to the subdivision. Once prepared,
the subdivider shall submit the street lighting plans to the City for review. Street lighting plans must show the
location of each streetlight, the corresponding power source and the size of luminaries measured in watts or
lumens.
3. The City will not accept any public improvements or issue a certificate of occupancy for any part of a subdivision
until all street lighting within each construction phase is complete and fully operational.
4. Requests for street lighting in previously developed areas must be approved by the City for location and
installation prior to being submitted to the utility company for design engineering.
5. Once the street lighting has been installed and operational, approval by the City will constitute acceptance of the
street lighting and the City will then be responsible for the energy costs and maintenance thereafter.
B. Design Standards: All streetlight installations shall be designed in accordance with the following minimum design
standards:
1. All luminaries shall be LED luminaires with a minimum of one hundred watt (100 W) equivalent LED for
residential areas and a minimum of two hundred watt (200 W) equivalent LED for commercial/industrial areas or
approved equal.
2. A streetlight shall be placed at each street intersection and shall be situated to properly illuminate the
intersection.
3. A streetlight shall be placed at each proposed U.S. Postal Service gang box location.
4. Streetlights shall be placed between intersections at midblock locations with a minimum spacing of three hundred
fifty feet (350') and maximum of five hundred feet (500') between all lights.
5. A streetlight shall be placed at the end of each cul-de-sac. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 258/640
3-3-17: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The design, construction and financing of all public improvements, such as but not limited to, grading, sidewalks, curbs,
streetlights, gutters, pavements, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, drainage structures and
monuments shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and shall conform to public improvement standards established
by the City; provided, however, that the subdivider may satisfy such requirements by participating in an improvement
district approved by the City. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-18: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
The subdivider shall contract with or otherwise utilize a properly licensed professional engineer to prepare a complete
set of construction plans for the construction of all required subdivision improvements. The construction plans shall
include (unless otherwise waived if permitted under this chapter) all infrastructure necessary for the construction of the
subdivision including, but not limited to: streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage, water, wastewater and protection
of important environmental features. The construction plans shall be based on, consistent with and prepared in
conjunction with the final map. Construction plans shall not be prepared until stage III of the subdivision planning and
approval process, and must be approved by the City and all State and Federal agencies with approval authority, prior
to certification and recordation of the final map. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-19: CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION:
A. Inspections; Performance Agreement; Permits Required: The following requirements apply to improvements
constructed in public rights-of-way:
1. All improvements constructed in public rights-of-way shall be subject to inspection by the City and must be
approved by the City prior to certification and recordation of the final map.
2. Construction of improvements in public rights-of-way shall not commence until the subdivider has entered into a
performance agreement with the City in accordance with sections 3-3-21 and 3-3-22 of this chapter.
3. Construction of improvements in public rights-of-way shall not commence until all Federal, State, and local
approvals and permits have been issued for such construction.
B. Underground Utilities: All underground utilities to be placed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of
such streets. Service stubs for underground utilities to be connected to lots shown on the final map shall be
installed with sufficient length to avoid disturbing street improvements at the time service connections are made.
(Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-20: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys within the subdivision shall be graded, drained and surfaced to cross
sections, grades, standards, and profile approved by the City. If there are existing streets adjacent to the
subdivision, proposed streets within the subdivision shall be fully improved to the intercepting paving line of the
existing streets. Temporary dead end streets serving more than four (4) lots shall be designed and constructed with
a graded all-weather, temporary turning circle, subject to any additional requirements imposed by the City based
upon site conditions. The subdivider shall construct adequate permanent culverts and bridges at all points within
the subdivision where watercourses are crossed by streets or alleys. Culverts and bridges shall, without limitation,
conform to all applicable requirements of this Code and be constructed to the full width of the dedicated street or
alley.
B. Curbs: Curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. The construction of curbs, gutters and valley gutters
shall be subject to any additional standards required by the City, which standards may be imposed based on site
conditions.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 259/640
C. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be four feet (4') wide in all locations adjacent to residential or local streets, and five feet
(5') wide in all locations adjacent to streets classified as collector, minor arterial, arterial, or major arterial. Sidewalks
shall be constructed on both sides of all streets unless the requirement is waived pursuant to a specific provision of
this Code permitting such a waiver.
D. Pedestrianways: Pedestrianways shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or asphalt. All pedestrianways
shall be constructed to a width, line and grade approved by the City based on site conditions.
E. Street Name Signs: The subdivider shall install street name signs at all street intersections before the time the street
pavement is ready for use. Design, construction, location and installation of street name signs shall conform to all
applicable standards adopted by the City.
F. Stormwater Drainage: The design and construction of public streets and alleys, and the grading of private properties,
shall provide for adequate disposal of stormwater. Existing major drainage courses shall be maintained and
dedicated as public drainageways. The type, extent, location and capacity of drainage facilities shall be designed by
the subdivider's engineer and approved by the City. The subdivider shall install stormwater drainage facilities to the
grade, in the locations, to the depths and of the materials shown on plans and specifications approved by the City.
Storm and surface water drain pipes and mains, together with catch basins, shall be designed and constructed to
provide discharge in a manner and at a place approved by the City. The design and construction of stormwater
drainage facilities shall conform to all applicable requirements of this Code, to include the requirements of title 9,
chapter 8, "Postconstruction Runoff Control And Water Quality Management", of this Code.
G. Sanitary Sewerage:
1. The subdivider shall install public sanitary sewers in the subdivision. Sanitary sewers shall be connected to a
public sewer system. Sewers, connections and related apparatus shall be constructed in accordance with plans,
profiles, and specifications approved by the Nevada Division of Environmental Protection and the City, and in
accordance with approved City standards and State of Nevada requirements. The subdivider shall install sanitary
sewers to the grade, in the locations, to the depth and of the material shown on plans and specifications
approved by the City. The subdivider shall connect each lot in the subdivision to sanitary sewer mains at locations
specified by the City.
2. The subdivider shall install manholes in conjunction with the installation of sanitary sewer mains at the points, in
the manner and according to specifications approved or provided by the City.
H. Water Supply:
1. The subdivider shall design and construct the water supply system in such a manner as to ensure that each lot is
supplied with safe, pure and potable water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection,
and that conforms to all applicable State and City standards and requirements. The subdivider shall install, to
grade, all water mains and lines with the materials that are shown on plans and specifications approved by the
City. Connections from said mains and lines shall be installed to each lot in said subdivision. The construction
plans shall show the locations of shutoff valves to each block and lot. All proposed water systems shall connect to
the City Municipal water system.
2. Water meter boxes and water meters shall be installed on all lots. Water meter boxes shall conform to all
applicable standards and specifications set by the City, and shall be subject to approval by the City.
I. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall conform to all applicable standards and specifications set by the City (to include,
without limitation, the Fire Code, section 6-1-1 of this Code), and shall be subject to approval by the City.
J. Power, Communications And Gas Utilities: The subdivider shall install or arrange for the installation of the following
utilities: electric power, natural gas, telephone and communication lines. These utilities shall be installed in all
subdivisions. All electric distribution facilities shall be installed underground, except in unusual situations involving
short extensions of overhead facilities existing on abutting subdivisions, which extensions are only permitted if
approved by the City Council. All underground electric distribution lines and telephone lines shall be installed in
accordance with General Order no. 9 issued by the Public Utilities Commission of Nevada.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 260/640
K. Survey Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be installed in accordance with standards set by the City at all
corners, angle points, points of curve and street intersections. After all improvements in the subdivision have been
installed, the subdivider shall have a registered land surveyor check the locations of monuments and certify their
accuracy. Monuments shall be at or near boundary corners. Monuments shall be set at intermediate points of
approximately one thousand feet (1,000') or at such lesser distances as may be necessary by reason of topography
or culture to ensure accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. All
monuments shall be permanently and visibly marked with the license number of the registered land surveyor under
whose supervision the survey was made, and a description of such monument shall be shown on the final map.
The subdivider shall set monuments at street intersections and at the beginning and ending of each curve, unless
the intersection of tangents of said centerline falls within the street right-of-way, in which event the City may permit
the subdivider to establish a monument at the intersection in lieu of monuments at the beginning and end of the
curve.
L. Lot Corner Staking: Five-eighths inch (5/8") reinforcing steel with a cap having a mark for the exact point and
stamped "PLS" followed by the number of the professional land surveyor's license shall be set at all corners, angle
points and points of curve for each subdivision lot prior to final acceptance of the subdivision. The cost for lot corner
staking, under the direction of a professional land surveyor, shall be included as part of the public improvements
and shall be a line item on the "engineer's estimate of the costs of the public improvements".
M. Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be installed on all streets and at all locations designated by the City within the
subdivision in conformity with section 3-3-16 of this chapter, to include City standards for materials, design and
construction. The subdivider will bear all costs for the design and installation of streetlights.
N. Stormwater Discharge And Land Disturbance: All construction activities that have the potential to create a land
disturbance of greater than one acre shall comply with State construction site stormwater general permit
requirements and the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System general permit for discharges from
small Municipal separate storm sewer systems. This requires developers and/or contractors to obtain a State
stormwater discharge permit and City grading permit for these projects. The subdivider shall provide construction
site stormwater erosion protection for all construction. Permanent stormwater erosion measures meeting the
minimum requirements of the City stormwater management plan will be enforced.
O. Full Frontage: The subdivider must construct and install all required public utilities across the full frontage of
property at the time of development of the subdivision.
P. Site Grading: The subdivider shall:
1. Ensure that the subdivision is constructed with sufficient site grading for the required improvements;
2. Ensure that each lot area is buildable; and
3. Ensure that there is adequate site drainage control. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-21: AGREEMENTS TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Provisions And Requirements Of Agreement To Install Improvements: Except as otherwise provided in this section,
no more than thirty (30) calendar days after the later of the approval of the final map or the approval of a proposed
agreement to install improvements by the City Council, prior to the commencement of construction of subdivision
improvements, and prior to certification of the final map, the subdivider shall enter into and have on file with the City
an agreement to install improvements, fully executed by the subdivider and the City, containing the following
provisions:
1. That the engineer's estimate must be approved by the City;
2. That the total engineer's estimate must be an amount no less than the full cost of the following improvements:
a. Improvements required under section 3-3-20 of this chapter;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 261/640
b. Improvements shown on the construction plans prepared and approved in accordance with section 3-3-18 of
this chapter;
c. The cost of required inspection and testing by a properly licensed engineer to oversee the quality assurance
and quality control necessary to ensure certification for the construction of the approved construction plans;
d. The cost to replace any existing streets, utilities or other improvements that are included in the required
improvements as shown on the construction plans;
e. The cost to prepare the as-built drawings and any associated documents; and
f. Incidental expenses associated with the foregoing work.
3. One of the following provisions, at the election of the subdivider:
a. That the subdivider will complete the subdivision improvements with its own resources, subject to terms and
conditions approved by the City in the agreement to install improvements; provided, during the construction of
subdivision improvements, the subdivider may, at its option, guarantee performance of the remaining
subdivision improvements with a performance guaranty that conforms to subsection A3b of this section and
section 3-3-22 of this chapter; or
b. That the subdivider will guarantee the completion of the subdivision improvements by providing to the City a
performance guaranty that satisfies the requirements of section 3-3-22 of this chapter, and that a performance
guaranty given in the form of a bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall not expire or be released by the issuer
prior to completion of all required subdivision improvements and written authorization by the City permitting the
performance guaranty to expire or be released.
4. That all subdivision improvements identified in the agreement to install improvements shall be completed within a
specified period, not to exceed two (2) years, to the satisfaction of the City.
5. That in the event the required subdivision improvements are not completed within the specified period to the
satisfaction of the City, the City may, with City Council approval, complete or cause to be completed the
improvements and thereafter recover from the subdivider the full cost and expenses therefor.
6. That approved construction plans are appended to the agreement to install improvements as an exhibit.
7. That the construction plans and all required improvements shall be approved by the City, applicable State and
Federal agencies prior to the commencement of construction.
8. That the subdivider shall, at its own expense, use the services of a licensed professional engineer to: a) oversee
the construction of the subdivision, b) provide to the City copies of all test results required under the
specifications for the project and c) provide the City with a stamped certification that the subdivision was
constructed in conformity with the approved construction plans.
9. That the subdivider shall pay the cost of inspection, testing and surveying all subdivision improvements and,
further, that if the City determines the subdivider is not performing adequate surveying, inspection and/or testing
through the use of a properly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor (as appropriate), the City may then,
in its discretion, order the subdivider to immediately stop work; and that the City may thereafter hire a properly
licensed professional engineer and/or land surveyor to perform the remaining surveying, inspection and/or
testing, the cost of which shall be reimbursed to the City by the subdivider upon demand and prior to final
acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the City.
10. That the subdivider's engineer shall provide to the City as-built drawings of all subdivision improvements, and
further, that the as-built drawings shall be submitted both in digital format and on paper, the paper version to be
wet-stamped by the subdivider's engineer prior to submittal to the City.
11. That the subdivider shall use qualified and properly licensed contractors for the construction of all required
improvements, to include all subdivision improvements shown on the construction plans.
12. That the parties acknowledge the City Council will only accept the subdivision improvements if: a) the
subdivider's engineer certifies that the subdivision improvements are complete and b) the City independently
confirms that the subdivision improvements are complete.
13. That the subdivider shall provide the City with a maintenance guaranty that satisfies the requirements of section
3-3-22 of this chapter, and that the one year maintenance period shall commence on the date the City Council
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 262/640
accepts the subdivision improvements.
14. That the subdivider's breach of the agreement to install improvements shall constitute a default, including,
without limitation, the following:
a. Subdivider's failure to complete construction of subdivision improvements within time stated in the agreement
to install improvements;
b. Subdivider's failure to timely cure any defect in the subdivision improvements;
c. Subdivider's insolvency, appointment of a receiver, or the filing of any petition in bankruptcy, either voluntary or
involuntary, which subdivider fails to discharge within thirty (30) days; or
d. Subdivider fails to perform any other obligation under the agreement to install improvements.
15. That in the event of a default by the subdivider: a) the City may thereafter draw upon any performance guaranty
provided to the City to complete the subdivision improvements and mitigate the City's damages (if applicable), in
addition to any other remedies available to the City; b) the subdivider shall promptly, but in no case more than
thirty (30) days after written notice from the City, dedicate all remaining undedicated and required rights-of-way
for the continuation of existing streets into the subdivision; and c) the City may record all deeds of dedication for
rights-of-way for the continuation of existing streets into the subdivision.
16. That in the event of a default by the subdivider, the City reserves all remedies available to it at law and in equity.
17. That upon a determination by the City that specific improvements have been satisfactorily constructed and
completed, funds may be released from the performance guaranty (if applicable) either by refunding a portion of
a cash deposit to the subdivider or by authorizing a reduction of a bond or other form of non-cash guaranty, so
long as the foregoing release of funds does not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the value of the completed
improvements that have been certified by the subdivider's engineer and approved by the City. The foregoing
determination by the City shall be subject to the appeal rights set forth in section 3-3-30 of this chapter.
B. Additional Provisions: Notwithstanding any other requirements set forth in this section, the agreement to install
improvements may also contain any of the following provisions and/or requirements:
1. That the construction of improvements shall take place in specified stages.
2. That the time to complete construction may be extended by the City, in its discretion, subject to specified
conditions.
C. Modifications, Extensions: At the written request of the subdivider, the terms and conditions, to include time frames
and deadlines, contained in an executed agreement to install improvements may be modified by the City Council
upon a demonstration of good cause by the subdivider, so long as the modification does not frustrate the purposes
of this Code or relieve the subdivider of the requirement to construct or compensate the City for constructing the
required subdivision improvements. The subdivider shall, at the time of filing the written request for modification of
the agreement to install improvements, pay a filing fee to the City in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-22: PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES:
A. Completion Or Guaranty: To ensure that subdivision improvements are properly completed at the subdivider's
expense, the subdivider shall either: 1) complete the subdivision improvements with its own resources according to
the agreement to install improvements and other terms and conditions approved by the City, in which event the
subdivision improvements must be certified by the City as complete prior to certification of the final map; or 2)
provide the City with a performance guaranty.
B. Performance Guarantees: In the event the subdivider does not complete the subdivision improvements with the
subdivider's own resources, the subdivider shall provide a performance guaranty to the City, subject to the following
requirements:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 263/640
1. Provisions: Prior to execution of an agreement to install improvements pursuant to section 3-3-21 of this chapter
and prior to approval of the final map by the City Council, the subdivider shall provide the City with a performance
guaranty, subject to approval by the City, in an amount deemed sufficient by the City to cover the full cost of: a)
remaining improvements required under section 3-3-20 of this chapter in the construction plans prepared and
approved in accordance with section 3-3-18 of this chapter; b) remaining improvements identified in engineering
inspections; c) the cost to replace any existing streets, utilities or other improvements that may be damaged
during construction of the required subdivision improvements; d) the cost to prepare the as-built drawings and
any associated documents; e) the cost for the services of a licensed professional engineer to oversee the
construction of the subdivision and f) identified incidental expenses associated with the foregoing work. The
performance guaranty shall be in one of the following forms:
a. Performance Bond: A performance or surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in
the State of Nevada, approved by the City Attorney as to form, and having a length of term not exceeding
twenty four (24) months from the date of final map recordation.
b. Deposit Of Funds: A deposit of cash with the City, or a certified check or negotiable bonds made payable to
and deposited with the City or an escrow agent or trust company approved by the City Attorney; provided, any
decision by the City Attorney not to approve an escrow agent or trust company is subject to review by the City
Council.
c. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the City issued by a financial institution
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).
d. Combinations: Upon approval by the City based on a showing of good cause by the subdivider, a combination
of the forms of performance guaranty listed in this subsection, so long as the combination provides the City
with at least the same level of protection against default as any single one of the listed forms of guaranty.
2. Penalty In Case Of Default: In the event the subdivider fails to complete all required subdivision improvements in
accordance with terms of the agreement to install improvements, the City may, in its sole discretion, complete the
work at its own expense and thereafter reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof from the performance
guaranty.
3. Maintenance Guaranty: The subdivider shall provide the City with a maintenance guaranty to ensure the
maintenance, adequacy and condition of all improvements required by the agreement to install improvements for
a period of not less than one year after the improvements are accepted by the City. The maintenance guaranty
may be in any form permitted in subsection B1 of this section for a performance guaranty and shall be in an
amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the total cost of the required subdivision improvements. The City shall not
accept the subdivision improvements until the subdivider provides the maintenance guaranty.
4. Reduction Of Maintenance Guaranty: Once a maintenance guaranty has been delivered to the City, the City shall
not thereafter release any funds from or reduce the amount of the maintenance guaranty except upon written
certification by the City that all required maintenance has been performed in conformance with the agreement to
install improvements; provided, in no event shall the release of funds exceed the amount of the maintenance
guaranty.
5. Improvement District Financing Through Special Assessments: If not all of the properties abutting a public street
within any given block are under the control of the subdivider, and the street abutting those properties is not fully
improved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the subdivider may petition the City Council for the
creation of an improvement district for the construction of the required improvements and for the special
assessment of the cost thereof against abutting properties in accordance with chapter 268 of the Nevada
Revised Statutes; provided, however, that the subdivider shall thereupon enter into an agreement with the City
pursuant to which it agrees to be responsible for any difference between the cost of such improvements and the
maximum amount which the City can specially assess against the property to be subdivided, and to furnish any
necessary waivers to permit assessment of the entire cost of such improvements. Any such agreement pursuant
to the preceding sentence shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-23: PARK LAND DEDICATIONS:
The City may require the dedication of land for the development of park, playground and recreational facilities,
payment in lieu of dedication, or Residential Tax (to the extent permitted under Nevada law), in accordance with the
recreation and open space element of the Elko Master Plan. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 264/640
3-3-24: PARCEL MAPS:
A. Required: A person who proposes to divide any land into four (4) or fewer lots shall file a parcel map application with
the City and, upon approval by the City, the applicant shall thereafter file the parcel map with the Office of the
County Recorder, unless such recordation is not required under Nevada law.
B. Public Improvements: Public improvements may be required by the City as a condition of approval of a parcel map,
but such requirements shall not exceed those that would be required under section 3-3-20 of this chapter if the
proposed division of land were a subdivision.
C. Public Improvements: For parcel maps, the City Council shall require, as a condition of approval of a parcel map,
the design and construction of all improvements (to include off-site improvements) that are consistent with the uses
of the existing property and surrounding land, and that are reasonably necessary to ensure the adequacy of site
grading; parcel ingress/egress; street alignment, surfacing and width; water quality; water drainage; water supply;
sewerage; and the protection of public health and safety.
D. Dedications: If the proposed parcels are located in areas where public improvements do not exist, the City Council
shall require the dedication of rights-of-ways and/or easements to the extent necessary to serve the best interests
of the public.
E. Parcel Or Lot Design: Lot width, depth and area shall comply with the zoning requirements appropriate for the
location and character of development proposed, including the requirements set forth in sections 3-2-26 and 3-2-28
of this title, and appropriate for the type and extent of public improvements being installed. However, where steep
topography, unusual soil conditions or drainage problems exist or prevail, the City may require increased lot width,
depth and/or area that exceeds the minimum requirements of the particular zoning district.
F. Construction Plans: The subdivider shall use a licensed professional engineer to prepare a complete set of
construction plans for all required public improvements. The construction plans shall be based on and prepared in
conjunction with the parcel map. The foregoing construction plans must be approved by the City prior to recordation
of the parcel map.
G. Second Or Subsequent Parcel Maps: When considering whether to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a
second or subsequent parcel map involving land that has been divided by a parcel map which was recorded within
the five (5) years immediately preceding the acceptance of the second or subsequent parcel map as a complete
application, the following criteria shall be considered:
1. Environmental and health laws and regulations concerning water and air pollution, the disposal of solid waste,
facilities to supply water, community or public sewage disposal and, where applicable, individual systems for
sewage disposal;
2. The availability of water which meets applicable health standards and is sufficient in quantity for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the property being divided into parcels;
3. The availability and accessibility of utilities;
4. The availability and accessibility of public services, such as schools, police protection, transportation, recreation
and parks;
5. Conformity with the zoning ordinances and master plan, except that if any existing zoning ordinance is
inconsistent with the master plan, the zoning ordinance shall apply;
6. General conformity with the City's master plan of streets and highways;
7. The effect of the proposed division of land into parcels on existing public streets and the need for new streets or
highways to serve the land being divided;
8. Physical characteristics of the land, such as floodplain, slope and soil;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 265/640
9. The recommendations and comments of those entities reviewing the parcel map pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes sections 278.330 through 278.348, inclusive; and
10. The availability and accessibility of fire protection, including, but not limited to, the availability and accessibility
of water and services for the prevention and containment of fires, including fires in wild lands.
11. For any other second or subsequent parcel map, any reasonable public improvement shall be required, but not
more than would be required under section 3-3-20 of this chapter if the parcel were a subdivision.
H. Review And Approval Of Parcel Map:
1. Upon the filing of an application by a person proposing to divide land into parcels, except as otherwise provided
in this section, the City Planning Department shall approve the parcel map, or waive the requirement of a parcel
map or survey for a parcel map, without further action by the Planning Commission or City Council, unless the
parcel map includes an offer of dedication of a street right-of-way to the City or is associated with a request to
modify subdivision ordinance standards or regulations. Except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence,
the City Planning Department shall review the parcel map and within sixty (60) days after filing shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the parcel map.
2. A parcel map which includes an offer of dedication of a street right-of-way to the City or a modification of
ordinance standards or regulations respecting the division of land shall be referred to the Planning Commission
and the City Council for review and consideration, and formal acceptance of the offer of dedication and/or any
modification of standards or regulations. The Planning Commission shall consider the parcel map within sixty (60)
days after filing and shall thereupon make a recommendation to the City Council to approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the formal acceptance of the offer of dedication and/or any modification of standards or
regulations. The City Council shall then consider and take action upon the formal acceptance of the offer of
dedication and/or any modification of standards or regulations no later than thirty (30) days after action by the
Planning Commission, taking into account the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
I. Exceptions:
1. A parcel map is not required when the division of land into parcels is for the express purpose of:
a. Creation or realignment of a public right-of-way by a public agency;
b. Creation or realignment of an easement;
c. An adjustment of the boundary line between two (2) abutting parcels or the transfer of land between two (2)
owners of abutting parcels, which does not result in the creation of any additional parcels, if such an
adjustment is approved pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.5692 and is made in compliance with the
provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 278.5693;
d. The purchase, transfer or development of space within an apartment building or an industrial or commercial
building;
e. Carrying out an order of any court or dividing land as a result of an operation of law.
2. A parcel map is not required for any of the following transactions involving land:
a. The creation of a lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any other security instrument;
b. The creation of a security or unit of interest in any investment trust regulated under the laws of this State or
any other interest in an investment entity;
c. Conveying an interest in oil, gas, minerals or building materials, which is severed from surface ownership of
real property;
d. Conveying an interest in land acquired by the Department of Transportation pursuant to chapter 408 of the
Nevada Revised Statutes;
e. Filing a certificate of amendment pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.473.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 266/640
J. Survey Not Required: If a survey is not required for the preparation of a parcel map, the map must be prepared by a
registered land surveyor, but the certificate upon the map may include substantially the following:
This map was prepared from existing information (identifying it and stating where filed or recorded), and the
undersigned assumes no responsibility for the existence of monuments or corrections of other information shown
on or copied from any such prior document.
K. Fee: The applicant shall, at the time of filing the parcel map, pay a filing fee to the City in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council.
L. Information Required: The parcel map shall contain the following information and meet the following requirements:
1. The parcel map shall be legibly drawn in black, waterproof India ink on tracing cloth or produced by the use of
other materials of a permanent nature generally used for such purpose in the engineering profession. The size of
each sheet shall be twenty four inches by thirty two inches (24" x 32"). A marginal line shall be completely drawn
around each sheet leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1") at the top, bottom and right edges, and of two
inches (2") at the left edge along the twenty four inch (24") dimension.
2. A parcel map must indicate the owner of any adjoining land or right-of-way if owned by the person dividing the
land.
3. If a survey is required, the parcel map shall also show:
a. All monuments found, set, reset, replaced or removed, describing the claim, size and location and other data
relating thereto;
b. Bearing or witness monuments, basis of bearings, bearing and length of line and scale of map;
c. Name and legal description of tract or grant in which the survey is located and ties to adjoined tracts;
d. Memorandum of oaths;
e. Signature of surveyor;
f. Date of survey;
g. Signature of the owner or owners of the land to be divided;
h. Any easements granted or dedications made;
i. Any other data necessary for the intelligent interpretation of various items in the location of the points, lines and
areas shown; and
j. Provision and date for installation of all required improvements.
4. The following certificates shall appear on a parcel map before it can be recorded:
a. A certificate for execution by the Clerk of each approving Governing Body stating that the body approved the
map;
b. A certificate by the surveyor responsible for the parcel map giving the date of the survey on which the map is
based and stating that the survey was made by him or under his direction and setting forth the name of the
owner who authorized him to make the survey, and that the parcel map is true and complete as shown. The
certificate shall also state that the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated or that
they will be set in such positions at such time as agreed upon under the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 278. The certificate shall also state that monuments are or will be sufficient to enable the survey to be
retraced;
c. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title in the land to be divided into
parcels evidencing their grant of permanent easements for utilities installations and access, as designated on
the parcel map;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 267/640
d. A statement approving such easements, signed by each public utility company or agency in whose favor the
easements are created or whose utility services are to be required for the mapped parcel; and
e. A statement that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the approvals of all serving utility
companies as to the location of any utility easements shown on the parcel map.
5. The following data shall accompany a parcel map at the time it is submitted:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the persons requesting approval of the parcel map and the owner or
owners of the land;
b. Name, address and telephone number of the person who prepared the map;
c. Legal description of the original parcel. It shall be sufficient to give the Recorder's book and page number of
the deed and the Assessor's parcel number;
d. Proposed use of each parcel;
e. Source of water supply and proposed method of sewage disposal for each parcel;
f. A copy of all survey computations shall accompany the parcel map; and
g. A vicinity map.
6. The subdivider shall file the following copies of the parcel map with the City at the time of filing:
a. One hard copy that is 24" x 36" in size;
b. One reproducible hard copy that is 81/2" x 11" in size; and
c. A legible electronic copy in PDF format.
M. Recording: A parcel map approved pursuant to this section and section 3-3-25 of this chapter, shall be recorded in
the Office of the Elko County Recorder within two (2) years after the date when the map was approved or deemed
approved by the City.
N. Prohibitions Of Parcels: Parcel maps that are determined by the City to fall into one or more of the following
categories shall not be approved by the City:
1. One or more of the proposed parcels are not reasonably capable of being developed due to site conditions.
2. The parcels are proposed in an attempt to eliminate frontage or required public improvements.
3. The proposed parcels are detrimental to the health, safety and/or welfare of the public. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-25: MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS:
A. Permitted: Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission that there exist extraordinary conditions of
topography, land ownership, or adjacent development, or other circumstances not provided for in this chapter, that
prevent or unreasonably restrict the ability of a person to develop land, the City Council may thereafter modify the
provisions of this chapter, or any other provision in this Code, in such manner and to the minimum extent necessary
to carry out the intent of this chapter; provided, this paragraph shall not permit the modification of the process for
satisfying the substantive requirements of this chapter.
B. Complete Neighborhood Plan: In the case of a plan and program for a complete neighborhood development, the
City Council may modify the provisions of this chapter in such manner as it deems necessary and desirable to
provide for adequate space and the development of improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and
service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated. The City Council may further require such
restrictions on the neighborhood development, through the use of deed restrictions, restrictive covenants and
conditions and the like, as may be necessary to assure conformity to and the achievement of the plan and program.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 268/640
C. Additional Requirements: In modifying a standard or requirement pursuant to this section, the City Council may
impose such additional requirements as it determines are necessary to best achieve the purpose of the standard or
requirement being modified. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-26: REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE:
A. Application: Except as otherwise provided in Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.4925, an owner or Governing
Body desiring to revert any recorded subdivision map, parcel map, map of division into large parcels, or part
thereof, to acreage or to revert the map or portion thereof, or to revert more than one map recorded under the same
tentative map if the parcels to be reverted are contiguous, shall submit a written application accompanied by a map
of the proposed reversion which contains the same survey dimensions as the recorded maps or maps filed with the
City Planning Department. The application must specifically describe the requested change.
B. Review: At its next regular meeting, or within a period of not more than thirty (30) days after the filing of the map of
reversion, whichever occurs later, the City Council shall review the map of reversion and approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the map.
C. Applicability Of Fees: Except for the provisions of this section, Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.4955,
278.496 and 278.4965, and any provision of this Code relating to the payment of fees in conjunction with filing,
recordation or checking of a map of the kind offered, no other provision of Nevada Revised Statutes sections
278.010 through 278.630, inclusive, applies to a map made solely for the purpose of reversion of a former map or
for reversion of any division of land to acreage.
D. Recording: Upon approval of the map of reversion, it must be recorded in the Office of the Elko County Recorder.
E. Street Or Easement Included: At the time a map of reversion is submitted and presented for recording, it must
conform with provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.4955, 278.496 and 278.4965. If the map includes
the reversion of any street or easement owned by a city, a county or the State, the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes section 279.480 must be followed and satisfied before the map of reversion is approved by the City.
F. Fee: The owner shall, at the time of filing the map of reversion, pay a filing fee to the City in an amount established
by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-27: PROHIBITION AGAINST SALE IN VIOLATION:
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall hereafter sell or offer for sale any lot, or piece or parcel of land
which is within a tract of land proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, or pieces or parcels of land, until after a
final map thereof has been approved and certified by the City, and recorded with the Elko County Recorder in
accordance with provisions of the Nevada Revised Statutes and this chapter. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-28: MERGERS AND RESUBDIVISION OF LAND:
A. Permitted: An owner of two (2) or more contiguous parcels may merge and resubdivide the land into new parcels or
lots without reverting the preexisting parcels to acreage.
B. Recording Required: Parcels merged without reversion to acreage pursuant to this section must be resubdivided
and recorded on a final map, parcel map or map of division into large parcels, as appropriate, in accordance with
Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.320 through 278.4725, inclusive, and this Code. The recording of the
resubdivided parcels or lots on a final map, parcel map or map of division into large parcels, as appropriate,
constitutes the merging of the preexisting parcels into a single parcel and the simultaneous resubdivision of that
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 269/640
single parcel into parcels or lots of a size and description set forth in the final map, parcel map or map of division
into large parcels, as appropriate.
C. Street Easements And Utility Easements: With respect to a merger and resubdivision of parcels pursuant to this
section, the owner of land conducting the merger and resubdivision shall ensure that street easements and utility
easements, whether public or private, that will remain in effect after the merger and resubdivision, are delineated
clearly on the final map, parcel map or map of division into large parcels, as appropriate, on which the merger and
resubdivision is recorded.
D. Security Credit: If the City Council requires an owner of land to post security to secure the completion of
improvements to two (2) or more contiguous parcels and those improvements will not be completed because of a
merger and resubdivision conducted pursuant to this section, the City Council shall credit on a pro rata basis the
security posted by the owner of land toward the same purposes with respect to the parcels as merged and
resubdivided. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-29: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction therefor, be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. The imposition of any sentence
shall not exempt the offender from compliance with all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
3-3-30: APPEALS OF CERTAIN DECISIONS REGARDING USE OF LAND:
A. Notice Of Appeal: Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, any person who is aggrieved by: 1)
a decision of a person appointed or employed by the City who is authorized to make administrative decisions
regarding the use of land or 2) a decision of the Planning Commission, may appeal the decision to the City Council
by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the decision. The notice of
appeal shall contain the following information: the name of the appellant, the location of the property to which the
decision relates, the date on which the appellant was notified of the decision, a summary of the decision being
appealed and a statement of reason why the decision is being appealed. The failure of the aggrieved person to file
a notice of appeal in the manner stated in this section shall result in a waiver of the aggrieved person's right to
appeal. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the action of the City pending the outcome of the appeal. The
City Council may by resolution establish a fee for the filing of an appeal.
B. Investigation By City Council: Following the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Council may, in its discretion, appoint
a committee of the City Council or an independent Hearing Officer to investigate the notice of appeal, report
findings of fact and make a recommendation for disposition to the City Council.
C. Hearing Before City Council: The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within forty five (45) days from
the date the notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
D. Purposes: In reviewing the decision, the City Council will be guided by the following purposes:
1. That, for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of the community, the City
Council is authorized and empowered to regulate and restrict the improvement of land and to control the location
and soundness of structures.
2. That regulations, restrictions and controls pertaining to the improvement of land, and the control of the location
and soundness of structures, must take into account:
a. The potential impairment of natural resources and the total population which the available natural resources
will support without unreasonable impairment; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 270/640
b. The availability of and need for affordable housing in the community, including affordable housing that is
accessible to persons with disabilities.
E. Hearing Procedures: The procedures pursuant to which the City Council shall hear an appeal pursuant to this
section are as follows:
1. The appellant shall first describe the decision being challenged, state the grounds for the appeal and present a
summary of the appellant's argument.
2. The appellant may then testify, submit documents and/or call witnesses in support of the appeal.
3. The City shall then state the grounds for opposing the appeal.
4. The City may submit documents and/or call witnesses in opposition to the appeal.
5. The appellant may then present a rebuttal argument, witnesses and/or documents. The failure of an appellant to
provide argument, witnesses and/or documents on rebuttal shall not be considered by the City Council in
deciding the appeal.
6. The appellant and the City, respectively, may present closing arguments.
7. Appellant and the City are entitled to be represented by counsel, and present testimony, evidence and argument
on all issues raised on appeal.
8. The City Council may, if it appears helpful to a clear understanding of the issues, consider matters not raised at
the hearing.
9. All testimony by the appellant and the parties' witnesses shall be under oath.
10. The rules of evidence shall not apply.
11. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem may limit testimony or other proffered evidence that is duplicative, unnecessarily
argumentative or not reasonably related to the matter being appealed.
12. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem may terminate the hearing upon finding that sufficient testimony, documents and
arguments have been presented to enable the City Council to fully deliberate and decide the appeal; provided,
the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall first request from the appellant a summary of all remaining matters he or she
intends to present at the hearing.
F. Decision By City Council: At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final decision that is
consistent with the requirements of this title to affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from and shall within
sixty (60) days thereafter file a notice of decision with the City Clerk stating the decision. The foregoing decision of
the City Council shall be a final decision for the purpose of judicial review.
G. Judicial Review: Any person who has appealed a decision to the City Council in accordance with this section and is
aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal that decision to the Fourth Judicial District Court in and for
the County of Elko, State of Nevada, by filing with that court a petition for judicial review within twenty five (25) days
after the date the notice of decision is filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 834, 11-27-2018)
Chapter 4
PLANNING COMMISSION
3-4-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT; MEMBERS; COMPENSATION; TERM; REMOVAL;
VACANCIES:
A. Created; Membership; Appointment: There is hereby created a Planning Commission in and for the City, to be
known as the Elko Planning Commission. This commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The members of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 271/640
the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council. The members shall hold no
other public office, except that one such member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Members
shall be eligible for reappointment.
B. Compensation: All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation excepting reasonable
traveling expenses made necessary in the fulfillment of their duties.
C. Terms: The terms of the members first appointed shall be three (3) years for two (2) members, two (2) years for two
(2) members and one year for two (2) members. The Mayor shall designate the terms of the respective members
first appointed at the time of appointment. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be four (4) years or until his
successor takes office.
D. Removal: Members may be removed, after public hearing, by a majority vote of the City Council for inefficiency,
neglect of duty or malfeasance of office.
E. Vacancies: Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term.
F. Absences From Meetings: Absence of an appointed member for four (4) consecutive regular meetings without the
formal consent of the Planning Commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of that appointed member,
and the vacancy thus created shall be filled thereafter by the Mayor by the appointment of a successor to fill the
unexpired term of office. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-2: MEETINGS, RECORDS, QUORUM AND VOTING:
A. Meetings: The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. Other meetings may be
provided for in its rules.
B. Rules: It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings
and determinations, which record shall be a public record. Rules may be amended from time to time.
C. Quorum: A majority of the appointed Planning Commission members shall constitute a quorum for all meetings, to
include public hearings.
D. Voting Requirements:
1. A majority vote of the appointed Planning Commission members present and participating in any agenda item
shall be required to approve the corresponding action for that item. To be present and participating at a meeting,
a Planning Commission member must be either: a) physically present at the meeting or b) participating by means
of electronic communication with access to all written materials for that agenda item that are available to the
other Planning Commission members.
2. An abstention from voting by a Planning Commission member shall not be counted in the determination of the
motion as a vote in favor of any action but shall be noted on the record.
3. In the event of a tie vote, the motion shall not pass. (Ord. 836, 11-27-2018)
3-4-3: CHAIRPERSON, VICE CHAIRPERSON AND SECRETARY:
A. Election; Term: At the first regular meeting in January of each calendar year, members of the Planning Commission
shall meet in regular session and organize by electing from their members a Chairperson, and from their members
a Vice Chairperson, and from their members a Secretary. The term of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 272/640
B. Chairperson Duties: It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to preside over all meetings of the Planning Commission.
In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall preside, and in the absence of the Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson, a Chairperson Pro Tempore may be elected to preside.
C. Records: It shall be the duty of the Secretary to attest that records of all proceedings of the Planning Commission,
are being kept as required by this chapter or by the laws of the State. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-4: EMPLOYEES:
A. Authority: In addition to electing its Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary, the Planning Commission may
create and fill such other offices and subcommittees.
B. Other: The Planning Commission may also recommend to the City Council the appointment or contract of such
employees, planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require and deem
necessary for its work. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-5: EXPENDITURES:
The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be with the amounts appropriated for the
purpose by the City Council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the
commission's work. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-6: MASTER PLAN:
A. Preparation: The Planning Commission shall prepare and adopt a comprehensive long term general plan for the
physical development of the City, which in the commission's judgment bears relation to the planning thereof.
B. Adoption By City Council: The plan must be known as the master plan, and must be so prepared that all or portions
thereof may be adopted by the City Council, as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through
278.630, inclusive, as a basis for the development of the City, County or region for such reasonable period of time
next ensuing after the adoption thereof as may practically be covered thereby. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-7: SUBJECT MATTER OF MASTER PLAN:
A. Basis For Development: The master plan, with the accompanying charts, drawings, diagrams, schedules and
reports, shall include subject matter or portions thereof as are appropriate to the City and as may be made the
basis for the physical development thereof in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.160.
B. Other Plans And Reports: The Planning Commission may prepare and adopt, as part of the master plan, other and
additional plans and reports dealing with such other subjects as may in its judgment relate to the physical
development of the City and nothing contained in this chapter or in Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010
through 278.630, inclusive, shall be deemed to prohibit the preparation and adoption of any such subject as a part
of the master plan. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-8: COORDINATION OF MASTER PLAN:
The Planning Commission may prepare and adopt all or any part of the master plan or any subject thereof for all or any
part of the City; but master regional plans shall be coordinated with similar plans of adjoining regions, and master
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 273/640
county and city plans within each region shall be coordinated so as to fit properly into the master plan for the region.
(Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-9: SCHOOL SITES:
A. Notice To School Board Of Plan Preparation: The planning commission shall, during the formulation of plans for
community design and public buildings, notify the board of trustees of the Elko County school district of the
preparation of such plans to the end that adequate and properly located school sites may be provided for.
B. Notice Of Plan For Future Construction: When the board of trustees of a school district develops a plan for the future
construction of one or more schools, it shall notify each city, county or regional planning commission any part of
whose territory will be served by a proposed school. The notice must include the grades to be taught, the number of
pupils to be accommodated, and the area to be served. The board shall notify each commission of any change in or
abandonment of its plan. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-10: COMMISSION TO PROMOTE PUBLIC INTEREST IN MASTER PLAN; POWERS:
A. Recommendations To City Council: The planning commission shall endeavor to promote public interest in and
understanding of the master plan or official plans and regulations relating thereto. As a means of furthering the
purpose of a master plan, the commission shall annually make recommendations to the governing body for the
implementation of the plan.
B. Consultation With Other Agencies: It also shall consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility
companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens generally with relation to the
carrying out of such plans.
C. Entrance Upon Land: The planning commission, and its members, officers and employees, in the performance of
their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary
monuments and marks thereon.
D. Generally: In general, the planning commission shall have such power as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its
functions and carry out the provisions of this chapter and of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through
278.630, inclusive. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-11: FORM OF MASTER PLAN:
The master plan shall be a map, together with such charts, drawings, diagrams, schedules, reports, ordinances or
other printed or published material, or any one or a combination of any of the foregoing, as may be considered
essential to the purpose of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through 278.630, inclusive. (Ord. 210, 11-13-
1973)
3-4-12: ADOPTION OF MASTER PLAN AND AMENDMENTS BY THE COMMISSION:
A. Hearing; Notice: Before adopting the master plan, or any part of it, or any substantial amendments thereof, the
planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be
given at least by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the hearing.
B. Adoption By Resolution: The adoption of the master plan, or of any amendments, extensions or additions thereof,
shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of
the total membership of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 274/640
other matter intended by the commission to constitute the plan, or any amendment, addition or extension thereof,
and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signatures of
the secretary and chairperson of the commission.
C. Amendments, Extensions Or Additions: No plan or map hereafter shall have indicated thereon that it is a part of the
master plan until it shall have been adopted as part of the master plan by the planning commission as herein
provided for the adoption thereof, whenever changes, conditions or future studies by the commission require such
amendments, extensions or additions.
D. Certification To City Council: An attested copy of any part, amendment, extension of or addition to the master plan
adopted by the planning commission shall be certified to the city council. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-13: ADOPTION OF MASTER PLAN BY GOVERNING COUNCIL:
A. Adoption: Upon receipt of a certified copy of the master plan, or of any part thereof as adopted by the planning
commission, the city council may adopt such parts thereof as may practicably be applied to the development of the
city for a reasonable period of time next ensuing.
B. Endorsement And Certification: The part shall thereupon be endorsed and certified as master plans thus adopted for
the territory covered, and are hereby declared to be established to conserve and promote the public health, safety
and general welfare.
C. Hearing; Notice: Before adopting any plan or part thereof, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing
thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city at least ten (10) days before the date of hearing.
D. Changes Or Additions To Plan: No change in or addition to the master plan, or any part thereof, as adopted by the
planning commission, shall be made by the city council in adopting the same until the proposed change or addition
shall have been referred to the planning commission for a report thereon and an attested copy of the report shall
have been filed with the city council. Failure of the planning commission to so report within forty (40) days, or such
longer period as may be designated by the city council, after such reference shall be deemed to be approval of the
proposed change or addition. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-14: GOVERNING BODY TO PUT ADOPTED MASTER PLAN INTO EFFECT:
A. Whenever the city council shall have adopted a master plan, or part thereof for the city, or for any major section or
district thereof, the city council shall, upon recommendation of the planning commission, determine upon
reasonable and practical means for putting into effect the master plan, or part thereof, in order that the same will
serve as a pattern and guide for that kind of orderly physical growth and development of the city or county which
will cause the least amount of natural resource impairment and will conform to the adopted population plan, where
required, and as basis for the efficient expenditure of funds thereof relating to the subject of the master plan.
B. The city council may adopt and use such procedures as may be necessary for this purpose. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-15: ACQUISITION AND ABANDONMENT OF STREETS, PARKS AND CONSTRUCTION OF
PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
Whenever the city council has adopted a master plan, or one or more subject matters thereof, for the city, or for a major
section or district thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space may be acquired by
dedication or otherwise, except by bequest, and no street or public way may be closed or abandoned, and no public
building or structure may be constructed or authorized in the area for which the master plan or one or more subject
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 275/640
matter thereof has been adopted by the city council unless the dedication, closure, abandonment, construction or
authorization is approved in a manner consistent with the requirements of the city council. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-16: LAND USE, CLASSIFICATIONS AND DISTRICTS:
A. Authority: For any or all of the purposes of this chapter and of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through
278.630, inclusive, the city council may divide the city into districts of such number, shape and area as may be
deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter and of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010
through 278.630, inclusive. Within such districts it may regulate and restrict the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of the buildings, structures or land.
B. Regulations In Accordance With Master Plan: Such regulations shall be made in accordance with the master plan
for land use and shall be designed to:
1. Preserve the quality of air and water resources.
2. Promote the conservation of open space and the protection of other natural and scenic resources from
unreasonable impairment.
3. Provide for recreational needs.
4. Protect life and property in areas subject to floods, landslides and other natural disasters.
5. Conform to the adopted population plan, if required by Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.170.
6. Develop a timely, orderly and efficient arrangement of transportation and public facilities and services.
7. Ensure that the development on land is commensurate with the character and the physical limitations of the land.
8. Take into account the immediate and long range financial impact of the application of particular land to particular
kinds of development, and the relative suitability of such land for such development.
9. Promote health and the general welfare.
10. Ensure the development of an adequate supply of housing for the community, including the development of
affordable housing.
11. Ensure the protection of existing neighborhoods and communities, including the protection of rural preservation
neighborhoods.
C. Considerations: Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character
of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of the buildings
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. (Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-17: CHANGES OF LAND USE CLASSIFICATION; NOTICE AND HEARING:
(Rep. by Ord. 533, 10-12-1999)
3-4-18: JURISDICTION OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
The jurisdiction of the planning commission shall be within the limits of the city and all areas hereafter annexed or
added to the city. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-19: WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 276/640
So far as applicable to this chapter, the definitions set out in Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.010 are adopted as
part of this chapter. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-20: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: The planning commission shall have the following additional powers and duties:
1. To confer with and advise the city council upon all matters which may be referred to it by the mayor or the city
council.
2. To recommend to the city council the leasing, sale, exchange, use or other disposition of city owned property for
planning and zoning purposes.
B. Powers Limited: Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, or by the laws of the state, the powers and duties of
the planning commission are of an advisory nature only, and the commission shall not have any powers or duties
which conflict with or supersede the powers and duties of other city commissions, councils, council members or
officials. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-21: CITY OFFICIALS:
All officers and employees of the city shall cooperate with the planning commission and render all reasonable
assistance. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-22: FINANCIAL LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, neither the planning commission nor any member thereof shall incur any
financial liability in the name of the city. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
3-4-23: ANNUAL REPORT:
The planning commission shall render annually a full report of its work to the city council. (Ord. 210, 11-13-1973)
Chapter 5
MOBILE HOME PARKS, MOBILE HOME, MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISIONS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
3-5-1: INTENT:
Within selected geographical areas that are designated for mobile homes on the city general plan map, adopted by the
city council on January 15, 1974, or zoned RMH on the zoning map, the city council, through conditional use permits,
after review by the planning commission, may regulate by districting, the proposed mobile home residential use,
manufactured home residential use, and recreational vehicle parks. When such districts are designated, the provisions
of this chapter shall prevail over any requirements underlying by virtue of the zoning previously adopted. Within the
commercial zoning districts, the appropriate provisions of this chapter shall apply to recreational vehicle (RV) parks
approved by the planning commission through conditional use permits. (Ord. 398, 4-24-1990)
3-5-2: DISTRICTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 277/640
Four (4) separate districts for residential mobile homes, manufactured homes and RV parks are contemplated by this
chapter:
RMH-1: Areas suitable for development, placement and occupancy of mobile homes for residential purposes on rented
or leased sites in mobile home parks.
RMH-2: Areas suitable for development, placement and occupancy of mobile homes for residential purposes on
individually owned lots in mobile home subdivisions.
RMH-3: Areas suitable for development, placement and occupancy of manufactured homes for residential purposes on
individually owned lots in manufactured home subdivisions.
RMH-4: Areas in commercial zones approved by a conditional use permit for development of recreational vehicle
parks. (Ord. 398, 4-24-1990)
3-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS: Includes the following: garage, carport and awning. (See definition of Service Building.)
CABANA: Any portable, demountable or permanent cabin, room, enclosure or other building erected, constructed or
placed on any mobile home or manufactured home lot or mobile home space, on the same lot or space as a mobile
home or manufactured home and adjacent to the mobile home or manufactured home.
CAMPING TRAILER: A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial side walls
that fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters.
EXPANSION: Any increase in or addition to commercial uses on the property, excluding any uses requiring a
conditional use permit.
FULL FRONTAGE: All lot lines of any lot, parcel or tract of property adjacent to a road, street, alley or right of way, to
include lots, parcels or tracts containing multiple borders or edges, such as corner lots.
GROSS TRAILER AREA: The total plan area of a travel trailer measured to the maximum horizontal projection of
exterior walls when in the setup mode.
LOT: A distinct part or parcel of land divided with the intent to transfer ownership or for the placement of mobile homes
or manufactured homes.
A. Depth: Distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
B. Front Line: Narrowest lot dimension fronting a street.
C. Frontage Width: Distance between the side lot lines measured at the front line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure which is: a) built on a chassis or frame; b) designed for and set on a permanent
foundation; c) capable of being drawn or carried by a motor vehicle; d) used as a dwelling when permanently
connected to utilities; e) in an RMH-3 district, containing not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of usable living
area; and f) structural engineering bulletin number on frame. This definition is intended to include mobile homes which
meet the above criteria.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicular structure which is: a) built on a chassis or frame; b) designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation; c) self-propelled, or capable of being drawn or carried by a motor vehicle; d) used as a dwelling
when permanently connected to utilities; e) in an RMH-2 district, containing not less than five hundred eighty (580)
square feet of usable living area; and f) chassis built under national mobile home safety standards. This definition is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 278/640
intended to include mobile homes as buildings, structures and residences, where applicable, within all provisions of this
code.
MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME LOT: A portion of land within a mobile home or manufactured home
subdivision used or intended to be used for parking of one mobile or one manufactured home, including required yards
and parking area, attached or detached accessory building and open space.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land having as its principal use the rental, leasing or occupancy of space by
mobile homes on a permanent or semipermanent basis, including accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental
thereto.
MOBILE HOME, RV OR MANUFACTURED HOME SETBACK: Distance between the property line and the nearest
portion of a mobile home, RV or manufactured home on the property.
A. Front: Setback from front line to nearest part of the mobile home, RV or manufactured home.
B. Rear: Setback from rear line to nearest part of the mobile home, RV or manufactured home.
C. Side: Setback from side line to nearest part of the mobile home, RV or manufactured home.
MOBILE HOME, RV OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision of land platted in conformance with
the Nevada Revised Statutes and applicable city of Elko ordinances for the purpose of providing mobile home, RV or
manufactured home lots.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A portion of land within a mobile home park used or intended to be used for the parking of
one mobile home, including required yards and parking area, attached or detached accessory buildings and open
space.
A. Depth: Distance between the front and rear space lines measured in the mean direction of the side space line.
B. Front Line: Narrowest dimension fronting on a street.
C. Frontage Width: Distance between the side space lines measured at the front line.
D. Rear Line: Space line or lot line farthest away from the front line and which runs parallel or approximately parallel
to the front line.
E. Side Line: Space line or lot line which runs perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the front line.
MOTOR HOME: A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational or travel use built on or
permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van which is an integral part of
the completed vehicle.
OCCUPIED AREA: The total lot area covered by a mobile home, RV or manufactured home and accessory buildings
and structures on a mobile home, RV or manufactured home lot or space.
RECONSTRUCTED: The rebuilding, constructing again or restoration of any part of an existing mobile home or RV
park which has been destroyed or deteriorated.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational
or travel use which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The basic entities
are: travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home of such size or weight as not to require special
highway movement permits when towed by a motorized vehicle and containing not more than three hundred twenty
(320) square feet of living area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 279/640
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (RVP): A plot of land upon which recreational vehicle sites are located to provide for
occupancy by recreational vehicles owned or operated by the general public as temporary living quarters for
recreational or vacation purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) SITE: A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park set aside for the
accommodation of a recreational vehicle on a temporary basis.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) STAND: That area of a recreational vehicle site intended for the placement of a
recreational vehicle.
SERVICE BUILDING: A structure or portion thereof that is used to house sanitary facilities, such as water closets or
lavatories. It may include other facilities for the convenience of the owner or the occupants of the mobile home or
recreational vehicle park. (See definition of Accessory Buildings.)
SHALL: Indicates a mandatory requirement.
SHOULD: Indicates a recommendation or that which is advised but not required.
TRUCK CAMPER: A portable unit constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping
use, consisting of a roof, floor and sides designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck. (Ord.
741, 8-9-2011)
3-5-4: USES PERMITTED AND MINIMUM STANDARDS:
A. Uses Permitted:
Accessory buildings.
Community recreation buildings and facilities, laundry, car wash, boat or storage facilities serving the mobile home
or RV park; provided, however, that the architectural design of all non-mobile home structures shall be subject to
approval by the planning commission prior to issuance of any conditional use permit, and all applicable state and
city requirements.
Management offices (RMH-1 and RMH-4 only). One or more single-family dwellings or mobile homes used
exclusively for office and living quarters by the operator or manager of the mobile home or RV park. The
architectural design of a non-mobile home office shall be subject to approval by the planning commission prior to
the issuance of any conditional use permit.
Mobile homes, manufactured homes, RVs. One mobile home, manufactured home or RV per space, including
doublewide or expandable mobile home units.
Residential uses.
B. Standards For Development; Requirement:
1. Minimum Overall Area:
a. RMH-1: Two (2) acres;
b. RMH-2: One acre;
c. RMH-3: One acre;
d. RMH-4: Two (2) acres.
2. Maximum Building Height: The height of any building shall in no manner be such as to create a nuisance or
safety hazard for air traffic into and about the Elko Municipal Airport.
3. Minimum Net Space Area: Minimum net space area for each mobile home, RV or manufactured home:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 280/640
a. RMH-1: Four thousand (4,000) square feet;
b. RMH-2: Six thousand (6,000) square feet;
c. RMH-3: Six thousand (6,000) square feet;
d. RMH-4: One thousand two hundred sixty five (1,265) square feet.
4. Minimum Frontage Width: Minimum mobile home, RV or manufactured home space frontage width:
a. RMH-1: Forty feet (40');
b. RMH-2: Sixty feet (60');
c. RMH-3: Sixty feet (60');
d. RMH-4: Twenty three feet (23').
5. Minimum Setback, Public Street: Minimum setback of any building, mobile home, RV or manufactured home from
a bordering public street line is fifteen feet (15'), except that garages and carports shall be set back twenty feet
(20') from the front lot line.
6. Minimum Setback, Internal Street: Minimum setback from internal street in mobile home parks is twelve feet
(12'), except that garages and carports shall be set back twenty feet (20') from the front lot line.
7. Minimum Side, Rear Setbacks, Separations: Minimum side and rear setbacks or separation for each mobile
home, RV or manufactured home lot, where such side and rear does not border on public or internal streets:
a. RMH-1: Five feet (5') from space side line; seven and one-half feet (71/2') from space rear line.
b. RMH-2: Five and one-half feet (51/2') from side property line; ten feet (10') from rear property line.
c. RMH-3: Five and one-half feet (51/2') from side property line; ten feet (10') from rear property line.
d. RMH-4: Ten feet (10') separation between units or structures.
8. Expandable Sections, Separation Requirements: Expandable sections of a mobile home, manufactured home or
RV shall be considered a part of the mobile home, RV or manufactured home proper for setback or separation
requirements.
9. Underground Utilities: All utilities shall be placed underground.
10. Other Statutes And Regulations Applicable: Where applicable, all site preparation, construction, mobile home,
RV and manufactured home installation, utility connections and occupancy shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Nevada statutes and regulations of this code and ordinances.
C. Transportation Systems Requirements:
1. Access; Alignment And Grading Of Streets: All mobile home, RV or manufactured home spaces shall be
provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from public or private streets. Alignment and grading of
streets shall be properly adapted to topography.
2. Street Surfacing: All streets shall have a paved all weather surface approved by the city engineer and drained in
a manner approved by the city engineer.
3. Paved Curb Section: All streets shall have a paved, back of curb to back of curb section not less than:
a. RMH-1: Forty two feet (42') in width;
b. RMH-2: Fifty feet (50') in width;
c. RMH-3: Fifty feet (50') in width;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 281/640
d. RMH-4: Twenty feet (20') in width with off street parking.
4. Curb/Gutter Sections; Sidewalk: All streets shall require curb/gutter sections on both sides and have a five foot
(5') paved sidewalk:
a. RMH-1: At least one side of street;
b. RMH-2: Both sides of street;
c. RMH-3: Both sides of street;
d. RMH-4: On both sides of dedicated public streets.
5. Off Street Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces per mobile home or manufactured home
space shall be required. One per RV site shall be required on streets twenty feet (20') in width.
6. Emergency Vehicular Access: In all districts, adequate provisions for emergency vehicular access during
inclement weather shall be provided on internal streets.
7. Storm Drainage: Adequate storm drainage shall be provided and shall be reviewed by the city engineer for his
approval.
8. Signs And Lighting: All streets shall be properly signed and lighted. Lighting systems to be approved by the city
engineer.
D. General Requirements:
1. Paving: All vehicle parking spaces and driveways shall be paved with a hard surface material.
2. Recreation Or Open Space Area: The planning commission shall require mobile home and RV parks to have at
least one recreation area or usable open space accessible from all spaces, the cumulative size of which
recreation area shall not be less than:
a. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor recreation area per mobile home space or fifty (50)
square feet per RV site shall be provided, exclusive of required yards or setback area. The minimum size for
any single outdoor recreation area shall be two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet in mobile home
parks and one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in RV parks, with a minimum width of twenty four feet
(24').
b. Parks catering to family use shall provide larger recreation areas and adequate playgrounds. A minimum of
three hundred (300) square feet of outdoor recreation area per mobile home space or seventy five (75) square
feet per RV site shall be provided, exclusive of required yards or setback areas. All recreation areas and
landscaping plans shall be approved prior to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission.
3. Pedestrianways: When included as additions to required sidewalks, pedestrianways shall have a minimum width
of four feet (4') and shall be surfaced in concrete or hard surface material.
4. Water Supply: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water for domestic purposes shall be
provided to each mobile home or manufactured home space or lot and RV site, and proof of the same shall be
provided to the planning commission before approval of any conditional use permit. Such supply of water shall be
in conformance with any applicable Nevada statutes and regulations and city ordinances, and furnished through
a pipe distribution system directly connected to the city water service.
5. Sewerage Facilities: An adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided to each mobile home, manufactured
home or RV space, lot or site. Such sewer system shall be in conformance with any applicable Nevada statutes
and regulations and city ordinances, and directly connected through a pipe collection system to the city sewer
facilities.
6. Refuse And Garbage: Storage, collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be in conformance with any
applicable Nevada statutes and regulations and city ordinances. In mobile home and RV parks, one metal
dumpster with lid per twenty five (25) spaces located no more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from mobile home
lots and RV sites shall be required.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 282/640
7. Fuel Supply And Storage: Installation of liquid petroleum gas or fuel oil containers within a mobile home or
manufactured home subdivision or mobile home or RV park shall be in conformance with any applicable Nevada
statutes and city ordinances.
8. Fire Protection: In every mobile home or RV park, mobile home subdivision or manufactured home subdivision,
fire hydrants shall be installed as may be required by the fire department.
9. Tie Downs: Tie downs for all mobile homes shall be provided in accordance with state fire marshal regulations
and applicable Nevada statutes and regulations. Tie downs shall not be required on RV sites.
10. Skirting:
a. Skirting shall be of durable materials suitable for exterior exposures, and be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions. It shall be secured, as necessary, to assure stability, to minimize
vibrations, to minimize susceptibility to wind damage and to compensate for possible frost heave.
b. If combustion air for heat producing appliance is taken from within the under floor area, ventilation shall be
adequate to assure proper operation of the appliances.
c. Use of combustible material (such as hay, straw, cardboard, etc.) shall be prohibited.
11. Fences: Mobile home and RV parks adjacent to residential zones shall be fenced with a solid view screening
decorative fence not more than six feet (6') nor less than three feet (3') in height around the entire boundary of
the park. However, no such fence over three feet (3') in height shall be allowed within thirty feet (30') of the
intersection of any two (2) streets. The design and construction materials of said fence shall be subject to
approval by the planning commission prior to the issuance of any conditional use permit. (RMH-1 and RMH-4
districts only.)
12. Floodplain: No mobile home or manufactured home subdivision, mobile home or RV park which is proposed to
be constructed below the 100-year floodplain elevation of the Humboldt River and other drainage as defined by
the U.S. army corps of engineers, shall be approved by the planning commission.
13. Grading, Erosion Protections; Avoidance Of Visual Scars On Hillsides; Protection Of Underground Utility Lines:
Whenever it may be necessary for the developer of a mobile home, manufactured home subdivision, mobile
home or RV park to cut and fill, or to alter the contours of the land in any way, he shall comply with the provisions
of the city building code.
14. Management: The holder of a valid city business license for the operation of a mobile home or RV park shall be
responsible for compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances (e.g., section 5-1-1 of this code) or
Nevada statutes and regulations. He/she shall maintain the mobile home or RV park in a neat, orderly and
sanitary condition at all times. (RMH-1 and RMH-4 districts only.)
15. Signs: All signs for the mobile home or RV park, including the height, size, location, appearance and illumination
of such signs, shall be subject to approval of the planning commission prior to the issuance of any conditional use
permit. No signs will be installed without approval of said sign by the planning commission. The applicant shall
submit a plan showing the locations of such signs and architectural elevations showing the heights, shapes, size
and manner of illumination of the signs. (RMH-1 and RMH-4 districts only.)
16. Landscaping: Exposed ground surfaces in the park shall be covered with stone, screening or other materials or
protected with a vegetative growth in a well kept manner, either of which is capable of preventing soil erosion and
eliminating objectionable dust. (RMH-1 and RMH-4 districts only.)
17. Plan: A copy of the final approved plan for the mobile home or RV park shall be conspicuously posted on the
site near office, or as designated by the fire department and the license holder shall be responsible for
maintenance of the park as per the final approved plan thereafter. (RMH-1 and RMH-4 districts only.)
18. Space Numbering: All spaces shall be numbered, and such number shall be posted in a place clearly visible
and conspicuous from the internal street. (RMH-1 and RMH-4 districts only.)
19. Electrical: All mobile home parks shall comply with the national electrical code, article 550, part B. All
recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the national electrical code, article 551, part B.
20. Public Telephone: At least one public telephone is required for a mobile home or RV park.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 283/640
21. Dump Stations: Permitted dump stations in RV parks shall meet all applicable Nevada statutes and regulations
and city requirements.
22. Fuel Cylinders: No extra or empty fuel cylinders are allowed to be stored on RV sites. Fuel cylinders being used
shall comply with the latest edition of NFPA 58 (standard for the storage and handling of liquified petroleum
gases).
23. Other Requirements: Where this code does not address a particular problem, the use of the latest edition of
NFPA 501A (manufactured home installations, sites and communities), 501D (recreational vehicle parks and
campgrounds) and 501C (fire safety criteria for recreational vehicles) will be used. Wherever 501A, 501D and
501C and this code differ, the requirements which are more stringent shall apply.
E. Additional Requirements For Mobile Home Subdivision Utilizing Small Lots And Homeowners' Associations In RMH-
2 Or RMH-3 Residential Mobile Home Districts: All mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to issuance of a
conditional use permit, following review by the planning commission. Applications and procedures shall be in the
manner provided by this title. Additionally, such subdivisions shall comply with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter
278, the subdivision and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and any health regulations of the
state health department. In addition to all applicable requirements set forth in subsections A through D of this
section, all mobile home subdivisions shall be required to conform to the following standards:
1. Development Requirements: Development requirements shall be as follows:
a. Minimum overall area: Two (2) acres;
b. Minimum lot area: Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet;
c. Minimum lot width: Forty five feet (45');
d. Minimum setback from bordering public street line: Fifteen feet (15'), except that garages and carports shall be
set back twenty feet (20') from the front lot line;
e. Minimum setback from internal street: Twelve feet (12'), except that garages and carports shall be set back
twenty feet (20') from the front lot line;
f. Minimum setback from property line: Seven and one-half feet (71/2');
g. Minimum distance between mobile home sides or side and end: Fifteen feet (15'); between ends: Fifteen feet
(15');
h. Expandable sections of a mobile home or attached accessory building shall be considered a part of the mobile
home proper for setback requirements.
2. Street System:
a. All mobile home lots shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from public or private streets.
Alignment and gradient of streets shall be properly adapted to topography.
b. All streets shall be paved and drained in a manner approved by the public works department. Streets shall
have a designed structural section based on traffic volumes and soil conditions, but in no event shall the
asphaltic pavement be less than two inches (2") in thickness, placed on a base material at least six inches (6")
thick and approved by the public works department.
c. Access to mobile home subdivisions shall be designed to minimize congestion and traffic hazards and provide
for safe movement of traffic at the entrance or exits to adjoining streets.
d. All interior streets shall have a paved section not less than forty feet (40') in width, back of curb to back of curb,
and a right of way not less than fifty feet (50').
e. All streets shall be properly signed and lighted. Lighting system is to be approved by the public works
department and shall provide a minimum level of lighting approved by the city engineer.
f. Adequate provisions for snow removal and snow storage areas shall be provided.
g. All streets shall have four foot (4') concrete paved sidewalks on both sides of street.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 284/640
3. General Requirements:
a. Pavement Of Spaces And Driveways: All vehicle parking spaces and driveways shall be paved.
b. Covering Of Ground Surfaces: Exposed ground surfaces in all other parts of the mobile home subdivision shall
be covered with stone, screening or other material or protected with a vegetative growth in a well kept manner,
either of which is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust.
c. Refuse And Garbage: Storage, collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be in conformance to any
applicable Nevada statutes and regulations, and regulations of the city and state health departments1.
d. Fuel Supply And Storage: Installation of liquified petroleum gas or fuel oil containers within a mobile home
subdivision shall be in conformance to any applicable Nevada statutes and regulations, and city ordinances,
and to the satisfaction of the fire department.
e. Fire Protection: In every mobile home subdivision there shall be installed, and properly maintained, fire
hydrants as required by the fire department.
f. Fences: Mobile home subdivisions shall be fenced with a screened fence not more than six feet (6') nor less
than four feet (4') in height around the entire boundary of the subdivision, subject to waiver in specific cases by
the planning commission at its discretion.
g. Variations: The planning commission, as part of the conditional use permit procedure, may vary the above
requirements in its recommendation to the city. (Ord. 771, 3-26-2013)
3-5-5: STORAGE AND TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL OFFICE USE:
Trailer, manufactured home, recreational vehicle and mobile home sales lots may have one and only one mobile home,
recreational vehicle or manufactured home used for dwelling purposes, properly connected to utilities. An additional
mobile home, recreational vehicle or manufactured home used for office quarters properly connected to utilities may be
permitted, subject to the granting of a temporary use permit by the planning commission pursuant to subsection 3-2-
3C5 of this title. (Ord. 613, 3-9-2004)
3-5-6: APPLICATION TO EXISTING AREAS:
A. Provisions of this chapter shall apply to the expanded or reconstructed area of those mobile home, RV or
manufactured home subdivisions, and mobile home and RV parks whose existing area is reconstructed or
expanded after the effective date hereof amending this chapter.
B. This chapter does not apply to existing mobile home subdivisions or mobile home and RV parks, except in the case
of when the existing area is expanded or reconstructed, then that portion of the subdivision or park being expanded
or reconstructed shall be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Mobile homes not established on any lot or tract of land not permitted by any provision of this code are not governed
by this chapter. Only an existing mobile home used for dwelling purposes by the owner of the premises may be
removed or replaced without having to conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 398, 4-24-1990)
3-5-7: MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS:
The planning commission, as part of the conditional use permit review pursuant to section 3-2-18 of this title, and
where just cause or circumstance warrants, may vary or modify the standards and requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
534, 12-14-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 285/640
Chapter 6
RESERVED
Chapter 7
MOVEMENT OF BUILDINGS
3-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as MOVEMENT OF BUILDINGS. (Ord. 265, 11-28-1978)
3-7-2: CONSENT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any building or structure of any kind or description to
any lot, piece or parcel of land within the city, or within three (3) miles of any exterior boundary of the city, or over, along
or across any highway, street or alley in the city, unless the consent of the city council for such moving has been
obtained prior to the move, except as hereinafter provided in this chapter. (Ord. 265, 11-28-1978)
3-7-3: APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE:
Except as provided in section 3-7-4 of this chapter, any person who owns, has any interest in, possesses or controls
any building or structure of any kind or description and who desires or intends to move any such building or structure
in, upon, over, along, across or through any public highway, street or alley within the city, or within three (3) miles of
any exterior boundary of the city, shall first file a written application with the building inspector requesting the review by
and recommendation of the planning commission and consent of the city council to such move and the issuance of a
permit pursuant hereto. The application filed with the building inspector shall set forth the following:
A. Description; Current Location: A description of and the location of the building or structure proposed to be moved,
giving street number, if any, construction, materials, dimensions, and condition of exterior, interior, plumbing and
wiring;
B. New Location: The proposed new location of such building or structure;
C. Route: The route over which it is proposed to move the building or structure, and the proposed date of and the
estimated time necessary to complete the move;
D. Use: The purpose for which the building or structure is to be used in its new location;
E. Description Of Work: A description of the alteration, repair, remodeling and other type of work that is to be performed
upon the building or structure with a specification of the type of exterior finish that will be on the building or structure
upon completion;
F. Cost Estimate: An accurate estimate of the cost of moving such building or structure and completion of the work on
the building or structure and the previous and new locations required by this chapter. (Ord. 265, 11-28-1978)
3-7-4: PUBLIC HEARING:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 286/640
A. Required; Notice: The application shall be presented to the planning commission at its next regular meeting after the
filing of the application, and the planning commission shall set the matter for public hearing. The city clerk shall give
notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing by mailing a notice thereof not less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of such hearing to each property owner owning property within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior
limits of the parcel of property onto which the building or structure is to be moved. For the purposes of this chapter,
"property owner" shall mean the taxpayer shown upon the latest assessment rolls of Elko County as being taxable
for the property, the address on the assessment roll to be the address used for mailing of notice.
B. Decision Of Planning Commission; Recommendation: The planning commission shall file a written report with the
city council that the application be granted as requested, granted subject to specific conditions, or denied. The
planning commission recommendation shall be transmitted to the city clerk and a copy mailed to the applicant.
Failure by the planning commission to file a report with the city council shall be deemed approval by the planning
commission. (Ord. 265, 11-28-1978)
3-7-5: EXCEPTIONS:
If the building or structure to be moved is to be moved more than three (3) miles beyond the city limits; or if said
building or structure to be moved was constructed pursuant toa permit issued by the building inspector's office and in
conformity with all current building codes of the city within a period of sixty (60) days prior to the date specified for
moving; or if said building or structure is a new building constructed or prefabricated outside the city limits which has
never been occupied or used for the purpose for which it is designed and which satisfied all applicable requirements of
the current building or construction codes of the city; or if said building contains under four hundred (400) square feet
of floor space and has not or is not now used for human habitation, then, in any of these events, the detailed
application, notices and the public hearing provided for in sections 3-7-3 and 3-7-4 of this chapter shall be dispensed
with and an application for a moving permit shall be made directly to the building inspector, which shall set forth
sufficient information to establish that the applicant is entitled to a permit without a public hearing. If in the opinion of
the building inspector the applicant is entitled to a permit without public hearing pursuant to this section, then, upon
payment of a filing fee as set by resolution of the city council, all other costs incurred by the city and the filing of the
bond as required by section 3-7-8 of this chapter, the building inspector shall issue a moving permit to the applicant,
subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
3-7-6: ACTION ON APPLICATION:
The city council shall, after the presentation of the application, receipt of the planning commission recommendations,
the public hearing and the consideration of all statements and materials submitted to it, either grant the application and
consent to the move and authorize the issuance of a removal permit, subject to payment of a filing fee as set by
resolution of the city council, all costs of publication and mailing, other costs incurred by the city, and the posting of a
bond as required by section 3-7-8 of this chapter, or shall deny such application and refuse to consent to the moving
and the issuance of a permit therefor. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
3-7-7: DESIGNATION OF ROUTE AND TIME:
If a permit is issued, the building inspector shall designate the streets over which the building or structure may be
moved so as to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets and shall set the time within which the same
shall be moved. (Ord. 265, 11-28-1978)
3-7-8: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
Every permittee under this chapter shall:
A. Move the building or structure only over the streets designated by the building inspector.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 287/640
B. Comply with all building, fire and construction codes, and any zoning ordinances, and all other applicable
ordinances and laws upon relocating the building or structure in the city, or within three (3) miles of the exterior
boundaries of the city.
C. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the
premises is left in a safe and sanitary condition, if the original site is within the city or within three (3) miles of the
city limits.
D. Remove all building material, rubbish and scraps from the new site and fill in the site to existing grade so that the
new site is in a safe, sanitary and orderly condition.
E. Complete the moving of said building or structure, the repair, remodeling and alteration of such building or structure
as necessary to bring it into compliance with the requirements of this title, as amended, and all other applicable
codes and ordinances relating to buildings and construction within the city, and perform all of the duties of the
permittee under the terms of this section within six (6) months from the date of the issuance of the permit
hereunder; provided, the city council may, for good cause shown, extend this completion date. (Ord. 265, 11-28-
1978)
3-7-9: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Conditions: Prior to the issuance of any removal permit pursuant to this section, the applicant shall file with the city
clerk a bond, approved as to form by the city attorney, in the reasonable amount set by the city council at the time of
approval of the application in cases acted on by such council or by the building inspector in cases acted on by him
pursuant to this section, which bond shall be conditioned:
1. The moving of the building or structure; the necessary repairs, remodeling and alteration of such building or
structure as necessary to bring it into compliance with all applicable building and construction codes, fire codes
and zoning ordinances of the city; and the removal of all rubbish and materials from both the old and new building
locations and the filling of all holes, trenches, and excavations to grade at both the old and new locations of the
building; and all other work required of the permittee under this section; and shall be completed within the time
set by the city council; and
2. The permittee shall pay for all damages that may accrue to the highway, streets or alleys, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, fire hydrants and water or sewer pipes in the city, or to anyproperty of any person, in the moving of
said building or structure; and
3. The permittee will pay all damages and costs and expenses necessary for the removal of, or the changing of,
any telephone, telegraph, electric power, television or any other wires used for public convenience or utilities in
the city, and all damages for the removal of any poles from the streets, sidewalks or alleys in the city; and
4. The permittee shall pay all other damages, costs or expenses incurred by the city or any person, who in any
manner is damaged during the process of moving such building or structure.
B. Right To Sue And Collect: Said bond may be sued upon and collected upon by the city or any person or legal entity
in any manner damaged by the moving of such building or structure. (Ord. 265, 11-28-1978)
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
3-8-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACTS, PURPOSE AND METHODS:
A. Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Nevada in Nevada Revised Statutes 278.020, 244A.057, and
543.020 confers upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 288/640
safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Elko does hereby adopt the
following floodplain management regulations.
B. Finding Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of city of Elko are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures
for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood
damage. The cumulative effects of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights
and velocities, also contribute to flood losses.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare,
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazards;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard
so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;
7. Ensure potential buyers are notified of property located in areas of special flood hazards;
8. Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards assume responsibility for their actions; and
9. Maintain qualifying standards for participation in the national flood insurance program.
D. Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: To accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or
which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that land uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, alluvial fans, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which
help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 736, 6-14-2011)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure used solely for parking (2 car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 289/640
(small, low cost sheds).
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is
located.
ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of clay, silt, sand, gravel,
and boulders that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and deposited on the valley
floor.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar land form which originates at
the apex and is characterized by high velocity flows: active processes of erosion, sediment transport, deposition, and
unpredictable flow paths.
ANCHORING: A series of methods used to secure a structure to its footings or foundation wall so that it will not be
displaced by flood or wind forces.
APEX: The highest point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the local floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provisions of this chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: Designated zones AO and AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD RELATED EROSION HAZARD: The land within a community which is most likely to be
subject to severe flood related erosion losses. This area may be designated as zone E on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM).
AREA OF SPECIAL MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) HAZARD: The area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows).
This area is designated as zone M on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (Also
called the "100-year flood".)
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base
flood at pertinent points in the floodplain of riverine areas.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. A subgrade crawl
space is considered a basement unless it meets the minimum technical requirements defined in FEMA technical
bulletin 11-01 (crawlspace construction for buildings located in special flood hazard areas, 2001) and the community
has adopted the standards of FEMA technical bulletin 11-01.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
COMMUNITY: Any state or area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or
authorized native organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the
areas within its jurisdiction.
COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS): A program developed by FIA to provide incentives for those communities in
the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra
measures to provide protection from flooding.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA): A letter from FEMA stating that a proposed structure that
is not to be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if built as proposed.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): Procedures by which contractors, developers and
communities can request review and determination by the federal insurance administrator of scientific and technical
data for a proposed project, when complete and functioning effectively would modify the elevation of individual
structures and parcels of land, stream channels, and floodplains on the FIRM.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 290/640
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (Based On Fill) (CLOMR-F): A letter from FEMA stating that a parcel of
land or proposed structure that is to be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is placed on the
parcel as proposed or the structure is built as proposed.
CRITICAL STRUCTURES: Any structure for which even a slight chance of flooding would reduce or eliminate its
designed function of supporting a community in an emergency. Fire stations, hospitals, municipal airports, police
stations, communication antennas or towers, eldercare facilities (retirement homes), fuel storage facilities, schools
designated as emergency shelters, fresh water and sewage treatment facilities are some examples of critical
structures.
DATE OF CONSTRUCTION: The date that the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel of a stream and the portion of the adjoining floodplain designated by a
regulatory agency to be kept free of further development to provide for unobstructed passage of flood flows.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment
or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The official map, in digital format, on which the federal
emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. The DFIRM is the legal equivalent of the FIRM in
communities where a DFIRM is available (see definition of Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)).
DRY FLOODPROOFING: A floodproofing method used to design and construct buildings so as to prevent the entrance
of floodwaters.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The elevation certificate is required in order to properly rate post-FIRM buildings, which
are buildings constructed after publication of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), for flood insurance zones A1-A30,
AE, AH, A (with BFE), VE, V1-V30, V (with BFE), AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO. The elevation
certificate is not required for pre-FIRM buildings unless the building is being rated under the optional post-FIRM flood
insurance rules.
ENCLOSURE: That portion of an elevated building below the lowest elevated floor that is either partially or fully shut in
by rigid walls.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, excavation, fill, buildings, permanent structures
or development, storage of equipment and materials, or any other physical object placed in the floodplain, that hinders
the passage of water or otherwise affects flood flows.
EROSION: The process of the gradual wearing away of any landmass. This peril is not per se covered under the
program. (See definition of Flood Related Erosion.)
EXPANSION TO A MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME) PARK: The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME) PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted
by a community.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The federal agency under which the national flood
insurance program (NFIP) is administered.
FEDERAL INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION (FIA): The government unit, a part of federal emergency management
agency (FEMA) that administers the national flood insurance program (NFIP).
FLASH FLOOD: A flood that crests in a short period of time and is often characterized by high velocity flows. It is often
the result of heavy rainfall in a localized area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 291/640
FLOOD CONTROL: Keeping floodwaters away from specific developments or populated areas, areas by the
construction of flood storage reservoirs, channel alterations, dikes and levees, bypass channels, or other engineering
works.
FLOOD, FLOODING OR FLOODWATERS: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow of floodwaters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source and mudslides (i.e., mudflows) and the condition resulting from flood related erosion.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the
boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated
as zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): Official map on which the federal emergency management agency or
federal insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. Includes digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) in communities where a DFIRM is
available (see definition of Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM)).
FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONE DESIGNATIONS: The zone designations indicating the magnitude of the flood
hazard in specific areas of a community. See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
Zone A1-30 And Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are
determined.
Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (3')
(usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths are determined. For areas of alluvial fan flooding,
velocities are also determined.
Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood; flood depths of one to three feet (3')
(usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations are determined.
Zone AR: Special flood hazard areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection
system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection.
Zones AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, And AR/A: Special flood hazard areas that result from the
decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored to
provide a 100-year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these areas will still
experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
Zone A99: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by
a federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations determined.
Zone B And Zone X (Shaded): Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths
of less than one foot (1') or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
Zone C And Zone X (Unshaded): Areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.
Zone D: Areas in which flood hazards are undetermined.
Zone E: Area of special flood related erosion hazards.
Zone M: Area of special mudslide or mudflow hazards.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report provided by the federal insurance administration that includes
flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD RELATED EROSION: The collapse or subsidence of land along a stream or wash, the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 292/640
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
FLOOD RELATED EROSION PRONE AREA: A land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which
due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind driven currents, is likely to suffer flood
related erosion damage.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain
management regulations. The floodplain administrator for the city of Elko is defined in subsection 3-8-4A, "Designation
Of The Local Floodplain Administrator", of this chapter to be the city engineer or designated staff member.
FLOODPLAIN AND FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by waters from any source.
(See definition of Flood, Flooding Or Floodwaters.)
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management plans, regulations
and ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This chapter, and any federal, state or local regulations plus
community zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood
prone areas to prevent and reduce flood loss and damage.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and
their contents. Refer to FEMA technical bulletins TB-1 (openings in foundation walls and walls of enclosures, 2008),
TB-3 (non-residential floodproofing - requirements and certification, 1993), and TB-7 (wet floodproofing requirements,
1993) for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. Also referred to as "regulatory
floodway".
FOOTING: The enlarged base of a foundation wall, pier, or column, designed to spread the load of the structure so that
it does not exceed the soil bearing capacity.
FOUNDATION: The underlying structure of a building usually constructed of concrete that supports the foundation
walls, piers, or columns.
FOUNDATION WALLS: A support structure that connects the foundation to the main portion of the building or
superstructure.
FRAUD/VICTIMIZATION: Related to variances of this chapter, the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization to the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly
constructed building adds to government responsibilities, and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one
hundred (100) years. Buildings permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those
years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. Additionally
future owners may be unaware of the risk potential to the property due to flood damage and the extremely high rates
for flood insurance.
FREEBOARD: A margin of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only marina facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, and boat building and boat repair facilities, but does not include long term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 293/640
GOVERNING BODY: The local governing unit, county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement
regulations to provide for public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
HARDSHIP: Related to variances of this chapter. The exceptional hardship would result from a failure to grant the
requested variance. The city council requires the variance be exceptional, unusual, and pertain only to the property
involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as
an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even
if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different
use than originally intended.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of the interior)
or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of
a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly
by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
HYDRAULICS: The science that deals with practical applications of water in motion.
HYDRODYNAMIC LOADS: Forces imposed on structures by floodwaters due to the impact of moving water on the
upstream side of the structure, drag along its sides, and eddies or negative pressures on its downstream side.
HYDROLOGY: The science of the behavior of water in the atmosphere, on the earth's surface and underground.
HYDROSTATIC LOADS: Forces imposed on a flooded structure due to the weight of the water.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): The procedure by which any owner or lessee of property who believes his
property has been inadvertently included in a special flood hazard area can submit scientific and technical information
to the federal insurance administrator for review to remove the property from said area. The administrator will not
consider a LOMA if the information submitted is based on alteration of topography or new hydrologic or hydraulic
conditions since the effective date of the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (Based On Fill) (LOMR-F): A letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure or parcel
of land that has been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): An official revision to a currently effective FIRM. An LOMR officially changes
flood zone, floodplain and floodway designations, flood elevations and planimetric features.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 294/640
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that the enclosure does not violate applicable nonelevation design
requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME): A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include "recreational vehicles".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE: For the purposes of determining substantial improvement, market value pertains only to the structure
in question. It does not pertain to the land, landscaping or detached accessory structures on the property. For
determining improvement, the value of the land must always be subtracted.
Market value shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting
that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed.
A. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a
building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry.
B. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the
structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic
or other forms of external obsolescence.
Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building
cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an
independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.
MOBILE HOME: Having the same meaning as the definition of Manufactured Home (Mobile Home).
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW): A condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside
usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover, and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground
preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a
landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the federal insurance administrator only if the mudflow, and
not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history,
geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflows.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for
establishing various elevations within the floodplain. Flood elevations on flood insurance rate maps published for
Nevada communities prior to 2007 were typically referenced to NGVD 29.
NATURAL GRADE: The grade unaffected by construction techniques such as fill, landscaping, or berming.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Buildings for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an
initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, including any subsequent improvements.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME) SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads is completed on or after the effective date of these floodplain management regulations adopted by the city of
Elko.
NONRESIDENTIAL: Includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings
(including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and
industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than six (6) months' duration.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 295/640
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD): A vertical control used as a reference for establishing various
elevations within the floodplain based upon the general adjustment of the North American datum of 1988. Flood
elevations on digital flood insurance rate maps for Nevada communities are referenced to NAVD 88.
OBSTRUCTION: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel refuse, fill, structure,
vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris
carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
100-YEAR FLOOD: Having the same meaning as the definition of Base Flood.
PHYSICAL MAP REVISIONS (PMR): A reprinted NFIP map incorporating changes to floodplains, floodways, or flood
elevations. Because of the time and cost involved to change, reprint, and redistribute an NFIP map, a PMR is usually
processed when a revision reflects large scope changes.
PONDING HAZARD: A flood hazard that occurs in flat areas when there are depressions in the ground that collect
"ponds" of water. The ponding hazard is represented by the zone designation AH on the FIRM.
POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION: Construction or substantial improvement that started on or after the effective date of
the initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM) of the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION: Construction or substantial improvement which started on or before December 31,
1974, or before the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM) of the community, whichever is later.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE: A single-family dwelling in which at the time of loss, the named insured or the named
insured's spouse has lived for either: a) eighty percent (80%) of the calendar year, or b) eighty percent (80%) of the
period of ownership, if less than one year.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: A structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory
use.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY: A defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures
that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.
PROPER OPENINGS FOR ENCLOSURES (Applicable To Zones A, A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, AR, And AR Dual): All
enclosures below the lowest floor must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of two (2) openings, with positioning on at least two (2)
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
must be provided.
PUBLIC SAFETY/NUISANCE: Related to variances of this chapter. The granting of a variance must not result in
anything which is injurious to safety or health of the entire community or neighborhood, or any number of persons, or
unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle built on a single chassis, four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured
at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river including tributaries, stream, brook, etc.
SHEET FLOW AREA: Having the same meaning as the definition of Area Of Shallow Flooding.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Darkly shaded area on a flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or a flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) that identifies an area that has a one percent (1%) chance of being flooded in any given
year (100-year floodplain). Over a thirty (30) year period, the life of most mortgages, there is at least a twenty six
percent (26%) chance that this area will be flooded. The FIRM identifies these shaded areas as FIRM zones A, AO,
AH, A1-A30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V, V1-V30, and VE. See definition of Flood
Insurance Risk Zone Designations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 296/640
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground and includes gas or liquid storage tanks
and manufactured homes.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Includes:
A. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred; or
B. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent
(25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known as "repetitive loss".
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage",
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would
otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other
development in a special flood hazard area, without an elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of
compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988, or (other
datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which
waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage
may occur. (Ord. 736, 6-14-2011)
3-8-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of city of Elko.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 297/640
B. Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal
insurance administration (FIA) of the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study
(FIS) dated November 16, 1995, and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) and flood boundary and
floodway maps (FBFM), dated November 16, 1995, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum
area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The
FIS, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the Elko engineering department located at 1755 College Parkway, Elko, NV
89801.
C. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Elko from taking such lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and other ordinances, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposed the more stringent restrictions or that imposing
the higher standards, shall prevail.
E. Interpretation: The interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
F. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Elko, any officer or
employee thereof, the state of Nevada, or the federal insurance administration, federal emergency management
agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
G. Declaration Of Public Nuisance: Every new structure, building, fill, excavation or development located or maintained
within any area of special flood hazard after August 1, 1983, in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance per se
and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political subdivision.
H. Abatement Of Violations: Within thirty (30) days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the floodplain
administrator shall submit a report to the city council which shall include all information available to the floodplain
administrator which is pertinent to said violation. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of this report, the city council shall
either:
1. Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or
2. Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of section 3-8-6, "Variance Procedures", of this
chapter; or
3. Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may
be required for their determination. Such information must be provided to the floodplain administrator within thirty
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 298/640
(30) days of such order, and he shall submit an amended report to the city council within twenty (20) days. At
their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the governing body shall either order the abatement of said
violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of section 3-8-6, "Variance Procedures",
of this chapter.
4. Submit to the administrator of federal insurance administration a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that
the property is in violation of a cited statute or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to section 1316 of the
national flood insurance act of 1968 as amended.
I. Unlawful Acts:
1. It is unlawful for any person to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse whenever it creates
a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization of the floodplain administrator. Where the
watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to excavate or build any structure affecting the flow of waters
without securing written authorization of the floodplain administrator.
2. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. (Ord. 736, 6-14-2011)
3-8-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Designation Of The Local Floodplain Administrator: The Elko city engineer or designated staff member is hereby
appointed local floodplain administrator to administer and implement this local ordinance by granting or denying
floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
B. Establishment Of Development Permit: A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in the city of Elko for the purpose of
protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring new development is constructed in a manner that
minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area of special flood
hazard, as shown on the flood insurance rate map enumerated in subsection 3-8-3B, "Basis For Establishing Areas
Of Special Flood Hazard", of this chapter, without a valid floodplain development permit. Applications for a permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the local floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
C. Permit Application: The applicant shall provide at least the following information, where applicable. Additional
information may be required on the permit application forms.
1. The proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all residential
and nonresidential structures whether new or substantially improved to be located in zones A, A1-A30, AE, and
AH, if base flood elevations data are available.
2. In zone AO the proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) and the
elevation of the highest adjacent grade of all residential and nonresidential structures whether new or
substantially improved.
3. The proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed.
4. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect in the state of Nevada that any utility floodproofing
meets the criteria in subsection 3-8-5B, "Standards For Utilities", of this chapter.
5. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect in the state of Nevada that any nonresidential
floodproofed structures meet the criteria in subsection 3-8-5A5, "Nonresidential Floodproofing Requirements", of
this chapter.
6. When a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development, the applicant must
submit the maps, computations, and other materials required by the federal emergency management agency
(FEMA) to process a letter of map revision (LOMR) and pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for
processing the revision.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 299/640
7. A technical analysis, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Nevada, showing the proposed
development located in the special flood hazard area will not cause physical damage to any other property.
8. When there is no base flood elevation data available for zone A from any source, the base flood elevation data
will be provided by the permit applicant for all proposed development of subdivisions, manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks in the special flood hazard areas, for all developments of fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is less.
D. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Local Floodplain Administrator: Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Permit Application Review: The floodplain development permit will not be issued by the local floodplain
administrator until the following has been accomplished:
a. Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of subsection C, "Permit
Application", of this section, and for compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
b. Review all subdivision and other proposed new development, including manufactured home and recreational
vehicle parks to determine whether the proposed development site will be reasonably safe from flooding. When
the proposed building site is located in the special flood hazard area, all new construction and substantial
improvements will meet the applicable standards of subsection 3-8-5A, "Standards Of Construction", of this
chapter.
c. Determine whether any proposed development in the special flood hazard area may result in physical damage
to any other property to include stream bank erosion and any increase in velocities or that it does not adversely
affect the carrying capacity of the areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has
not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot (1/2') at any point. To assist the local
floodplain administrator in making this determination, the permit applicant may be required to submit additional
technical analyses.
d. Ensure all other required state and federal permits have been received.
e. For construction on an existing structure, determine if proposed construction constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of a substantially damaged structure.
2. Use Of Other Flood Data:
a. When the federal emergency management agency has designated special flood hazard areas on the
community's flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data nor
identified a floodway, the local floodplain administrator shall attempt to obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to subsection D6, "Retaining Floodplain Development Documentation", of this section, as
criteria for requiring new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed development meets the
requirements of this chapter.
b. When base flood elevations are not available, the local floodplain administrator may use flood information from
any other authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood elevations within the special flood
hazard areas. This information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.
c. When base flood elevations are not available from any other source, base flood elevations shall be obtained
using one of two (2) methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development In
Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide For Obtaining And Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations", dated
July 1995.
3. Alteration Of Watercourses: Prior to issuing a permit for any alteration or relocation of watercourse the local
floodplain administrator must:
a. Have processed letter of map revision (LOMR).
b. Notify all adjacent communities, Nevada's national flood insurance program coordinator, and submittal of
evidence of such notification to the federal insurance administration, and the federal emergency management
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 300/640
agency.
c. Determine that the potential permit recipient has provided for maintenance within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
4. Inspections: The local floodplain administrator or designee shall make periodic inspections throughout the period
of construction to monitor compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit or any variance
provisions.
5. Stop Work Orders: The local floodplain administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop work for any
floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this chapter or conditions of the development
permit and all development found ongoing without a floodplain development permit. Disregard of a stop work
order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in subsection 3-8-3C, "Compliance", of this chapter.
6. Retaining Floodplain Development Documentation: The local floodplain administrator shall obtain and retain for
public inspection and have available for the national flood insurance program coordinator or the federal
emergency management agency representative conducting a community assistance visit, the following:
a. Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
b. Elevation certificates with record of certification required by subsection 3-8-5A4, "Lowest Floor Certification
Requirements", of this chapter.
c. Certifications required by subsection 3-8-5A5, "Nonresidential Floodproofing Requirements", of this chapter.
d. Elevation certificates with record of certification required by subsection 3-8-5A6, "Requirements For Areas
Below The Lowest Floor", of this chapter.
e. Elevation certificates with record of certification of elevation required by subsection 3-8-5C, "Standards For
Subdivisions", of this chapter.
f. Certification required by subsection 3-8-5G, "Floodways", of this chapter.
g. Variances issued pursuant to section 3-8-6, "Variance Procedures", of this chapter.
h. Notices required under subsection D3, "Alteration Of Watercourses", of this section.
i. Reports required by subsection 3-8-5H, "Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow) Prone Areas", of this chapter.
7. Map Determinations: The local floodplain administrator may make map interpretations where needed, in writing
with appropriate documentation, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
and where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
8. Appeals: The city council of the city of Elko shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
9. Submission Of New Technical Data To FEMA: When the city of Elko base flood elevations either increase or
decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions, as soon as practicable, but not later than
six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, the city of Elko will submit the technical or
scientific data to FEMA. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of the physical changes
affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon
current data.
10. Nonconversion Of Enclosed Areas Below The Lowest Floor: To ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be
used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human
habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of
conversion, the floodplain administrator shall:
a. Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are five feet (5') or higher;
b. Enter into a "nonconversion agreement for construction within flood hazard areas" or equivalent with the city of
Elko. The agreement shall be recorded with the Elko County recorder as a deed restriction. The nonconversion
agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain administrator and county counsel; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 301/640
c. Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon
prior notice of at least seventy two (72) hours. (Ord. 736, 6-14-2011)
3-8-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. Standards Of Construction: In all areas of special flood hazard the following standards are required:
1. Anchoring:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
b. All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of subsection E, "Standards For Manufactured
Homes", of this section.
2. Construction Materials And Methods: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed:
a. With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
b. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
c. Ensure electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities are
designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
d. Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
3. Elevation Requirements For Lowest Floor: Residential construction, new or substantial improvements, shall have
the lowest floor, including basement:
a. In zone AO, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height two feet (2') above the depth number
specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified.
b. In zone A, elevated two feet (2') above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community.
c. In all other zones, elevated two feet (2') above the base flood elevation.
4. Lowest Floor Certification Requirements: Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor
including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the
community building inspector to be properly elevated. The certification shall be provided to the floodplain
administrator using the current FEMA elevation certificate.
5. Nonresidential Floodproofing Requirements: Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with
subsection A3, "Elevation Requirements For Lowest Floor", of this section or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities:
a. Will be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection A3, "Elevation Requirements For
Lowest Floor", of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
b. Will have the structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy;
c. Will be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of subsection A3,
"Elevation Requirements For Lowest Floor", of this section are satisfied. The certification shall be provided to
the floodplain administrator.
6. Requirements For Areas Below The Lowest Floor: All new construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 302/640
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA technical bulletins TB-1 (openings in foundation walls and
walls of enclosures, 2008) and TB-7 (wet floodproofing requirements, 1993) and must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. Must have a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
b. The bottom of all such openings will be no higher than one foot (1') above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices provided they permit
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
7. Crawl Space Construction: This subsection applies to buildings with crawl spaces up to two feet (2') below grade.
Below grade crawl space construction in accordance with the requirements listed below will not be considered
basements.
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Crawl space
construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet (5') per second unless the design
is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer;
b. The crawl space is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such, must have openings that equalize
hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. For guidance on flood
openings, see FEMA technical bulletin TB-1 (openings in foundation walls and walls of enclosures, 2008);
c. Crawl space construction is not permitted in V zones. Open pile or column foundations that withstand storm
surge and wave forces are required in V zones;
d. Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This
includes not only the foundation walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE; and
e. Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above BFE or designed so that
floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions.
f. Requirements for all below grade crawl space construction, in addition to the above requirements, to include
the following:
(1) The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown as D in figure 3 of FEMA technical bulletin 11-01 (crawlspace
construction for buildings located in special flood hazard areas, 2001);
(2) The height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top
of the crawl space foundation wall must not exceed four feet (4') (shown as L in figure 3 of technical bulletin
11-01, crawlspace construction for buildings located in special flood hazard areas, 2001) at any point;
(3) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl
space within a reasonable period of time after a flood event, not to exceed seventy two (72) hours; and
(4) The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet (5') per second for any crawl space. For
velocities in excess of five feet (5') per second, other foundation types should be used.
8. Garages And Low Cost Accessory Structures:
a. Attached Garages:
(1) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be
designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwater in accordance with subsection A6, "Requirements For
Areas Below The Lowest Floor", of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with
flood resistant material in accordance with subsection A2a of this section.
(2) A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be floodproofed. For
guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA technical bulletin TB-6 (below-grade parking
requirements, 1993).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 303/640
b. Detached Garages And Accessory Structures:
(1) "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (2 car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small,
low cost sheds), as defined in section 3-8-2, "Definitions", of this chapter, may be constructed such that its
floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
(A) Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;
(B) The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood resistant
materials;
(C) The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral
movement;
(D) Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or
above the BFE;
(E) The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in subsection G,
"Floodways", of this section; and
(F) The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance
with subsection A6, "Requirements For Areas Below The Lowest Floor", of this section.
(2) Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in
accordance with all applicable standards in subsection A6, "Requirements For Areas Below The Lowest
Floor", of this section.
B. Standards For Utilities:
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system.
2. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters or discharge from the systems into floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for
buildings that have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves or
other automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building's exterior
wall.
3. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
C. Standards For Subdivisions:
1. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.
2. All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base
flood, the final lowest floor and pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor
and provided to the floodplain administrator.
3. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
4. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
5. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
6. Additionally all subdivision proposals will demonstrate, by providing a detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
that the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 304/640
D. Standards For Critical Structures: Critical structures are not authorized in a special flood hazard area, unless:
1. All alternative locations in flood zone X have been considered and rejected.
2. All alternative locations in flood zone shaded X have been considered and rejected.
If the floodplain manager determines the only practical alternative location for the development of a new or
substantially improved critical structure is in a special flood hazard area he must:
1. Give public notice of the decision and reasons for the elimination of all alternative locations.
E. Standards For Manufactured Homes:
1. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A, AH, AE, and on the
community's flood insurance rate map, on sites located:
a. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
b. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
c. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
d. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as a result of a flood:
(1) Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor will be elevated at least two feet (2')
above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision within zones A, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to
the provisions of subsection D, "Standards For Critical Structures", of this section will be elevated so that either:
a. The bottom of structural frame or the lowest point of the manufactured home is at least two feet (2') above the
base flood elevation; or
b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
3. Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and substantially improved manufactured
homes shall have the floor elevated at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade.
4. Within zone AO, the floor of all new and substantially improved manufactured homes will be elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least two feet (2') above the depth number specified on the FIRM, or at least three feet
(3') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
F. Standards For Recreational Vehicles: All recreational vehicles placed on sites within the floodplain on the
community's flood insurance rate map will either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions; or
3. Will meet the permit requirements of subsection 3-8-4C, "Permit Application", of this chapter and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection E, "Standards For Manufactured Homes", of
this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 305/640
G. Floodways: Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
1. If a floodway has not been designated within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 3-8-3B,
"Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this chapter, no new construction, substantial
improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it has
been demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot (1') at any point within the community.
2. In designated floodways located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 3-8-3B, "Basis
For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this chapter encroachment shall be prohibited, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, storage of equipment or supplies, and any other development within
the adopted regulatory floodway; unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses,
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in
any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, and the
federal emergency management agency has issued a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR).
3. If subsections G1 and G2 of this section have been satisfied; all proposed new development and substantial
improvements will comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
H. Mudslide (i.e., Mudflow) Prone Areas:
1. All permit applications will be reviewed by the floodplain administrator to determine if the proposed development
will be located within a mudslide area.
2. The reviewing process will determine if the proposed site and improvements will be reasonably safe from
mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include, but are not limited to, the
following:
a. Type and quality of soils.
b. Evidence of groundwater or surface water problems.
c. Depth and quality of any fill.
d. The overall slope of the site.
e. The weight that any proposed structure will impose on the slope.
3. When a proposed development is located in an area that may have mudslide hazards, the following will be the
minimum requirements:
a. A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering.
b. The proposed grading, excavations, new construction, and substantial improvements are adequately designed
and protected against mudslide damages.
c. The proposed grading, excavations, new construction and substantial improvements do not aggravate the
existing hazard by creating either on site or off site disturbances.
d. Drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance be such as not to endanger slope stability.
4. When a proposed development is determined to be within a mudslide hazard area, the following requirements
will include, but not be limited to:
a. Adopting and enforcing a grading ordinance in accordance with data supplied by the federal emergency
management agency.
b. Regulate the location of foundation systems and utility systems of new construction and substantial
improvements.
c. Regulate the location, drainage and maintenance of all excavations, cuts and fills and planted slopes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 306/640
d. Provide special requirements for protective measures including, but not necessarily limited to, retaining walls,
buttress fills, subdrains, diverted terraces, and benching.
e. Require engineering drawings and specifications to be submitted for all corrective measures, accompanied by
supporting soils engineering and geology reports.
I. Flood Related Erosion Prone Areas:
1. All permit applications will be reviewed by the floodplain administrator to determine if the proposed development
will be located within a special flood related erosion hazard area.
2. The reviewing process will determine if the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe
from flood related erosion and will not cause flood related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing
flood related erosion hazard.
3. When the proposed development is found to be in the path of flood related erosion or to increase the erosion
hazard, require the improvement to be relocated or adequate protective measures to be taken which will not
aggravate the existing erosion hazard.
4. When it has been determined the proposed development is in a special flood related erosion hazard, as
delineated zone E on the community FIRM, require:
a. A setback for all new development from the lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water, to create a safety buffer
consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer will be designated according to the flood related
erosion hazard and erosion rate, in conjunction with the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending
upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic and climatic characteristics of the community's land. The buffer may
be used for suitable open spaces purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife
habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only.
J. Alluvial Fan Advisory:
1. Alluvial fans present a unique flood hazard environment where the combination of sediment, slope, and
topography create an ultra hazardous condition for which elevation on fill will not provide reliable protection.
Active alluvial fan flooding is characterized by flow path uncertainty combined with abrupt deposition and erosion.
As a result, any area of an alluvial fan may be subject to intense flood hazards.
The technology of mathematically modeling the hydrodynamics of water and debris flows for alluvial fans is still in
the early development stage. The federal emergency management agency (FEMA) has formulated a mapping
procedure for the purpose of defining the likelihood of flood hazards on inundated alluvial fan zones to be used
for flood insurance purposes and general floodplain regulation, referred to as the FEMA alluvial fan methodology.
An active alluvial fan flooding hazard is indicated by three (3) related criteria:
a. Flow path uncertainty below the hydrographic apex;
b. Abrupt deposition and ensuing erosion of sediment as a stream or debris flow loses its competence to carry
material eroded from a steeper, upstream source area; and
c. An environment where the combination of sediment availability, slope, and topography creates an ultra
hazardous condition for which elevation on fill will not reliably mitigate the risk.
Inactive alluvial fan flooding is similar to traditional riverine flood hazards, but occurs only on alluvial fans. It is
characterized by flow paths with a higher degree of certainty in realistic assessments of flood risk or in the
reliable mitigation of the hazard. Counter to active alluvial fan flooding hazards, an inactive alluvial fan flooding
hazard is characterized by relatively stable flow paths. However, areas of inactive alluvial fan flooding, as with
active alluvial fan flooding, may be subject to sediment deposition and erosion, but to a degree that does not
cause flow path instability and uncertainty.
An alluvial fan may exhibit both active alluvial fan flooding and inactive alluvial fan flooding hazards. The
hazards may vary spatially or vary at the same location, contingent on the level of flow discharge. Spatially, for
example, upstream inactive portions of the alluvial fan may distribute flood flow to active areas at the distal part
of the alluvial fan. Hazards may vary at the same location, for example, with a flow path that may be stable for
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 307/640
lower flows, but become unstable at higher flows.
More detailed information can be found at FEMA's website: "Guidelines For Determining Flood Hazards On
Alluvial Fans" at http://www.fema.gov/.
2. The NFIP does not allow for the removal of land from the floodplain based on the placement of fill (LOMR-F) in
alluvial fan flood hazard areas. The NFIP will credit a major structural flood control project, through the LOMR
process, that will effectively eliminate alluvial fan flood hazards from the protected area. Details about map
revisions for alluvial fan areas can be found in the code of federal regulations at title 44, part 65.13. (Ord. 736, 6-
14-2011)
3-8-6: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
A. Nature Of Variances: The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principal of zoning law
that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel
of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would
create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land
itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the
implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood
elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and
reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can
be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
If, upon review, the administrator of FEMA determines that community practices indicate a pattern of issuing
variances that is inconsistent with the objectives of sound floodplain management, the community may be
suspended from the national flood insurance program.
B. Appeal Board:
1. In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
a. The danger of materials being swept onto other lands and injuring others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on
the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion
damage;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that
area;
i. The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the
site;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 308/640
k. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
2. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage;
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy
of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Elko County recorder and shall
be recorded in a manner so that it appears as an exception on the title of the affected parcel of land.
3. The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance,
and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the federal insurance administration, federal
emergency management agency.
C. Conditions For Variances:
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, and other proposed new
development to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of sections 3-8-4,
"Administration", and 3-8-5, "Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction", of this chapter have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures", as defined in section 3-8-2,
"Definitions", of this chapter, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from
the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means
the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposed, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve
the integrity of the local ordinance.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon a:
a. Showing of good and sufficient cause such as renovation, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. Variances issued for
economic considerations, aesthetics, or because variances have been used in the past are not good and
sufficient cause.
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship", as defined in section 3-
8-2, "Definitions", of this chapter, to the applicant.
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, as defined in section 3-8-2 of this chapter,
cause fraud or victimization, as defined in section 3-8-2 of this chapter, of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
6. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections C1 through
C5 of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create
a public nuisance.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 309/640
7. Upon consideration of all the factors of subsection B, "Appeal Board", of this section and the purposes of this
chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
8. The city council shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variance to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
9. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be
built with a lowest flood elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 736, 6-14-2011)
3-8-7: MAP REVISION/AMENDMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Letters Of Map Revision/Amendment: National flood insurance program regulations provide procedures to remove
property from the 100-year floodplain or from a special flood hazard area. Amendments and revisions to community
flood insurance rate maps cannot adversely impact the floodplain or floodway delineations of the level of the 100-
year flood.
There are several procedures provided whereby the federal insurance administrator will review information from the
community, an owner, or a lessee of property where it is believed the property should not be included in a special
flood hazard area.
Submissions to FEMA for revisions to effective flood insurance studies (FISs) by individual and community
requesters will require the signing of application/certification forms. These forms will provide FEMA with assurance
that all pertinent data relating to the revision is included in the submittal. They will also assure that: 1) the data and
methodology are based on current conditions; 2) qualified professionals have assembled data and performed all
necessary computations; and 3) all individuals and organizations impacted by proposed changes are aware of the
changes and will have an opportunity to comment on them. FEMA procedures permit the following types of request:
A request for a revision to the effective FIS information (FIRM, FBFM, and/or FIS report) is usually a request that
FEMA replace the effective floodplain boundaries, flood profiles, floodway boundaries, etc., with those determined
by the requester. Before FEMA will replace the effective FIS information with the revised, the requester must: 1)
provide all of the data used in determining the revised floodplain boundaries, flood profiles, floodway boundaries,
etc.; 2) provide all data necessary to demonstrate that the physical modifications to the floodplain have been
adequately designed to withstand the impacts of the one percent (1%) annual chance flood event and will be
adequately maintained; 3) demonstrate that the revised information (e.g., hydrologic and hydraulic analyses and the
resulting floodplain and floodway boundaries) are consistent with the effective FIS information.
Requests for amendments or revisions to FEMA maps must be reviewed and submitted to FEMA by the city council
of the city of Elko with the applicant for a map amendment or revision required to prepare all the supporting
information and appropriate FEMA forms.
The scientific or technical information to be submitted with these requests may include, but is not limited to, the
following:
1. An actual copy of the recorded plat map bearing the seal of the appropriate recordation official, county clerk or
recorder of deeds, indicating the official recordation and proper citation, deed or plat book volume and page
number, or an equivalent identification where annotation of the deed or plat book is not the practice.
2. A topographical map showing:
a. Ground elevation contours in relation to the NGVD (national geodetic vertical datum).
b. The total area of the property in question.
c. The location of the structure or structures located on the property in question.
d. The elevation of the lowest adjacent grade to a structure or structures.
e. An indication of the curvilinear line which represents the area subject to inundation by a base flood. The
curvilinear line should be based upon information provided by an appropriate authoritative source, such as a
federal agency, department of water resources, a county water control district, a county or city engineer or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 310/640
designated staff member, a federal emergency management agency flood insurance study, or a determination
by a registered professional engineer.
3. A copy of the FHBM or FIRM indicating the location of the property in question.
4. A certification by a registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor that the lowest grade adjacent to
the structure is above the base flood elevation.
5. The completion of the appropriate forms in the federal emergency management agency's packets, amendments
and revisions to national flood insurance program maps (MT-1 FEMA form 81-87 series and MT-2 FEMA form 81-
89 series). (Ord. 736, 6-14-2011)
Chapter 9
SIGN REGULATIONS
3-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF ELKO SIGN ORDINANCE. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-2: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, APPENDIX H:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing signs, that certain code known as the
international building code, appendix H, entitled "Signs", recommended by the International Code Council, Inc., being
particularly the latest edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, such to become effective upon the effective date hereof. One copy of the latest edition being
adopted shall be approved by the city council and placed on file in the office of the city clerk. From the date on which
such filed edition of said code shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
The code is hereby adopted as the rules and regulations for the governing of signs. In the event any of the provisions
of the latest edition of the international building code, appendix H, conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern and be controlling. (Ord. 639, 9-13-2005)
3-9-3: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of this chapter to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by
establishing standards to ensure the placement of safe, effective signage throughout the city. Specific regulationsand
standards are intended to address the following:
A. To ensure that signs erected within the city are constructed of safe, durable materials and secured in a manner
adequate to withstand physical stresses.
B. To protect and enhance property values and create an attractive economic and business climate.
C. To protect and enhance the physical beauty and appearance of the community.
D. To reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may adversely affect or conflict with traffic control
signs, signals and other traffic control devices.
E. To reduce visual clutter along streets and roadways thus providing each sign user an opportunity for effective
identification and advertising by addressing the quantity, height and area of freestanding signs on all sites. (Ord.
608, 10-28-2003)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 311/640
3-9-4: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, service, product or activity
and which has been operationally discontinued for a period of two (2) years.
BLANKETING: The partial or complete shutting off of the face of one sign by another sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign designed for the purpose of guiding and directing pedestrians or vehicular traffic to a
specific site.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported permanently upon the ground by footings, poles, pylons and not attached to
any building.
OFF PREMISE SIGN: A sign which advertises a business, activity, use, product or service and is located off the
property providing the business, activity, use, product or service.
ON PREMISE SIGN: A sign which advertises a business, activity, use, product or service and is located on the same
property providing the business, activity, use, product or service.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building or structure that is designed easily to
be moved from place to place.
SIGN: Any commercial communication device intended to attractattention to and advertise a business, service, activity
or product. Such definition includes any letters, figures, symbols, trademarks or other copy meant to aid in such
advertisement.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign (including a portable sign), pendant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas or other light material (with or without frames), intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only. (Ord.
608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Permit Required; Application: No sign shall hereafter be erected, reerected, constructed, reconstructed or altered
without first having obtained a sign permit from the city building department. Application for a sign permit shall be
made upon forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to ensure
conformance with regulations contained within this chapter.
B. Placement Restrictions:
1. No sign shall be placed within any utility, access or drainage easement.
2. No permanent sign or sign foundation shall be placed within any public street right of way without first having
obtained approval of a revocable permit to occupy the right of way from the city council, or authorized city
personnel.
3. No sign shall be erected or placed that shall impede the safe movement of vehicles and/or pedestrians, or
obstruct any signs for traffic control, direction to public facilities, or for regulatory notice, warning or other public
purposes. No sign shall obstruct the view of a fire hydrant.
4. No signs shall be attached to any public utility poles or structures, nor traffic control devices, posts or signs.
C. Airport Restrictions: All sign heights and locations shall be subject to Elko regional airport airspace restrictions as
set forth by part 77 of the federal aviation regulations. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-6: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs erected in the city, except for the following, which shall be exempt
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 312/640
from conformance with provisions contained within this chapter:
A. Construction signs having an area not in excess of fortyeight (48) square feet, provided such signs are erected no
more than sixty (60) days prior to construction, are confined to the site of construction, and are removed not more
than thirty (30) days after completion of construction and prior to occupancy.
B. Government signs for traffic control, for direction to public facilities, or for regulatory notice, warning or other public
purposes.
C. Real estate signs, provided they are removed within seven (7) days of the sale, rental or lease of the subject
property; and provided, that such signs not exceed more than thirty two (32) square feet of area, shall not be
illuminated and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all property lines.
D. Permitted special event (election) signs as outlined in Nevada Revised Statutes.
E. Political signs, provided they are located and removed in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 608, 10-
28-2003)
3-9-7: PERMITTED FREESTANDING SIGNS:
A. Specified: Each property, lot or parcel of record within any commercial or industrial zoning district of the city is
permitted the following:
1. One freestanding sign on each street frontage, except that a gasoline service station may have one additional
trade name or pricing sign if the premises has only one street frontage and except that an automotive dealership
may have one sign for each new car dealership. Frontage along a freeway or interstate highway is not
considered street frontage.
2. Directional or instructional signs which do not advertise a business, other than the business logo but which
identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways or signs providing direction, such as parking lot entrances and
exit signs and those of a similar nature. Directional signs are limited to one sign per driveway approach and shall
not exceed an area of six (6) square feet.
3. Off premise signs shall observe a minimum separation distance of six hundred feet (600').
B. Sign Height:
1. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be twenty five feet (25') if located on property abutting a street
right of way having a twenty five (25) mile per hour or less speed limit.
2. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be thirty five feet (35') if located on property abutting a street
right of way having a speed limit greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour.
3. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be forty five feet (45') if located on property within one hundred
feet (100') of the Interstate Route 80 right of way.
C. Sign Area:
1. The maximum area of a freestanding sign shall be two (2) square feet of sign area for every one linear foot of
building frontage facing the adjacent street.
2. The maximum sign area of a freestanding sign proposed on vacant, undeveloped land shall be one square foot
for every one foot (1') of property frontage along the adjacent street.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 313/640
D. Nonpermitted Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs, other than exempted signs and signs authorized as part of
an approval of a conditional use permit for a medical office use, professional office use, multi-family residential use
or similar conditional use, are not permitted in any residential zoning district. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-8: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A. Permitted; Requirements: Temporary signs may be placed in any commercial or industrial zoning district of the city,
subject to the following requirements and other applicable provisions stated in this chapter:
1. Each lot or parcel of record may have two (2) temporary signs, each sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet
in size, or one temporary sign, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size.
2. No temporary sign shall obstruct or impair the use of the public sidewalk by pedestrians or impair the use of
public or private streets or driveways, traffic control signs, bus stops, fire hydrants, or any other type of street
furniture, or otherwise create a hazard, including a tripping hazard.
3. A temporary sign shall be designed to be stable under all weather conditions, including high winds.
4. A temporary sign may be internally illuminated.
5. A temporary sign shall be placed only with the consent of the property owner.
6. A temporary sign may be placed for a period of time of up to sixty (60) days at which time the sign shall be
removed orreplaced.
7. No temporary sign shall be placed without first having obtained a sign permit or sign clearance from the city
planning or building department.
8. No temporary signs shall be placed within the public street right of way except for areas improved with sidewalk
or landscaping, provided the sign is set back a minimum of three feet (3') from the curb face of the roadway and a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk area five feet (5') in width is maintained for pedestrian use, and provided the
temporary sign is removed from the sidewalk at dusk.
B. Placement In Residential Districts Prohibited: Temporary signs, other than exempted signs, are not permitted in any
residential zoning district. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-9: OFF PREMISES AND ON PREMISES SIGNS:
Off premises and on premises signs are permitted in any commercial or industrial zoning district in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, but are not permitted in any residential zoning district. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-10: ABANDONED SIGNS:
All abandoned signs and abandoned sign support structures shall be removed by the property owner or owner of the
premises within three (3) months after abandonment. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-11: MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS:
In any zoning district, the planning commission, upon demonstration of just cause, may modify any or all of the
provisions contained within this chapter under the variance procedures contained within section 3-2-22 of this title.
Additionally, the planning commission may include the following criteria when evaluating and considering a modification
of sign regulations contained within this chapter:
A. Blanketing of the proposed sign by other signs or structures in the area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 314/640
B. Multiple businesses on the same property or multiple tenants within the same building.
C. Topographic features, such as grade differential between the subject property and the adjacent roadway. (Ord. 608,
10-28-2003)
3-9-12: ILLUMINATION:
All signs shall be designed and installed to direct and shield light away from any residential district and adjacent
streets, in accordance with section 3-2-3 of this title. Techniques, such as use of opaque sign backgrounds, may be
required to control illumination spillover and meet this objective. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
3-9-13: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city building and planning
departments.
B. This chapter is not intended to conflict with or supersede other sections of the city code pertaining to the installation
of signs. In the event of a conflict, the most stringent provision shall prevail. (Ord. 608, 10-28-2003)
Title 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSE
4-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ELKO BUSINESS LICENSE CODE. (Ord. 507, 5-26-1998)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the meanings set
forth in this chapter:
AUCTION SALE: A sale of property by public outcry to the highest bidder.
AUCTIONEERS: Any person who shall by public outcry, sell or offer to sell to the highest bidder at public offering, any
goods, merchandise, livestock, real estate or interest in real estate, security or any personal property at any place
within the City where any and all persons who choose to do so are permitted to attend and offer bids; or any person
who shall advertise or in any other manner hold himself out as an auctioneer for public patronage.
BUSINESS: Any commercial enterprise, trade, occupation, calling, profession, vocation or activity conducted by any
person, or the person's agent or employee, for the purpose of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirect.
CITY: City of Elko.
CITY COUNCIL: Elko City Council.
COMMERCIAL RENTAL PROPERTY: Any rented or leased nonresidential unit or units of commercial or industrial
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 315/640
property.
COMMERCIAL TRAVELER: Any person traveling either by foot, motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from
business to business, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery to said business for
their use or resale by them in the normal course of their business.
COMMUNICATION/UTILITY COMPANY: Any business that provides gas, geothermal and/or electric power,
telecommunication services, broadband access and/or services, cable television communication services or
telephone/telegraph communication services.
EMPLOYEE: A person in the service of another under any appointment or contract of hire, express or implied, oral or
written, where the employer has the power or right to control and direct the employee in the material details of how the
work is to be performed.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any business conducted in or upon any premises, including any buildings, improvements,
equipment and facilities used or maintained in connection with such business.
FARMER'S MARKET: A special event that primarily features booths, tables or stands where vendors sell unprocessed
fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy products and non-alcoholic beverages.
FARMER'S MARKET VENDOR: A business that operates a physical retail market featuring foods sold directly to
consumers at a farmer's market.
FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS: The premises within the City limits where a business is conducted from day to day and
regularly kept open for the purpose of conducting business. The term "regular place of business", as used in this
chapter, has the same meaning as "fixed place of business".
GOODS: Personal property that can be sold, including merchandise and wares.
GROSS REVENUES: The total amount of revenues received in the business of offering any service.
GROSS SALES RECEIPTS: A. The total amount received from the sale of goods within the Municipal boundaries of
the City, regardless of the destination of the goods; and
B. The total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of any nature,
whether or not such service, act or employment is performed as part of or in connection with the sale of goods.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business customarily carried on in a business establishment that is permitted to be carried
out in a residence as long as the use as a business is incidental to the primary residential purpose and the residential
character of the property is not changed.
HOME SALES PARTY: A party or social gathering held at a residence for the purpose of selling merchandise to the
attendees.
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR: A person who provides service to another for remuneration, is conclusively
presumed to be an "independent contractor" for State wage and hour purposes pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
608.0155 and is not an "employee" as that term is defined in this section.
LICENSE FEE: Any monies required by law to be paid to obtain or renew a business license.
PERSON: Except where otherwise indicated, a natural person, any form of business or social organization and any
other nongovernmental legal entity including, but not limited to, a sole proprietorship, limited liability company,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or unincorporated organization, or a government, governmental agency or
political subdivision of a government.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY: Any rented or leased residential unit or units, excluding commercial or industrial
property. Residential rental houses, duplexes, triplexes, apartment houses, hotels, boarding and rooming houses are
all included within this definition.
RETAIL BUSINESS: Every business conducted for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods, other than as a
part of a "wholesale business", as defined in this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 316/640
SOLICITOR OR PEDDLER: Any person traveling either by foot, motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, or from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods
of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future; or carrying,
conveying or transporting goods, offering and exposing the same for sale.
SPECIAL EVENT: An organized event, whether indoor or outdoor: a) that is held on public property or streets, nonprofit
organization property, or non-residential private property; b) that can reasonably be expected to cause a public
gathering; c) where two (2) or more vendors are present or where the public is charged admission for entry; and d) that
is not part of the normal course of business at the location.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT: Any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods or
providing services; and who may, in furtherance of such purposes, hire, lease, use or occupy any building, structure,
tent, room in a hotel, shop or other place for the exhibition and sale of such goods or the provision of such services,
either privately or at public auction.
TRAVELING SHOW: Any circus, carnival, concert, exhibition or any show intending to exhibit in the open air or under a
tent, in a public or private hall, club room, assembly hall or theater where moveable scenery, theatrical equipment or
props are used in a performance or exhibition.
UNIT: A unit of commercial or residential rental property is any separate rental space (whether within a building or
ground space) of commercial, industrial or residential property.
VENDOR: Any person offering goods and/or services for sale to the public.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS: Every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling goods in wholesale lots to retail
merchants for resale. (Ord. 831, 6-26-2018)
4-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, either directly or indirectly, to conduct or commence any
business, trade, calling, profession or occupation or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine
or device, in whole or in part, in the City without first procuring a business license and keeping said license in effect
at all times in compliance with this chapter.
B. Fixed Place Of Business Required; Exception: A business license shall be issued only if the applicant has a fixed
place of business from which the business will be conducted, unless specifically stated otherwise in this title. Once
the license is issued, the licensee shall not engage in business from any other premises other than the one for
which the license was issued, excluding "service oriented" professionals.
C. Responsibility For Compliance: The agents or other representatives of any absentee person who is doing business
in the City shall be personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the business they represent
within this chapter, without relieving their principal of such responsibility.
D. Business License Types:
1. Regular Business License: All businesses not defined below shall require a regular business license.
2. Apartment Business License: Every person in the business of conducting an apartment house shall obtain a
business license.
3. Hotel, Motel, Boarding And Rooming House Business License: Every person in the business of conducting the
business of renting rooms shall obtain an annual business license.
4. Mobile Home Park, Trailer Park Business License: Every person in the business of conducting the business of
renting spaces for mobile homes and/or trailers shall obtain an annual business license.
5. Childcare License: Every person in the business of providing childcare services, including, but not limited to,
those operating a childcare facility, childcare center or childcare group home as defined by Nevada Revised
Statutes, shall obtain an annual business license.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 317/640
6. Residential Facility For Groups License: Every person in the business of providing a residential facility that
furnishes food, shelter, assistance and limited supervision to any aged, infirm, mentally retarded or handicapped
person as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes section 449.017 shall obtain an annual business license.
7. Communication/Utility Company Business License: Every person in the business of selling gas and/or electric
power, cable television services or telephone communication services shall obtain an annual business license.
(Ord. 517, 9-8-1998)
8. Residential Rentals Property: Every person, firm, corporation, or association in the business of renting or leasing
of three (3) or more residential rental units shall obtain an annual business license.
9. Commercial Rentals Property: Every person, firm, company, corporation or association in the business of renting
or leasing of two (2) or more commercial rental units shall obtain an annual business license. (Ord. 531, 8-24-
1999)
4-1-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Every person required to procure a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall submit an application to
the City Clerk or his/her designee.
A. Information Required: The application shall require, at least, the following information:
1. The name of the person to whom the license is to be issued.
2. The location for which the license is sought.
3. The type or kind of business to be conducted under this license.
4. The dates when the license is proposed to become effective.
5. The signature of the owner of the property, if other than the applicant.
6. Supplemental child support information as required by the State.
7. Proof of licensing and/or certification of the state permitting the business, where applicable.
8. Proof of an approved inspection by the State Health Department, where applicable.
9. Proof of approval to conduct business by the State Department of Taxation.
10. Verification by the following City departments that the fixed place of business has met all applicable Building
and Fire Codes and has met all applicable zoning requirements:
a. Building Department;
b. Fire Marshal;
c. Planning Department.
B. State License Required: No license to conduct any business or occupation in the City which is regulated and/or
licensed under any provision of the Nevada Revised Statutes shall be issued unless and until the appropriate State
licenses have been obtained.
C. Confidentiality: All business license applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be confidential
and shall not be subject to public inspection. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to preserve and keep the
applications so that the contents thereof may not become known except to the person charged with the
administration of this chapter. (Ord. 507, 5-26-1998)
4-1-5: APPROVAL, DENIAL OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE BY CITY CLERK:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 318/640
The City Clerk shall have the right and power to approve or deny all applications for a business license.
A. Conditions For Denial: An application for a business license shall be denied if the City Clerk determines that any one
or more of the following exists:
1. The application contains false, fraudulent or misleading material statement or information; or
2. The business for which the license is applied for is unlawful under any ordinance, code, rule or law of the City,
State or Federal government; or
3. The business for which the license is applied for involves any act, the commission of which is made unlawful or is
prohibited by any ordinance, rule, code or law of the City, State or Federal government; or
4. The applicant is indebted to the City for any unpaid license fee.
B. Notification Of Denial: Upon any denial of an application for a business license, the City Clerk or his/her designee
shall notify the applicant in writing and state the reason(s) for the denial. Such notification shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or by mail at the address indicated on the application.
C. Approval; Fee, Issuance: Upon approval of an application for a business license, the City Clerk or his/her designee
shall collect the appropriate business license fee and issue the business license.
D. Appeal: Every applicant denied a business license by the City Clerk shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
City Council. (Ord. 517, 9-8-1998)
4-1-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Validity: No license shall be valid except for the location and owner for which the original application therefor was
made and the license issued.
B. New Business Location: In such cases that a business changes location, however does not change the ownership
or character of the business, the licensee may apply to transfer the existing business license to the new location.
Verification by the following City departments that the new place of business has met all applicable Building and
Fire Codes and has met all applicable zoning requirements is required prior to approval:
1. Building Department;
2. Fire Marshal;
3. Planning Department.
C. New Business Owner: In such cases that a business is sold to or assumed by a new owner, the new owner must
make application for a business license. (Ord. 517, 9-8-1998)
4-1-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSES AND LICENSE FEES:
A. Charitable Organization: No business license fee shall be required of any institution, corporation, organization or
association organized for charitable civic purposes.
B. Nonprofit Organization: No business license fee shall be required of any nonprofit organization so registered with
the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 319/640
C. Commercial Traveler: No business license shall be required of any "commercial traveler", as defined in section 4-1-2
of this chapter.
D. Home Sales Parties: No business license shall be required of any person hosting a "home sales party", as defined
in section 4-1-2 of this chapter.
E. Residential And Commercial Rentals: No business license is required for a person who owns a residential or
commercial rental if the rental is managed by a person who holds a City business license as a State licensed
property manager.
F. Farmer's Market Vendors: No business license fee shall be required for a farmer's market vendor at a farmer's
market. (Ord. 831, 6-26-2018)
4-1-8: ESTABLISHMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
A. Regular Business License Fees; Examples:
1. Rates Established: Unless exempted by the provisions of section 4-1-7 of this chapter, the rates or amounts of
business license fees for all businesses and professions shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
The rates shall be established based on the yearly gross sales receipts or revenues of the business or
profession, unless the rate is established by some other method as set forth in this chapter. In the case of
businesses making sales and rendering services, the gross revenue from both sales and services shall be
considered the equivalent of gross sales.
2. Examples: The following are examples of businesses and professions whose business license fees shall be
established based on yearly gross sales or revenues; however, the list is for elaboration purposes only and is not
intended to be an all inclusive list. The list of examples is as follows:
Accountant
Amusement machines
Amusement park
Animal kennels
Appraisers
Architects
Arts
Attorneys
Automobile, bicycles sales and repairs/rentals
Bail bond broker
Barbershops
Beauty parlors
Bond securities
Bookstores
Bricks and adobe sale and manufacturing
Building and loan associations
Building maintenance
Building supplies
Buses
Business machines and supplies
Cabinet or carpentry shops
Car wash
Childcare
Chiropodist
Chiropractor
Clothing stores
Coin operated amusement machines
Collection, finance and insurance agencies
Computer sales and services
Concrete and cement products
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 320/640
Consultants
Contractors
Convalescent homes
Cosmetologist
Crafts/hobby shops
Dairies and ice cream parlors
Dance teachers
Dealer in gasoline, motor fuel and/or oil
Delivering
Dental laboratories
Dentist
Department stores
Detective service
Diesel/motor vehicle fuel sales
Doctor
Drive-up
Eating establishments
Engineer
Engineers, civil
Engineers, mining
Entrepreneur
Equipment leasing
Equipment rentals
Express companies
Exterminator
Fabric shops
Finance companies
Florist
Fuel oil sales
Funeral homes and cemeteries
Furniture stores
Garage (auto repair and supplies)
General repair shop
Gift and novelty shop
Grocery store/food products
Grooming shops (animal)
Hardware stores
Health studios
Hospital supplies and clinics
Hospitals
Hotel dining rooms
Hypnotist
Ironworks
Janitorial service
Jewelry stores
Jukeboxes
Junk dealers
Laundries and laundromats
Leather goods and services
Linen rental services
Loan agent
Machine shops
Massage parlors
Medical facilities
Medical labs
Microfilming
Mobile food vendors
Mortician
Motion picture production
Music machines
Music teachers
New/used shops
Newspapers/publishers
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 321/640
Nonresident
Paint store
Pawnshops
Pest control
Pet shops
Petroleum products
Photographers and studios
Physicians
Public transportation
Recycling companies
Residential facility for groups
Restaurants
Sales
Sales of musical instruments
Sales, repairs and rental
Service machines
Service stations (auto)
Shoe stores and repair shops
Skating rink
Slot machines sales and repairs
Soft drink sales and bottling plants
Spas
Sporting goods store
Stage lines
Stockbroker
Subcontractors
Surgeons
Tailoring and dressmaking
Taxies
Teachers
Television sales and services
Upholstery shops
Vending machines
Veterinarians
Wedding chapels
Welding shops
Yard maintenance
B. New Business; No Gross Established: If, at the time of filing an application for a business license, no sales or
services have been made or performed by the applicants, the applicant shall pay the minimum fee established by
resolution of the city council.
C. Apartment Business License Fees: The business license fee shall be established by resolution of the city council
and shall be based upon the number of apartment units, whether or not the person conducting such business is a
resident of the city.
D. Hotel, Motel, Boarding And Rooming House Business License Fees: The business license fee shall be established
by resolution of the city council and shall be based upon the number of rooms.
E. Mobile Home Park, Trailer Park Business License Fees: The business license fee shall be established by resolution
of the city council and shall be based upon the number of spaces.
F. Utility Business License Fees: The business license fee shall be established by resolution of the city council and
shall be based on gross sales, but shall include a maximum fee. (Ord. 517, 9-8-1998)
G. Residential Rental Property License Fee: The business license fee for residential rental property shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be based upon the number of residential rental units.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 322/640
H. Commercial Rental Property License Fee: The business license fee for commercial rental property shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be based upon the yearly gross receipts or revenues of the
commercial rental property units. (Ord. 531, 8-24-1999)
4-1-9: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
A. When Payable: All regular business license fees shall be paid in full in advance upon the original issuance of the
business license and annually thereafter at the office of the city clerk in legal currency of the United States.
B. Daily License: Daily licenses provided in this chapter shall be due and payable in advance. The daily license shall
cover a period of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of the next day.
C. Penalty:
1. If any license provided for by this chapter is unpaid for more than thirty (30) days after the due date, a penalty of
twenty five percent (25%) of the annual fee shall be added and collected by the city clerk or his/her designee.
2. If any license provided for by this chapter is unpaid for more than sixty (60) days after the due date, a penalty of
fifty percent (50%) of the annual fee shall be added and collected by the city clerk or his/her designee.
D. City Attorney To Bring Suit For Delinquent License: The city council may at any time direct the city attorney to bring
a civil action in the name of the city for the recovery of the applicable business license fee against any person who
engages in, conducts or carries on any business, game, profession or exhibition for which a license is required by
the provisions of this chapter without procuring such license and paying the prescribed license tax.
E. Refunds: All licenses shall be issued for the period of time set forth in this chapter and no licensee shall be entitled
to a refund of any portion of the fee paid by reason of the termination of the licensed activity prior to the expiration
of the time for which the license was issued. (Ord. 540, 10-5-2000)
4-1-10: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Application For Renewal: One month before the expiration date of any business license, the city clerk or his/her
designee shall send a business license renewal application to all businesses licensed in the city. The application
and appropriate business license fee must be returned to the city clerk's office prior to the expiration date of the
business license. Failure to notify any licensed business shall not be held to waive the requirement to file a renewal
application or pay the license fee, and the actual receipt of such notice is in no way required.
B. Second Notice: One month after the expiration date of any license, the city clerk or his/her designee shall send a
second notice and include an assessment of the twenty five percent (25%) penalty on the reported gross revenues.
C. Third, Final Notice: Two (2) months after the expiration date of any license, the city clerk or his/her designee shall
send a third and final notice and include an assessment of the fifty percent (50%) penalty.
D. Expiration Beyond Sixty Days: All expired licenses in excess of sixty (60) days' delinquency shall be served with a
notice of such penalty and intent of city to publish in the local newspaper as operating without a business license in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter.
E. Service Of Notice: A notice of delinquency shall be served upon a licensee by delivery to the person at the business
premises licensed, if the person is present. If the person is not present, service may be made by delivery to the
person in actual charge of the premises at the time of service. If the business is closed, service may be made by
mailing by certified mail with return receipt requested, the same to the person at the mailing address for the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 323/640
business as the same is shown on the current business license and by posting upon the front door. Delivery is
effective upon a date of delivery or posting and mailing, as the case may be.
F. Report Of Gross Revenues Of The Business Required:
1. Where the license fee for a renewed business license is calculated upon the gross revenues of the business, the
applicant must state, under oath, the amount of business in terms of gross revenues which he did in the
preceding year.
2. In the case of business making sales and rendering services, the gross revenue from both sales and services
shall be considered the equivalent of gross sales.
3. The city clerk or his/her designee may examine or cause to be examined, the books and accounts of any
business required to file a renewal application for the purpose of verifying the amount of gross receipts reported
for such business.
4. Any person who wilfully files a false statement of gross sales/receipts shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable as hereinafter in this code provided.
G. Issuance Of Business License By City Clerk: Upon approval of the application for renewal of a business license,
and upon collection of the appropriate business license fee, the city clerk or his/her designee shall issue the
business license to the applicant. (Ord. 540, 10-5-2000)
4-1-11: RECORD OF LICENSE:
The city clerk shall keep in his/her office, a record of all licenses issued with the name or names of all parties to whom
the license was issued, the business name, the type, trade or profession license, the date for which said license was
issued, the date of its expiration, and the amount of license fee received. (Ord. 540, 10-5-2000)
4-1-12: DUTIES OF LICENSEE AND INSPECTION AUTHORITY OF CITY PERSONNEL:
A. Duties Of Licensee: Every licensee under this chapter shall:
1. Ascertain and at all times comply with all federal, state, county and/or municipal laws, ordinances and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
2. Prominently display the business license in licensee's place of business.
3. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business and examination of his books by public authorities so
authorized by law.
4. Avoid all unlawful, improper or unnecessary acts, practices or conditions in the conduct of his business which do
or may affect the public health, morals or welfare or constitute a public nuisance.
5. Refrain from operating the licensed business in the city after expiration of the license or in such cases where the
license is revoked, canceled or suspended.
B. Enforcement Duties: The city clerk, chief of police, city attorney, and the regularly appointed police officers of the city
shall enforce compliance with this chapter.
1. Chief Of Police Additional Duties: In addition to any other duties set out herein, the chief of police and his
authorized representative may enter any place of business, trucks, vehicles or other conveyances used for any
business purpose to ascertain whether or not the proper license has been issued and paid for allowing the
person to engage in business in the city.
2. City Clerk Additional Duties: In addition to any other duties prescribed in this chapter, the city clerk or his/her
designee shall:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 324/640
a. Make diligent inquiry and examination as to all person required to obtain a business license and pay a fee
therefor; and
b. Maintain a city license register, in which shall be entered the names of all persons to whom licenses are
issued, the business, trade or profession licensed, the time for which the license is valid, the date of its issue,
the date of its expiration, and the fee therefor; and
c. Request city council permission for an audit of any person or business in the city, said audit to be performed by
a qualified certified public accountant to be appointed by the city; and
d. Make a written report of all persons who have failed to obtain a license and pay the fee prescribed therefor, as
provided in this chapter, and issue a delinquency notice for a penalty; and
e. Report to the city attorney the name of the delinquent person or persons if the fee and penalty are not paid
within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice.
3. City Attorney Additional Duties: In addition to any other duties prescribed in this chapter, the city attorney may
institute an action against all persons operating without a valid business license under title 1, chapter 3 of this
code.
C. Inspection Authority Of City Personnel: The city clerk, building official, fire marshal, city planner and the chief of
police, and their respective designees, are authorized to make all investigations reasonably necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter and shall have the authority to inspect licensees, their business records or premises to
determine and enforce compliance with this chapter. All persons authorized herein to inspect licensees and
businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without a search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following
premises:
1. Those for which a license is required.
2. Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of inspections, are operating under said license.
3. Those for which the license has been revoked, canceled or suspended. (Ord. 540, 10-5-2000)
4-1-13: GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Authority: Any business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be suspended, canceled or
revoked for good cause by the city council.
B. Included Cause: Good cause for such suspension, cancellation or revocation shall include, but is not limited to:
1. The existence of unsanitary conditions, noise, disturbances or other conditions at, near or in the premises which
causes or tends to create a public nuisance or which may injuriously affect the public health, safety or welfare.
2. The commission of, or permitting or causing the commission of, any act in the operation of the business which is
prohibited by any ordinances, rule or law of the city, state or federal government.
3. Fraudulent practices and misrepresentation in the operation of the business.
4. Concealment or misrepresentation in procuring the business license.
5. The business for which the license has been issued is unlawful or is prohibited by any ordinance, code, rule or
law of the city, state or federal government.
6. The license was issued by mistake or is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
7. The premises used to conduct said business has been condemned, declared a fire hazard or declared unsafe for
business occupancy pursuant to applicable building and fire codes.
8. The use of the premises for the business license violates the zoning ordinances or regulations of the city. (Ord.
507, 5-26-1998)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 325/640
4-1-14: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be suspended, canceled or revoked in the
manner provided in this section.
A. Authority: The city clerk may reject any application or cancel or, after notice to the licensee, may revoke any license
of a person who operates or maintains a place of business in violation of any ordinance of the city or violation of
any state or federal law, or who does not first secure any required federal state or city license.
B. Notice: Notice of the proposed suspension, revocation or cancellation shall be made to the licensee not less than
five (5) days prior to the effective date of the suspension, revocation or cancellation. Such notice shall be served as
provided in subsection 4-1-10E of this chapter, and shall include the reason for the action and shall provide for a
hearing before the city manager, at which time, the proposed action to suspend, revoke or cancel shall be approved
or denied.
C. Appeal Hearing: The licensee may submit a letter of appeal of the city manager's action to suspend, revoke or
cancel a business license to the city council within ten (10) days of the action at which time the city council shall
proceed as follows:
1. The city council may, on its own motion or initiative, or upon complaint of any person, institute proceedings to
suspend, cancel or revoke a business license.
2. Notice of intent to suspend, cancel or revoke said license shall be mailed to the person holding the business
license at the last address as shown on the application or on any supplemental application.
3. Such notice shall set forth the alleged reasons for the proposed suspension, cancellation or revocation.
4. The licensee shall, within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice of intent, or within ten (10) days of a
decision by the city manager to suspend, revoke or cancel a license, file with the city clerk a written answer to the
notice or a written notice of appeal.
5. After receipt of the written answer from the licensee, or written notice of appeal, the city council shall fix a day
and time for a hearing at which the licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 540, 10-5-2000)
4-1-14-1: PENALTY:
A. A criminal action shall be governed by title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
B. Each day a business is operated without a license shall constitute a separate offense for which criminal liability may
be imposed. Notwithstanding any grace periods or notice requirements of this chapter, the city may prosecute an
action for violation of this chapter at any time if a business owner is operating without properly paid for and issued
business license. (Ord. 540, 10-5-2000)
4-1-15: SOLICITORS, TEMPORARY MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS LICENSE:
A. Application: Every person conducting the business of a solicitor, temporary merchant and/or peddler in the city shall
make application in writing for a business license.
B. Contents Of Application: Such application shall contain and set forth the following:
1. The name of the business.
2. The kind or type of sales.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 326/640
3. The place where the sales are to occur.
4. The number of days for which the license should be issued.
5. The names of the persons owning or operating said business.
6. Written permission from the private property owner where the business is to be conducted, if applicable.
7. Make of vehicles to be used, a description of same, together with the license plate number or other means of
identification, if applicable.
8. Proof of approval to conduct business by the state department of sales tax.
9. Proof of an approved inspection by the state health department, where applicable.
10. Approval by the police department.
11. Approval by the planning department.
C. Police Department Approval:
1. An applicant for a license under this section must file with the chief of police, at the same time as filing the above
referenced application with the city clerk, a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the chief of
police. In addition to the application, fingerprinting of the applicant may be required.
2. At time of filing the application with the chief of police, an investigation fee shall be paid by the applicant to the
chief of police. Such fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
3. The police department shall perform a background investigation of the applicant's criminal history and moral
character as they deem necessary for the protection of the public good. Such investigation may include, but is not
limited to, employment history, criminal record and any other pertinent information or documents required by the
police department or city clerk.
4. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be
unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall deny approval of the application and shall notify the applicant that his
application is denied.
5. In such case where the applicant is denied a business license, the investigation fee shall not be refunded.
D. Planning Department Approval: Outdoor sales shall not interfere with circulation or parking of vehicles in any
required parking area.
An applicant for a license under this section must file a detailed site plan of the property with the city planning
department for review prior to obtaining a license. The site plan must include the following:
1. All existing buildings and/or structures.
2. Location and configuration of existing parking area(s).
3. Size and location of the proposed display area.
4. Number of parking spaces displaced by the display area.
E. Idaho Street Restriction: Solicitors, temporary merchants and/or peddlers shall not be allowed to display, sell or
solicit merchandise for sale within the Idaho Street right of way or within one hundred feet (100'), measured from
the centerline of the Idaho Street right of way, on either side where there are no curb and gutter improvements.
1. Exception: An applicant may request a reduction of the required setback of one hundred feet (100') from the
centerline of Idaho Street subject to the following:
a. Applicant must demonstrate the means and method(s) to control ingress/egress to the property; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 327/640
b. Applicant must demonstrate the means and methods to provide that all parking and backing movements will be
conducted on the property; and
In no case shall the reduction of the required setback encroach within the Idaho Street right of way.
F. Advertising: The applicant shall not use off premise or directional signage.
G. Removal Upon Vacation: Any space occupied by a temporary merchant must be completely cleared of all
paraphernalia associated with the use as well as all dirt or litter upon termination or vacation.
H. Conditional Use Permit: Temporary merchants who intend on displaying merchandise for sale within the City for a
period in excess of thirty (30) days within any calendar year must first secure a conditional use permit pursuant to
the provisions of section 3-2-18 of this Code.
I. Business License Fee: Each solicitor, temporary merchant and/or peddler, upon issuance of a business license, shall
pay a license fee as established by a resolution of the City Council. The business license fee shall be based on the
number of days the business is to be conducted. Solicitors, temporary merchants and/or peddlers shall display at all
times of operation, all applicable permits, approved site plan and City business license.
J. City Park Restriction: No business license shall be issued for business to be conducted within any City owned park
and/or adjoining rights-of-way, including, but not exclusively, streets, curbs, gutters or parks unless allowable under
the special events license provisions, sections 5-12-1 and 5-12-3 of this Code, or operating with a City
concessionaire agreement.
K. Revocation: Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Code shall be cause for the immediate revocation of
the license and shall be cause for a twelve (12) month waiting period prior to reapplication. (Ord. 704, 3-24-2009)
4-1-16: SPECIAL EVENT VENDOR BUSINESS LICENSE:
A. Application: Every organizer/sponsor of a special event must apply to the City Clerk's Office for a special event
vendor business license. In the event there are two (2) or more organizers/sponsors of a single special event, the
organizers/sponsors shall jointly apply for the special event vendor business license.
B. Issuance: The City Clerk shall issue a special event vendor business license to the organizer/sponsor of a special
event on behalf of the participating vendors upon approval of the application. The special event vendors business
license may only be issued after the following criteria have been met:
1. No special event vendor business license shall be issued for any special event held on City-owned property,
including public rights-of-way, unless approved by the City Council pursuant to section 8-11-2 of this Code.
2. A special event vendor business license will be issued only after the organizer/sponsor has provided a list of all
participating vendors to the City Clerk's Office, which list shall be appended to and incorporated into the license.
C. No Fee Required For Certain Vendors: A vendor listed on a special event vendors business license shall not be
required to pay a license fee if the vendor: 1) operates a place of business that is physically located within the City
or 2) normally conducts peddling operations or sales as a normal or seasonal part of the vendor's business;
provided, vendors that are subject to either of the foregoing exceptions must obtain all other required business
licenses and pay all other required license fees for their operations or sales prior to the special event. Vendors that
are entitled to the foregoing exceptions shall be so identified on the license application.
D. Discretion Of Organizer/Sponsor Of Event: This section shall not be interpreted as restricting the lawful discretion of
the organizer/sponsor of any special event to determine which vendors may or may not participate.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 328/640
E. Special Event Vendor Business License Fee: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each vendor participating
in a special event that is required to obtain a special event vendor business license shall pay a fee to the City in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council. All fees required pursuant to this subsection shall be collected
from the vendors by the organizer/sponsor(s) of the special event and shall thereafter be paid to the Office of the
City Clerk at the time the license application is submitted. No additional business license fee shall be charged to the
organizer/sponsor in connection with the special event.
F. Transferability: A special event vendor business license is nontransferable.
G. Investigation: The City Clerk may require a police investigation prior to issuing a special event vendors business
license if it appears: 1) that the organizer/sponsor or a vendor failed to truthfully provide all information required by
this chapter or 2) that the proposed special event or a vendor's proposed business activity at the special event
violates any City ordinance, or any Federal or State law. (Ord. 831, 6-26-2018)
4-1-17: AUCTION:
A. License Required: Every person or firm acting as an auctioneer or holding or carrying on any auction within the City
must obtain an auction business license from the City Clerk.
B. Application: Every person conducting the business of an auction shall make application in writing for a business
license to the City Clerk.
C. Contents Of Application: Such application shall contain and set forth at least the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The place where the auction will be conducted, including signature approval from the property owner for the
auction event.
3. The length of time for which the license is desired and the dates when the auction will be conducted.
4. The name and address of the owner of the property to be sold at the auction.
5. A short description of the items to be auctioned.
6. Proof of approval to conduct business from the State Department of Taxation.
D. Business License Fee: Each person conducting an auction shall pay a license fee as established by a resolution of
the City Council.
E. Limitation On Location: No auction may be conducted upon any street within the City, public right-of-way within the
City or public property owned by the City without prior permission of the City. (Ord. 507, 5-26-1998)
4-1-18: BANKS, SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS AND OTHER BANKING:
A. License Required: Every person or firm engaged in the banking business or savings and loan association business
must obtain a business license from the City Clerk.
B. Application: The application must be made on a form provided by the City Clerk.
C. Business License Fee:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 329/640
1. Every bank, savings and loan institution and each branch thereof shall pay a license fee as established by a
resolution of the City Council.
2. At the beginning of each annual licensing period, each bank, savings and loan institution, and each branch
thereof, will submit with their application a tabulation setting forth total deposits in the particular bank, association
or branch on the last day of each of the previous four (4) calendar year quarters. The license fee will be based on
the average of these quarterly totals. (Ord. 507, 5-26-1998)
4-1-19: TRAVELING SHOW:
A. License Required: Every organizer/sponsor of a "traveling show", as defined in section 4-1-2 of this chapter, shall
obtain a traveling show business license from the City Clerk. The City Clerk may require proof of inspection and
approval by Federal, State, County and/or Municipal authorities where required.
B. Business License Fee: Each person conducting a traveling show shall pay a license fee as established by a
resolution of the City Council. If the performance is given in aid of any local educational or charitable purpose with
fifty percent (50%) or more of the proceeds going to charity, no license shall be required.
C. Limitation On Locations: No traveling show may conduct business upon any street, public right-of-way within the
City or public property owned by the City without prior permission, and where necessary, execution of an agreement
to conduct the business with the City. (Ord. 507, 5-26-1998)
4-1-20: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Home Occupation Defined: A home occupation is a business customarily carried on in a business establishment,
that is permitted to be carried out in a residence as long as the use as a business is incidental to the primary
residential purpose and the residential character of the property is not changed. Every person permitted to carry on
a home occupation shall obtain an annual business license.
B. License Required: Every person having a "home occupation", as defined in section 4-1-2 of this chapter, shall obtain
a business license from the City Clerk.
C. Approval Required: The City Clerk shall require approval by the Planning Department prior to issuance of a home
occupation business license.
D. License Fees: The business license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The rates shall be
established based on the yearly gross sales receipts or revenues of the business or profession unless the rate is
established by some other method as set forth in this chapter. In the case of business making sales and rendering
services, the gross revenue from both sales and services shall be considered the equivalent of gross sales.
E. Limitation On Service Locations: No home occupation may conduct business upon any street, public right-of-way
within the City or public property owned by the City without prior permission from the City. (Ord. 818, 4-25-2017)
Chapter 2
RESERVED
Chapter 3
GAMING
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 330/640
4-3-1: LOCATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessor or lessee, employer or employee, whether for hire or not, to
deal, play or carry on, open or conduct in any capacity whatsoever, any gambling game or games, or game or games
of chance of any name, nature or description, mechanical or otherwise, except slot machines, punchboards and
theater lotteries based upon the sale of tickets for admission, for money, property, checks, tokens, credit or any
representative of value within or without a building, on public or private property within the following areas:
A. Along Idaho Street or the extension of the street as U.S. Highway 40, in the city limits, defined and measured by line
on each side of the street and extension thereof, forty five feet (45') from private property lines bounding Idaho
Street and extension thereof, as the same appear on the official plats of the city, and the additions thereto.
B. One hundred forty feet (140') on each side of Fifth Street bounded on the north by the southerly end of the Fifth
Street bridge across the Humboldt River and bounded on the southeast by the projection of the west side line of
Ninth Street at the point where the Ninth Street intersects with the Fifth Street, all of the area being south of the
Humboldt River and situated in the city, as more fully appears on the official plats of the city and additions thereto.
(Ord. 81, 9-5-1946)
4-3-2: SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, lessor or lessee, employer or employee, whether for hire or not, to
place or maintain any sign of any name, nature or description, advertising games, gambling, gambling establishments,
casinos, intoxicating liquors, bars, saloons and cocktail lounges of a size greater than twelve (12) square feet, in such
a manner as to extend over the private property lines bounding Idaho Street and the extension thereof as U.S.
Highway 40, or which shall parallel Idaho Street and the extension thereof along or over the private property lines.
(Ord. 81, 9-5-1946)
Chapter 4
SLOT MACHINES; GAMING
4-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, lessee or employee, whether for hire or not, to deal, operate, carry
on, conduct, maintain or expose for play any game of faro, monte, roulette, keno, fan-tan, twenty one, blackjack, seven
and a half, big injun, klondyke, craps, stud poker, draw poker, or any banking or per played with cards, dice, or any
mechanical device or machine, for money, property, checks, credit, or any representative of value; or any gambling
game in which any person keeping, conducting, managing or permitting the same to be carried on, receives, directly or
indirectly, any compensation or reward, or any percentage or share of the money or property played, for keeping,
running, carrying on, or permitting the game to be carried on, or to play, maintain or keep any slot machine played for
money, for checks or tokens redeemable in money or property, without having first procured a license for the same as
hereinafter provided; and provided further, that no alien, or any person except a citizen of the United States, shall be
issued a license, or shall directly or indirectly own, operate or control any game or device so licensed. (Ord. 55, 7-1-
1931)
4-4-2: GAMBLING DEVICES:
Any person desiring to conduct, operate or carry on any gambling game, slot machine, or any game of chance
enumerated or provided for in section 4-4-1 of this chapter shall, upon proper application to the city council, be issued
a license for each particular device or game or slot machine under the following conditions and regulations:
A. Room, Premises Description: The person so applying for a license shall furnish a complete description of the
particular room and premises in which the licensee desires to carry on or conduct such slot machine, device or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 331/640
game, together with the location of the building, its street number, if such there be,and any other information by
which it may be definitely and readily located and recognized;
B. Machine Identification: The person so applying for a license shall state definitely the particular type of slot machine,
together with the serial number of the machine, or the particular game or device which the licensee desires to carry
on or conduct in the room and premises; and as so stated the same shall be specifically described in and entered
upon the license. (Ord. 55, 7-1-1931)
C. Fees: The license fees as set by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city clerk for each of the following
gambling games and devices:
1. Faro, monte, roulette, keno, fan-tan, twenty one, blackjack, seven and a half, big injun, klondyke, craps and
bingo.
2. Racehorse keno.
3. Racehorse book.
4. Stud poker and draw poker.
5. Each money slot machine, or for each handle on the money slot machine. The license shall entitle the holder to
carry on, conduct or operate the specific slot machine, game or device for which the license is issued in the
particular room and premises described therein, but not for any other slot machine, game or device than that
specified therein, or the specified slot machine, game or device in any other place than the room and premises so
described, for the quarter thereof succeeding the date of issuance of the license; provided, that the licensee shall
be entitled to carry on, conduct and operate two (2) or more slot machines, games or devices mentioned in
section 4-4-1 of this chapter in the same room, by paying the license herein provided for, for each slot machine,
game or device and otherwise complying with the terms of this section.
6. Any and all other gambling games of every name, nature or description, including bank or percentage games
played with cards, dice or any mechanical device or machine for money, property, checks, credit or any
representative of value. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
4-4-3: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
Licenses shall be prepared by the city clerk and shall be issued and accounted for as is by law provided in respect to
other city licenses. Each license issued or delivered by the city clerk to any person shall contain the name of the
licensee, and a particular description of the particular roomand premises in which the licensee intends to carry on,
conduct or operate any one slot machine, game or device mentioned in this chapter, and shall specify the particular
type of slot machine, together with the serial number of the machine or the particular game or the particular device, by
name; any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable by the licensee to any other
person, and shall be valid only for the particular room and premises described therein, and the specified slot machine,
game or device for which it was issued. No license money paid shall be refunded, whether the slot machine, game or
device for which any license was issued has voluntarily ceased or has been revoked under the provisions of this
chapter herein provided, or for any other reason. (Ord. 55, 7-1-1931)
4-4-4: VIOLATION; LICENSE REVOCATION:
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall act as an immediate revocation of any and all licenses which
may have been issued to the violator, or which may have been issued for the particular room and premises in which
any such violation occurred, and no new or additional license or licenses shall be issued to such violator for the room
and premises in which the violation occurred for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 55, 7-1-
1931)
4-4-5: PERMITTING VIOLATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 332/640
Any person or persons who shall knowingly permit any of the slot machines, games or devices mentioned in this
chapter to be conducted, operated, dealt or carried on in any house or building owned by him or her, in whole or in
part, except by a person who has received a license as herein provided, or his employee, shall, upon conviction
therefor, be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
4-4-6: DEFINITION:
The term "game" or "games" shall be construed to mean and include all games or devices herein mentioned and any
slot machine or slot machines played for money or for checks or tokens redeemable in money or property. (Ord. 55, 7-
1-1931)
4-4-7: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit social games played solely for drinks or cigars served individually,
or games played in private homes or residences for prizes, or nickel in the slot machines operated solely for cigars
ordrinks. (Ord. 55, 7-1-1931)
4-4-8: MINORS:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be allowed to play any licensed game, or slot machine or loiter
about any room or premises wherein any game or slot machine provided for in this chapter is operated or conducted,
and in any legal action it shall be no excuse for the licensee, employee or dealer operating or conducting a licensed
game to plead he believed the party to be twenty one (21) years old or over; and any licensee, employee or dealer
operating or conducting any game who shall permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to play at such
game or games or permit any such person to loiter about the room or premises in which such game or games may be
conducted or operated, shall be deemed guilty of a city offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as
provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
4-4-9: POSTING OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued for gambling games and slot machines of every character and description shall be posted in a
conspicuous place where such gambling games and slot machines are installed, in order that they may be inspected
by authorized state, county, city and town officials. (Ord. 55, 7-1-1931)
Chapter 5
ELKO LIQUOR CONTROL CODE
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: As used in this chapter, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall have the same meaning as the
term "liquor".
APPEAL: The right of the licensee or applicant to request a hearing before a specified city official or the city council
upon denial of or any other action adversely affecting a liquor license.
APPLICANT: A natural person, partnership, association, firm, company, corporation or other legal entity applying for a
liquor license.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 333/640
APPLICATION FOR A LIQUOR LICENSE: A formal request, utilizing a form provided by the city, that a person submits
to the city for the purpose of requesting a liquor license.
BEER: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any
other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water.
BREWPUB: An establishment which manufactures beer and sells beer beverages at retail and not made available for
wholesale.
BREWPUB LICENSE: A license issued by the city which permits the manufacturing and sales of beer by the licensee
at the premises specified in the license for consumption on the licensee's premises.
CATERER'S LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city which is only effective if issued in addition to an existing
retail liquor license, retail beer and wine license, or brewpub license, permitting the giving, selling or serving of beer,
wine and liquor by the drink by the caterer licensee for private events on the premises of the caterer or at specified
locations within the city of Elko.
CHURCH: A building, structure or place owned or occupied by a religious organization that is used primarily for
religious worship.
CITY: The city of Elko, Nevada.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Elko, Nevada, or the said clerk's deputy.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
EXPIRATION: The date upon which a liquor license expires.
FEE: Any monies required by law to be paid to obtain or renew a liquor license.
FRATERNAL, SOCIAL AND CIVIC CLUB LICENSE: A license issued by the city, which permits the licensee therein
designated to serve, sell or give liquors to the licensee's bona fide members and their guests only for consumption of
the licensee's premises specified in the license. This license shall not permit the licensee to conduct or operate any
public bar or place for the sale, serving or delivery of any liquor to the general public.
INTOXICATION: A condition in which a person's mental and physical faculties are impaired because of the ingestion of
liquor or other substances so as to diminish the person's ability to think and act in a way in which an ordinary prudent
person in full possession of his or her faculties and using reasonable care would think and act in like circumstances.
LICENSE: Unless otherwise stated, a liquor license.
LICENSE CERTIFICATE: A document issued by the city stating that a person has a liquor license, together with any
conditions or restrictions which apply to that liquor license.
LIQUOR: Beer, wine, gin, whiskey, cordials, ethyl alcohol or rum, and every liquor or solid, patented or not, containing
one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is used for beverage purposes.
LIQUOR LICENSE: Except as otherwise stated in this chapter or the license certificate, a privilege granted by the city
to an applicant pursuant to this chapter permitting the applicant to give, sell or serve all or specified types of liquor
within the city limits while it is in effect, subject to any conditions or restrictions contained in this chapter and/or the
license certificate.
MINOR: A natural person, male or female, under the age of twenty one (21) years.
PACKAGE: Any container or receptacle used for holding liquor, which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.
PACKAGED LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city which permits the sale of liquor in packages by the
licensee at the premises specified in the license, for consumption off the licensee's premises.
PERSON: A natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, fraternal, civic or social clubs and all other
types of organizations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 334/640
PREMISES: A distinct and definite locality, including a room, shop, building or other area with discrete boundaries.
PRIVATE EVENT: A gathering in the city limits which is not open to the public that will include the selling, serving or
giving away of alcoholic beverages.
PUBLIC SCHOOL: A publicly funded school or preschool, specifically grades prekindergarten through grade 12.
QUARTER: One-fourth (1/4) of the year, beginning respectively on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each
year.
REGULAR LIQUOR LICENSE: A liquor license that is not a temporary liquor license.
RENEWAL: The granting of the privilege of a licensee to continue to use an existing liquor license for a definite period
of time.
RETAIL: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
RETAIL BEER AND WINE LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city, which permits the sale of beer and wine in
packages, or by the drink by the licensee at the premises specified in the license, for consumption on or off of the
licensee's premises.
RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city, which permits the sale of liquor, in packages, or by the drink
by the licensee at the premises specified in the license, for consumption on or off the licensee's premises.
REVOCATION OF A LIQUOR LICENSE: The automatic cancellation of a liquor license pursuant to this chapter.
SACRAMENTAL: The use of liquor that is part of a formal religious act or ceremony and that is considered sacred as a
spiritual sign or symbol by that religion.
SAMPLE: An amount of liquor that is only of such quantity as is reasonably necessary to provide a taste, not to exceed
one-half (1/2) ounce of liquor.
SERVER OF ALCOHOL: Any person who gives, sells or serves any liquor to another person for consumption.
SPECIAL EVENT: For purposes of this chapter only, an event consisting of a gathering within the city limits at a
location shown on the license application or license certificate, open to the general public, which includes the selling,
serving or giving away of liquor.
SPECIAL EVENTS BEER AND WINE LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city which permits the sale, serving
or giving away of beer and/or wine only by the licensee at a special event, with the duration of said license not to
exceed a period of one week.
SPECIAL EVENTS LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city which permits the sale, serving or giving away of
liquor by the licensee at a special event, with the duration of said license not to exceed a period of one week.
SUSPENSION OF A LIQUOR LICENSE: The temporary cancellation of a liquor license by the city pursuant to this
chapter.
TERMINATION OF A LIQUOR LICENSE: The permanent cancellation of a liquor license by the city pursuant to this
chapter.
WHOLESALE LIQUOR LICENSE: A license issued by the city, which permits the sale of beer and wine only, or liquors
in packages by the licensee, to a person holding a valid, current, retail liquor license or a wholesale liquor license
issued by the city, but not the direct sale to a consumer or the general public.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural content of fruits or other agricultural products
containing sugar and including, without limitation, port, sherry and champagne. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 335/640
A. The public health, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city require the regulation and control of all
persons who sell, serve or give away liquor, to include persons engaged in the business of liquor sales. Obtaining a
liquor license is a privilege subject to the regulations and conditions which are or may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter. A liquor license may, without limitation, be revoked for violating such regulations or conditions.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, keep for sale, serve, give away, furnish or distribute, or
cause or permit to be sold, offered or kept for sale, served, given away, furnished or distributed, any kind of liquor in
the city limits, unless such person has first applied for, paid all license fees for, received and is the holder in good
standing of the proper license or licenses required by this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to the following:
1. Liquor served by a private family in its residence as part of its family or social life;
2. The use of liquor for sacramental purposes;
3. Liquor used during church sponsored events and church sponsored social gatherings held on church premises;
4. The use, sale or dispensing of liquor by any doctor, apothecary or pharmaceutist who uses alcohol or liquor for or
in compounding medicine or for medicinal or scientific purposes;
5. The employees of a person who holds a valid, unexpired license pursuant to this chapter, while acting within the
course of his employment;
6. A private event, not open to the public, such as a company party or a wedding. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-3: CLASSES OF LICENSES:
A. Specified: Under the provisions of this chapter, the following classes of licenses may be issued to qualified
applicants therefor:
1. Retail liquor license.
2. Retail beer and wine license.
3. Wholesale liquor license.
4. Wholesale beer and wine license.
5. Packaged liquor license.
6. Packaged beer and wine license.
7. Fraternal, social and civic club license.
8. Special events liquor license.
9. Special events beer and wine liquor license.
10. Caterer's liquor license. A caterer's liquor license shall only be issued and is only valid if the applicant has a
valid retail liquor, retail beer and wine or brewpub license.
11. Brewpub license.
B. More Than One Class: Each person whose activities fall into more than one class of liquor licenses, as defined in
this chapter, must apply for and receive a license for each class applicable before such person can operate in such
class.
C. Liquor License Additional: The liquor licenses required by this chapter shall be in addition to any other licenses
required by any person by the city for conducting or carrying on any other business in connection with, or separate
from the activities licensed under this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 336/640
D. Business Not Located In City Limits: A business not located in the city limits that wishes to sell, serve or give away
liquor in connection with catering within the city limits may apply for a caterer's liquor license upon proof of an
existing retail liquor license issued by the city, by the county of Elko, or by another governmental entity that subjects
the licensee to requirements that are the same as or substantially equivalent to the corresponding requirements
contained in this chapter. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN:
An application for the licenses required by this chapter shall be made to the city council and filed with the city clerk.
Each application shall:
A. Form: Be made on such form as the city council shall describe;
B. Name, Address Of Applicant: Include the name and address of the applicant, who shall be all persons having an
interest in the business to be licensed. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall include the name and
addresses of all partners. If the application is a corporation, association or other organization, the application shall
include the names and addresses of all officers, directors, stockholders and all other persons having an interest in
the business to be licensed, and the address of the principal place of business of the corporation, and the name
and address of the person or persons who shall have the active management of its business for which or in
connection with which a license is desired (listing of stockholders may be dispensed with by the city council if stock
has been sold to the general public);
C. Classification; Location: Specify the class or classes of license desired; the location, by street and number, of the
premises for which the license is sought and the name of the owner or owners of the premises where the business
is to be operated;
D. Child Support Information: Contain any child support information required by the state of Nevada.
E. Department Of Taxation: Contain proof of any licensing or certificate of good standing required by the Nevada
department of taxation.
F. Health Department: Contain proof of approval by the Nevada state health department with respect to any required
inspections.
G. Industrial Insurance: Contain an affidavit verifying compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes chapters 616A through
617 pertaining to industrial insurance.
H. City Departments: Except for a caterer's liquor license, contain verification by the city building department, fire
marshal and planning department that the licensee's fixed place of business has met all applicable city code
requirements.
I. Additional Information As Requested: Be supplemented by such additional information or documents as the city
council shall request from the applicant at any time, it being the duty of the applicant to supply all such information
and documents;
J. Fee: Be accompanied by the quarterly license fee required for each class of license for which application is made,
which license deposit shall be nonrefundable;
K. Signature And Verification: Be signed and verified by all persons who shall conduct or have any interest in the
business activities for which a liquor license is required;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 337/640
L. Corporations Or Organizations: In the case of corporations, clubs or organizations with members, the application
shall be verified by its president or secretary or the person who shall actively manage or conduct the business or
activity for which a liquor license is required, if written authority from the corporation to make such application is
filed with the city clerk with the application;
M. Acceptance Of Terms By Applicant: Contain a statement that if such application is approved and a license issued, it
will be accepted by the applicant subject to the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter, and such other
rules and regulations as may at any time hereafter be adopted or enacted by resolution or ordinance by the city
council, and shall include a consent to and an acknowledgment of the power and authority of the chief of police, or
any other authorized representative of the city, to enter the premises licensed and the principal office of any
corporation, at any time during business hours for the purpose of examining the premises, or the books of account
of said business, or the books and records of any corporate licensee to ascertain the truth or veracity of the
statements made on the application and to determine if the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter have
been and are being complied with;
N. Investigation: All liquor license applications shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation. The chief of
police shall cause an investigation to be made of the moral character and business responsibility of the person or
persons applying for a license, and of all persons who will be interested in the business for which a liquor license is
required, and in the case of a corporation, its officers, directors, stockholders and the person or persons who shall
have the management of the business for which or in connection with which the license is desired, together with an
investigation of the location of the proposed place of business, and of such other matters as may be necessary to
the protection of the public good, welfare, safety, health and morals of the inhabitants of the city. Upon completion
of the investigation, the chief of police shall render a report of the investigation to the city council. (Ord. 777, 9-10-
2013)
4-5-5: REFERRAL BY POLICE CHIEF TO CITY COUNCIL:
The police chief or the police chief's designee shall present each application to the city council at its first regular or
special meeting after the filing of the application, completion of the investigation and submission of all other data as
required in section 4-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-6: CHARACTER AND BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Required: No liquor license, except as otherwise provided in subsection 4-5-3D of this chapter, shall be issued to
any person unless such person has an established place of business, or in the case of a special events license, a
specific location under the control of such person for the period of the license, within a zone or area permitting such
type of business, activity or license under this and all other ordinances of the city and unless each applicant is a
person of good moral character and satisfactory business responsibility. In the event the applicant shall be a
corporation or association, the officers, directors, managing agent and all persons who shall be active in the
conduct of the business for which a liquor license is required all must be persons of good moral character and
satisfactory business responsibility.
B. Felony Conviction: No liquor license shall be issued hereunder to any person who has within ten (10) years from the
date of the application been convicted of a felony either in this state or in any other state of the United States, or of
any crime in any other state which is considered a felony under the laws of the state; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to any person who has been so convicted, but whose rights of citizenship have been
restored or judgment of infamy has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. In the case of any such
conviction occurring after the license has been issued and received, the license may immediately be revoked, if
such convicted felon be an individual licensee, and, if not, the partnership, corporation or association with which he
is connected shall immediately discharge him, upon request of the city council, or their license may be revoked.
C. Employee Felony Conviction: No person shall work or be employed in or in connection with the liquor business of a
licensee hereunder who has been, or during employment is convicted of a felony unless the chief of police
approves such employment. If the licensee fails to discharge such employee upon request by the chief of police, its
license may be revoked. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 338/640
4-5-7: LIQUOR SALE LOCATION:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or association to sell, serve, give
away or distribute liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any existing schoolhouse wherein public school is
conducted, as measured from the point of distribution to the nearest exterior wall of a schoolhouse, provided, the
foregoing prohibition shall not apply in the event a schoolhouse is subsequently placed within one hundred feet
(100') of an existing business that sells, serves, gives away or distributes liquor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or association to sell, serve, give away, or otherwise distribute any liquor outside
the building described in the application of any drive-in business; provided, however, the city council may, for good
cause shown, authorize the sale, service or other lawful distribution of liquor in specified enclosed or defined areas
under the supervision, management and operation of a licensee; further provided, that the foregoing prohibition
shall not apply to liquor served adjacent to a building if permitted by an outdoor dining permit.
C. No application shall be granted or license issued authorizing or permitting the sale, service or distribution of any
liquor within the prohibited areas specified in this section. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-8: STATUS OF FRATERNAL, SOCIAL AND CIVIC CLUBS:
The city council shall be the sole judge as to whether or not any person, firm, company, association, partnership or
corporation applying for a license as a fraternal, social or civic club, is a bona fide fraternal, social or civic club such as
to qualify for a license under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-9: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION BY CITY COUNCIL:
A. Authority: Except for temporary and special events liquor licenses, no liquor license shall be valid unless and until it
is approved by the city council. The council may deny any application that fails to comply with the requirements of
this chapter or that the city council determines is reasonably likely to result in a violation of this chapter if issued
based upon such factors as the responsibility of the applicant in light of previous violations.
B. Number Limited: The city council shall, by resolution, have the right to limit the number of licenses which may be
issued based upon population as determined by any formula deemed sufficient by the city council, and to determine
where and under what conditions liquor may be sold, served, given away or distributed within the city.
C. Probationary Period For New Licenses: Any new license issued to a licensee shall be subject to an initial
probationary period of six (6) months, during which time the license may be immediately terminated or suspended
by the chief of police for any violation of this chapter or the certificate of license; provided, in the event of a
termination or suspension by the chief of police, the licensee shall have an immediate right to appeal the decision of
the chief of police to the city manager; further provided, the licensee shall have an additional right to appeal the
decision of the city manager to the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting for which notice may be
given in accordance with the Nevada open meeting law. The licensee must provide written notice to the city clerk
within ten (10) days of any adverse decision of the licensee's intent to appeal the decision, after which time all
appeal rights shall be deemed waived if such notice is not so given. The foregoing probationary period and the
requirements, terms and conditions applicable thereto shall be in addition to and not in lieu of all other applicable
requirements in this chapter.
D. Fees: All licensee fees paid pursuant to this chapter are nonrefundable, regardless of what action is taken by the
city, to include the denial of an application for a liquor license by the city council. If the city council approves an
application for a liquor license, the city council shall authorize the city clerk to issue such license upon full payment
in advance of all license fees then required by this chapter. The license shall not be effective until issued and
delivered to the applicant by the city.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 339/640
E. Majority Vote Required: It shall require a majority vote of all the members of the city council present at the meeting
to approve or deny an application for a liquor license. Such action by the city council on any application shall be
final.
F. Agreement To Comply: Any liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute and be conclusive
evidence of the applicant's agreement to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and to comply with the terms,
conditions, representations and agreements set out in the application for a liquor license and any license certificate
issued to the applicant hereunder.
G. Compliance With Federal And State Law: Any liquor license issued by the city must, in order to be valid, be at all
times in compliance with all applicable requirements of federal and state law, together with any amendments
thereto, including, without limitation, chapter 369 of the Nevada Revised Statutes. In the event of a conflict between
the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of any applicable federal or state law, the requirements of the
applicable federal or state law shall prevail. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-10: ISSUANCE AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
A. Certificate Of License: Upon the granting of any application pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall receive a
liquor license certificate, issued by the city clerk, pursuant and subject to the provisions of this chapter, and any
terms, conditions or restrictions contained in the license certificate itself. The license certificate shall set forth,
among other things, the following:
1. The name of all persons to whom it is issued. If the license is issued under a fictitious name, the license shall set
forth, in addition to the fictitious name, the name or names of each of the persons conducting the business under
the fictitious name. If it is issued to a corporation, the license shall set forth, in addition to the name of the
corporation.
2. The location, by street and number, of the premises for which the license is issued;
3. The date of commencement, which will be the date of issuance and date of termination which will be the last day
of the quarter year in which it was granted, subject to revocation, cancellation, suspension, restriction and
conditioning, pursuant to this chapter;
4. The particular class of liquor license and of liquors that the licensee is authorized to sell.
B. Term: The license shall be for one quarter.
C. Renewal: The city clerk shall issue a renewal notice prior to the expiration of the liquor license, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. The failure of the city clerk to notify any licensee of the requirement to file a renewal
application or to pay the license fee shall not relieve the licensee of those or any other requirements, and the actual
receipt of a renewal notice is not a condition precedent to the need to apply for or the issuance of a renewal.
Subject to all provisions of this chapter, if at the end of a quarter the licensee holds a valid, unexpired license which
has not been revoked, suspended, restricted, conditioned or terminated, such license shall automatically renew for
the next quarter without application to the city council upon timely payment of the required license fees and
penalties, if any, within the time specified in this chapter; provided, no license shall automatically renew if the
licensee is not in compliance with all federal, state and local requirements, including all city requirements. Such
renewal license, if renewed automatically pursuant to the preceding sentence, shall be on the same terms and
conditions as the original license and subject to all provisions of this chapter as if granted after application to the
city council.
D. Nonrenewal Due To Noncompliance: A license that is not renewed because it does not comply with federal, state or
local requirements, to include any requirement contained in this chapter or the license certificate, or because of
nonpayment of any required fees, shall thereupon be automatically revoked.
E. Acceptance Of Conditions: Any licensee receiving a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to have accepted the same with all the duties, obligations, restrictions, limitations and other provisions of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 340/640
this chapter as part and parcel of said license, and subject to the faithful compliance with the promises, agreements
and representations set forth in the application for such license, without other or further notice, and without each or
any of such provisions being specifically incorporated in the license granted.
F. Temporary License: In special or unusual circumstances and in order to prevent undue hardship, the city clerk, with
approval of the chief of police, may, upon application therefor, issue a "temporary license" pending the processing
of a regular liquor license; provided, however, that at the time any such temporary license is issued by the city clerk,
a full and complete application for a regular liquor license shall be on file with the city clerk; further provided, a
temporary license shall only be issued if the licensee or any business association with respect to which the licensee
is an owner, partner, member, officer, director or shareholder has not had a liquor license revoked within five (5)
calendar days of the date of application for the temporary license; and, further provided, all required fees, to include
delinquent fees, shall have been paid. Such license shall be valid for thirty (30) days or until approval or denial of
the final application by the city council for a regular liquor license, whichever occurs first. At least one quarterly
license fee pursuant to section 4-5-12 of this chapter must be paid at the time of issuance of the temporary license.
G. Elko City Code Compliance: No liquor license may be issued or renewed pursuant to this chapter if the applicant,
licensee or licensed business is in violation of any provision of this code which impacts the licensed business or
operation thereof. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-11: POSTING OF LICENSE; LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Each license shall:
A. Be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it was issued.
B. Be nontransferable, except that upon prior written consent of the city council, the location of the premises for which
it was issued may be changed, provided there is no change in licenses.
C. Be authority for the person or persons specifically named as licensees to transact the business or activity licensed
thereunder. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-12: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
A. Payment Of Fees; Refunds: All fees may be paid up to one year in advance; but in no event shall a fee be for less
than a quarter. No refunds of any portion of a license fee paid in advance shall be made nor shall any portion of a
fee paid in advance be transferable.
B. Sales Of Soft Drinks: A valid license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to sell soft drinks in connection with
the business for which the license is issued.
C. Amount Set By Resolution: The schedule of fees to be paid for licenses shall be set by resolution of the city council.
D. When Payable: License fees shall be due and payable January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year for
each following quarter. Any license fee which has not been paid on or before the fifth day of the month in which it
becomes due shall be increased by a penalty of ten percent (10%), which shall be added to the fee and collected
with the fee prior to the issuance of any license hereunder. When any license fee is paid by mail, the postmarked
date on the envelope shall be presumed to be the date on which the license fee was paid. If the license fee and
penalty have not been paid on or before the fifteenth day of the month in which the license fee becomes due, any
right to renew a license without application to the city council shall be forfeited and shall forthwith terminate at the
time of the close of the city office on the fifteenth day of such month, and at such time the liquor license for the
business to which the delinquent license fee relates shall be automatically revoked and the business shall
immediately cease all liquor sales. This provision shall not be construed to permit the operating of any business to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 341/640
which this chapter applies for any length of time whatever without having in full force and effect a proper license
issued by the city with all fees therefor fully paid, nor shall it be construed to extend the expiration date of any
license, nor to prevent the city council from taking any action to suspend, restrict, condition or terminate the license
for any reason permitted under this chapter, including nonpayment of fees. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-13: CITY COUNCIL MAY SUSPEND, RESTRICT, TERMINATE OR CONDITION ANY LICENSE;
GROUNDS; PROCEDURE:
A. Authority Of City Council: The city council may, upon its own motion, and shall, upon the verified complaint in writing
of any person, investigate the action of any licensee under this chapter and shall have power to suspend for such a
period of time as they deem advisable or terminate a license or place such restrictions and conditions upon a
license as they shall deem necessary or advisable, for any one of the following acts or omissions:
1. The failure to make timely payment of license fees and penalties, or either of them; provided, however, no action
by the city council shall be necessary in the event of nonpayment of license fees and penalties on or before the
fifteenth day of the month in which they came due as provided in this chapter; or
2. The misrepresentation of any material fact by the applicant in obtaining a license under this chapter; or
3. If any one of the licensees named in a license violates or causes or permits to be violated any of the provisions of
this chapter; or
4. If any one of the licensees named in a liquor license violates or causes or permits to be violated any provision in
this code which adversely affects the licensee's fitness to fulfill the requirements of the liquor license or this
chapter; or
5. If any manager, bartender, agent, servant, officer or employee of a licensee hereunder violates or causes or
permits to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter, while acting in any way in connection with the
licensee's business; or
6. If any one of the licensees named in a license commits any act which would be sufficient ground for the denial of
an application by such licensee for a license under this chapter; or
7. If any one of the licensees named in a license or any manager, agent, bartender, servant, officer or employee of
a licensee refuses to permit the chief of police, or any police officer, or any other duly authorized representative of
the city, to visit and reasonably inspect every part and portion of the licensee's premises, or refuses or fails to
furnish the chief of police, or any police officer or officer of the city, upon request with all facts and information
within his knowledge concerning any offense committed in or about the premises and the parties involved and the
witnesses thereto; or
8. If any one of the licensees named in a license violates any of the agreements, conditions or terms contained in
the application for a license, this chapter or the license issued pursuant hereto; or
9. If any one of the licensees named in a license violates or causes or permits to be violated any ordinance of the
city or any law of the state or of the United States Of America regulating the sale, serving or dispensing of liquors
or pertaining to the operation of the licensed business; or
10. If the licensee or any agent or employee thereof makes, causes or permits a sale or sales of any kind of liquor
other than that authorized by the class of license the licensee holds.
B. Citation To Appear: Except in cases of the automatic cancellation or revocation of a license as in this chapter
provided, upon the filing with the city council of a verified complaint charging a licensee with the commission, within
one year prior to the date of filing the complaint, of any act or omission which is cause for cancellation, suspension,
revocation, restriction or conditioning of a license, the city council forthwith shall issue a citation directing the
licensee, within twenty (20) days after service thereof upon the licensee, to appear by filing with the city council the
licensee's verified answer to the complaint showing cause, if any the licensee has, why his license should not be
terminated, suspended, restricted, or conditions placed thereon. Service of the citation with a copy of the complaint
shall be made upon the licensee in one of the following manners:
1. By personal service upon any one or more of the persons named in the license as a licensee, service upon one
licensee being deemed service upon and notice to all licensees named in the license, service to be made by the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 342/640
chief of police or any police officer of the city or by the county sheriff, or his deputy, or by any citizen of the United
States over twenty one (21) years of age; or
2. By mailing by depositing in the United States mail a copy of the citation with a copy of the complaint enclosed in
a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully prepaid, addressed to the licensee at the latest address of record in
the city clerk's office. Service shall be deemed complete upon the date of mailing. Without excluding other ways
of proof, proof of service by mailing and the date thereof may be made by an affidavit of mailing or by proof of
mailing by registered mail or certified mail.
3. In case a corporation is a licensee, then such service above specified may be upon the president, or other head
of the corporation, or the secretary, or managing agent, or any other officer thereof. In case of service by mailing,
it may be addressed to the corporation or to any of the said officers, or managing agent thereof at the latest
address of record in the city clerk's office.
Failure of the licensee to answer within the time specified shall be deemed an admission by the licensee of the
commission of the act or acts or omissions charged in the complaint and a waiver of all defenses the licensee
may have to such charges. Upon such failure to answer, the city council shall revoke the license and shall give
notice of such revocation by mailing a copy thereof, by United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage
thereon fully prepaid, addressed to the licensee at the latest address of record in the office of the city clerk.
C. Hearing: Upon the filing of an answer by the licensee, the city council shall fix the time and place for a hearing and
give the licensee and the complainant not less than two (2) days' notice thereof. The notice may be served by
depositing in the United States mail a copy of the notice enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully
prepaid, addressed to the licensee and to the complainant, respectively, at their latest address of record in the office
of the city clerk. With the notice to the complainant, there shall be attached to or enclosed a copy of the answer. If
either party has appeared by an attorney, notice shall be given to the attorney instead of to the party. In the event
the city, the city council, the chief of police, the city attorney or any other city officer or representative acting by or on
behalf of the city is the complainant, the notices to and service of answer upon the complainant herein called for
shall be dispensed with.
D. Conduct Of Hearing; Decision: At the hearing, the complainant and the licensee may appear in person or by
attorney, or both, and present relevant evidence and witnesses. After the hearing is concluded and the matter
submitted, the city council shall, at that meeting or at its next regularly scheduled meeting after such submission,
render its decision, which must be made by the vote of a majority of the members present at the meeting:
1. Revoke or cancel the license;
2. Suspend the license for such a period of time as the city council deems advisable;
3. Place such restrictions upon the license, the licensee and/or the licensee's place of business as the city council
deems advisable;
4. Make the license and the continued force and effect thereof conditioned upon such terms and conditions as the
city council shall deem advisable.
If in the opinion of a majority of all the members elected as council members, the charges set forth in the
complaint have not been established or proved, they shall dismiss the complaint.
E. Change In Time Restrictions: The city council, may, upon stipulation of the complainant and the licensee, shorten or
extend the times herein set in connection with notices, pleadings and hearings. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-14: SUMMARY SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; GROUNDS; PROCEDURE:
A. Summary Suspension By Police Chief: The police chief may summarily suspend any liquor license if the police chief
determines that such suspension is:
1. Reasonably necessary to prevent imminent harm to persons or property due to one or more violations of this
chapter by the licensee, including the violation of one or more conditions or restrictions placed in a license
certificate; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 343/640
2. Reasonably necessary to prevent the continuation of flagrant and intentional violations of this chapter upon the
licensed premises by the licensee or the licensee's managers, agents and/or employees, including the violation of
one or more conditions or restrictions placed in a license certificate.
B. Duration: A summary suspension by the police chief shall be for only such period as is reasonably necessary to
prevent imminent harm to persons or property and in no case shall exceed twelve (12) hours in duration.
C. Notice: Upon summary suspension by the police chief, the police chief or the police chief's designee shall promptly
provide the licensee or, if the licensee is not available, the licensee's manager, with written notice setting forth the
appeal rights provided herein, together with contact information for the mayor or mayor pro tem, which contact
information shall include telephone numbers and electronic mail addresses for the mayor or mayor pro tem.
D. Appeal: Any licensee aggrieved by a summary suspension by the police chief shall have the right to immediately
appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor or the mayor pro tem, which appeal may be communicated to
the mayor or the mayor pro tem in writing, verbally, by electronic mail or by telephone. The mayor or mayor pro tem,
upon receiving actual knowledge of the appeal from the licensee and the grounds therefor may affirm, modify or
reverse the decision of the police chief.
E. Liquor Sales Prohibited: During any period of suspension pursuant to this paragraph, the licensee shall cease all
liquor sales otherwise permitted by the liquor license.
F. Summary Suspension By City Council: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city council may
suspend summarily any license issued pursuant to this chapter in cases which are determined to be of an
aggravated or flagrant violation of this chapter, or of the laws of the state relating to liquors; provided, however, that
the city council shall not summarily suspend any license without first finding that such action is immediately
necessary for the protection of public health, welfare, safety and/or morals of the public. Such order of suspension
shall remain effective until further order of the city council. In the event of a suspension by the city council without
prior notice, every licensee shall promptly be given notice in writing of the reason or reasons for such suspension,
which shall include a clear and concise description of the acts or omissions upon which the suspension was based.
The licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council for
which an agenda has not yet been noticed pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 241.020, at which hearing the
licensee may appear in person, or be represented by an attorney, or both, and present a reasonable number of
witnesses and other evidence to show cause, if any there be, why the license should not be revoked, terminated,
suspended or conditioned. Notices shall be served and given, the answer filed, and the hearing conducted in the
manner and under the procedures provided in section 4-5-13 of this chapter. The licensee may waive the time
specified for a hearing and such hearing may be held at any time agreed upon by the licensee and the city council.
(Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-15: REINSTATEMENT OF LICENSES:
Nothing herein shall prevent a person whose license has been previously terminated or suspended from applying for a
reinstatement of the license; provided, the foregoing application for reinstatement shall not be submitted within six (6)
months of the date the previous license was terminated or suspended. If a licensee has shown proper cause, the city
council may, upon a unanimous vote, reinstate any license which has been previously terminated or suspended and
may at such time also remove, change or modify all or any restrictions or conditions which have been set pursuant to
this chapter, or may at such time impose any new restrictions or conditions upon the license it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-16: REVOCATION OF LICENSE THROUGH NONUSE AND CONTINUATION OF LICENSE
FOLLOWING DEATH OF LICENSEE:
A. Revocation Through Nonuse: In the event a holder of a license, other than one prevented or prohibited from
operating by city council action, shall discontinue business for more than thirty (30) days without the specific
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 344/640
approval of the city council, such license shall be revoked automatically, without action of the city council on the day
following said thirty (30) day period.
B. Continuation Following Death Of Licensee: In the event of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of the
estate of the deceased licensee may continue to operate the business under the same license; provided, the
personal representative must promptly, but in no case more than thirty (30) days after the death of the licensee,
notify the city of the death of the licensee, apply for a new license, and thereafter pay all fees when due and
otherwise comply with all requirements of this chapter. The continuation of a liquor license following the death of a
licensee pursuant to this chapter shall in no event be for a period in excess of three (3) months. (Ord. 777, 9-10-
2013)
4-5-17: LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
At all times while any premises licensed hereunder is open for business, the interior lighting therein shall be sufficient
to make easily discernible upon immediately entering the main entrance the appearance and conduct of all persons
and patrons in that portion of the premises where liquor is sold, served, delivered or consumed. In no event shall the
intensity of such interior lighting be less than one foot (1') candlepower light when measured at a point thirty inches
(30") from the floor wherever persons and patrons are sitting or standing within the premises. This section shall apply
in all cases except in licensed establishments where floorshows are permitted under city ordinance. In such cases, the
floor showroom lights may be dimmed only during the floorshow, and at the conclusion of each floorshow the lighting
must then immediately be restored to the minimum standards of light intensity hereinbefore provided. (Ord. 777, 9-10-
2013)
4-5-18: PROPERTY AND ADJACENT AREA CLEANUP:
All license holders shall remove all bottles, cans, trash, broken glass, debris, and bodily fluids from adjoining city
sidewalks, alleyways and rights of way upon closing or by seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., whichever is earlier, on each day
licensee is open. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-19: SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any bartender, manager, agent, or any other person employed by
any licensee to sell, serve, give away, furnish or dispense any kind of liquor to any minor. For the purpose of this
section, a person shall be deemed to be employed by a licensee if he or she purports to have the authority to make
sales, whether actually receiving a wage or not.
B. Defense: In any prosecution or proceeding for the suspension or revocation of any license based upon a violation of
subsection A of this section, proof that the defendant licensee or his or her agent or employee, demanded and was
shown, immediately prior to furnishing any liquor to a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, bona fide
documentary evidence of majority and identity of such person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal
government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a
registered certificate issued under the federal selective service act, or an identification card issued to a member of
the armed forces, is a defense to the prosecution or proceeding for the suspension or revocation of any license.
C. Written Record: In any case where a licensee, or any person employed by a licensee, demands and is shown the
documentary evidence of majority and identity specified in subsection B of this section, the licensee shall, at the
time of being shown the documentary evidence, make a written record of at least the following information
appearing on the identification document shown, which record shall be retained and reserved by the licensee for
one year thereafter: the type of card or evidence shown; the government or subdivision or agency thereof issuing
the evidence; the serial or identification number of the document; and the person's full name, age or birth date and
description as it appears on the identification card. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-20: EMPLOYMENT OF CERTAIN MINORS PROHIBITED AND CERTAIN MINORS PERMITTED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 345/640
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ any minor to sell or handle any liquor of any kind, or to permit any minor
to handle such liquor in his or her place of business in any way, except that a person who has attained the age of
sixteen (16) years but not yet eighteen (18) years, may be employed in a retail food store for the sale or disposition of
liquor if he or she is supervised by a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or over, is an owner or employee of the
business which sells or disposes of the liquor, and is actually present at the time the liquor is disposed of or sold,
provided the liquor is in a sealed or corked container or receptacle; further provided, however, that grocery store,
shopping center, and supermarket licensees affording "box boy" or other delivery service from the place of sale to the
purchaser's delivery truck or other means of transporting the liquor, shall be responsible under the foregoing prohibition
only until the sale is completed. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibitions, minors may carry or transport liquors to the
purchaser's delivery truck or other means of transporting the liquor, in which event such purchaser shall be deemed to
have assumed full and complete ownership of and responsibility for such liquor at the time of delivery to the purchaser.
(Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-21: SALE OR FURNISHING OF LIQUOR TO MINOR, AIDING MINOR TO PURCHASE OR
PROCURE LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
A. Every person who knowingly:
1. Sells, gives or otherwise furnishes liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years; or
2. Leaves or deposits any liquor in any place with the intent that the same shall be procured by any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years; or
3. Furnishes, gives or causes to be given any money or thing of value to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years with the knowledge that the money or thing of value is to be used by the person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to purchase or procure any liquor;
is guilty of a violation of this code.
B. Subsection A1 of this section does not apply to a parent, guardian or physician of the person under the age of
twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-22: FALSE IDENTIFICATION PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age, to counterfeit, forge, alter, erase or obliterate any card, writing,
paper or document which bears the age of the holder or purported holder thereof, with the intention that such card,
writing, paper or document should be used by a minor for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage or liquor,
or to sell, lend or give away any such card, writing, paper or document to a minor which could be used by a minor
for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage or liquor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor to use or attempt to use or offer any counterfeit, forged, erased or obliterated card,
writing, paper or document of the kind mentioned in subsection A of this section, or to verbally falsely represent his
or her age, or to use or attempt to use any other person's identification documents, for the purpose of obtaining any
alcoholic beverage or liquor from any person within the city. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-23: PURCHASE BY MINOR PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, obtain or receive in any manner within the city any liquor or alcoholic
beverage of any kind from any person; except that at the direction and in the company of a parent or guardian, a minor
may consume an alcoholic beverage in the residence of such parent or guardian; further, except that a minor may
consume an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of following the direction of a licensed medical practitioner; or except
that a minor may consume an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of participation in legitimate religious activities. (Ord.
777, 9-10-2013)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 346/640
4-5-24: POSSESSION BY MINOR PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his or her custody or possession within the city any alcoholic beverage or
liquor of any type or kind, except any sealed alcoholic beverage in the regular course of his or her legitimate
employment. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-25: CONSUMPTION BY MINOR PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to consume any kind of alcoholic beverage or liquor in or about the premises of any
licensed establishment of the city or elsewhere within the city.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor to be in possession of any kind of alcoholic beverage or liquor through
consumption anywhere in the city; except that at the direction and in the company of a parent or guardian, a minor
may consume an alcoholic beverage in the residence of the parent or guardian; except that minor may consume an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of following the direction of a licensed medical practitioner; or except that a
minor may consume an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of participation in legitimate religious activities.
Possession by consumption shall consist solely of the assimilation of alcohol in the minor's body, and such crime
shall not require proof of possession or control prior to consumption or proof of the act of swallowing an alcoholic
beverage or liquor.
C. It shall be unlawful for any minor who has consumed any kind of alcoholic beverage or liquor at the direction and in
the company of a parent or guardian in the home, to leave the home and go out into the city while alcohol is still
present in the minor's body. Such a minor shall be guilty of possession through consumption as provided for in
subsection B of this section.
D. For purposes of this section, any peace officer may detain any minor whom the officer encounters under
circumstances which reasonably indicate that the minor has committed or is committing one of the crimes
enumerated in subsections A through C of this section. At any time after this detention, the minor so detained shall
be arrested if probable cause for an arrest appears. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-26: LOITERING BY MINOR PROHIBITED:
A. No minor shall spend time in or remain in the bar area of the premises of any licensee hereunder where liquors of
any kind are sold or served.
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, or the bartender, manager, agent or any other employee of any
licensee, to knowingly allow or permit any minor to remain in the bar area of the premises of the licensee where
liquor of any kind is sold or served.
C. Nothing in subsections A and B of this section shall apply to:
1. The areas, other than the bar and gaming areas, of the establishments wherein liquor of any kind is sold at a bar
in an establishment which operates and maintains dining tables or booths or lunch counters, or hotel or motel
accommodations, or other types of businesses separate from the bar; or
2. Any grocery store or drugstore where liquor of any kind is not sold by the drink for consumption on the premises.
(Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-27: INTOXICATION OF LICENSEE, EMPLOYEES, PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of this chapter, or any manager, bartender, servants, agents or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 347/640
other employees thereof, to be in an intoxicated condition in or about the licensee's business premises while
performing his or her duties in connection with the business. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-28: ESTABLISHMENT TO BE CLEAN AND ORDERLY; PRESENCE OF CERTAIN PERSONS
PROHIBITED:
A. Every licensee shall conduct and maintain his premises in a clean and orderly manner.
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, or any bartender, manager, agent, employee of such licensee or any
other person in charge of any saloon or bar, to knowingly allow or permit any of the following persons to remain on
the licensee's premises or to sell or give, or to permit to be sold or given any liquor to any of the following:
1. A person who is visibly intoxicated;
2. Any person having, carrying or exhibiting any knife, gun, pistol or other deadly weapon;
3. Any person whose conduct is tumultuous or offensive, or who is threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to
fight, or fighting on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensee's premises.
4. A person who provides liquor to another person who is visibly intoxicated.
C. A person is visibly intoxicated if it can reasonably be determined through direct observation that the person's mental
and physical faculties are impaired because of ingestion of liquor or drugs so as to diminish the person's ability to
think and act in a way in which an ordinary prudent person in full possession of his or her faculties and using
reasonable care, would think and act in like circumstances.
D. Signs of visible intoxication may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following clues which appear from
the circumstances, provided they occur during or following the ingestion of liquor or drugs:
1. Mood changes;
2. Slurring or mistakes in speech;
3. Irrational or nonsensical statements;
4. Raised speaking voice;
5. Clumsiness;
6. Fumbling with change;
7. Loss of balance or coordination;
8. Swaying or staggering;
9. Confusion;
10. Lack of ability to hear or respond;
11. Bumping into or knocking over furniture;
12. Falling down;
13. Dozing while sitting at a bar or table;
14. Heavy eyelids;
15. Glassy eyes;
16. Crude behavior;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 348/640
17. Vomiting;
18. Spilling drinks;
19. The inability to find one's mouth with drinking vessel;
20. Inappropriate sexual advances;
21. Aggression or belligerence; and/or
22. Inability to light a cigarette. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-29: CIVIL JUDGMENT NO BAR:
No civil judgment, or any act or suit by the city attorney, the city clerk or the violator shall bar or prevent a prosecution
for each and every violation of this chapter. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-30: PENALTIES:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-31: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 777, 9-10-
2013)
4-5-32: POSTING OF NOTICE REQUIRED:
Any licensee under the provisions of this chapter must post in a conspicuous place in the premises for which the
license is issued, the following notice to customers:
NOTICE TO CUSTOMERS
It is illegal for any bartender, manager, agent, employee or any other person in charge of a saloon or bar to
knowingly allow or permit a person who is intoxicated to remain on the premises or to give or sell or to permit to be sold
any liquor to a person who is intoxicated.
ELKO LIQUOR CONTROL CODE
(Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-33: SPECIAL EVENTS LIQUOR LICENSE OR SPECIAL EVENTS BEER AND WINE LIQUOR
LICENSE:
A. Application: Any person in charge of giving away, selling or serving liquor during a "special event" which is
scheduled to be held in the incorporated city limits, is open to the public and which is properly licensed and/or
permitted, may apply to the city clerk for a special events liquor license or a special events beer and wine liquor
license.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 349/640
B. Procedures: The applicant for a special events liquor license or a special events beer and wine liquor license shall
follow the procedures set forth in section 4-5-4 of this chapter with regard to the preparing and filing of an
application for such license.
C. Name Of Responsible Person: The applicant shall designate a person responsible for serving alcohol during the
event and shall provide the city clerk with that person's name, address and telephone number.
D. Department Of Taxation: Contain proof of any licensing or certificate of good standing required by the Nevada
department of taxation.
E. Health Department: Contain proof of approval by the Nevada state health department with respect to any required
inspections.
F. City Departments: Contain verification by the fire marshal and police department that the licensee's fixed place of
business has met all applicable city code requirements.
G. Fee: The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee for the period for which the special events
liquor license or special events beer and wine liquor license is sought.
H. Submission; Approval: The application shall be submitted to the city clerk or the deputy clerk and must be approved
by the chief of police or assistant chief of police and either the city manager or assistant city manager or the city
clerk or deputy clerk prior to issuance of the license by the city clerk or the city clerk's designee.
I. Caterer's Liquor License Substitution: A caterer's liquor license shall not substitute for a special events liquor license
or special events beer and wine liquor license.
J. Restrictions And Conditions: The city may place appropriate restrictions or conditions on a special event liquor
license or a special event beer and wine liquor license to the extent necessary for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare.
K. Appeal: If the special events liquor license or special events beer and wine liquor license application is rejected, or if
the applicant disagrees with the restrictions or conditions placed on the license, the applicant shall have the right of
appeal to the city council within twenty (20) days thereof. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
4-5-34: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN DESIGNATED
AREAS OF CITY PARKS:
A. Authority To Install Signs Prohibiting Consumption Or Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages: The city manager shall
cause to be placed and maintained signs and/or control devices in areas of the city park system as approved by the
city council to prohibit the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages.
B. Unlawful Consumption Or Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages: It is unlawful for any person to consume or have in
possession any alcoholic beverage in any area of the city park system that has been designated by approved signs
or control devices prohibiting the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 777, 9-10-2013)
Chapter 6
TRANSIENT LODGING TAX
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 350/640
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the following words when used herein shall
have the following meanings:
FOLIO: Document that summarizes or itemizes guest charges.
LESSEE: Any person renting rooms, spaces or other accommodations from a licensee.
LICENSEE: Any person operating or conducting a transient lodging rental business.
RECREATION FACILITY OR RECREATION FACILITIES: A place, structure, area or other facility used for community
recreation, such as playgrounds, playing fields or courts, beaches, lakes, rivers, swimming pools, dams constructed
across streams or rivers for the creation of swimming pools and recreational reservoirs, gymnasiums, auditoriums,
camps, parks, ski facilities, golf courses, natural reservoirs, recreation grounds, fairgrounds, exposition buildings,
convention halls, field houses, amusement halls and recreation centers.
RENTAL BUSINESS: A. Rent: The act of permitting a person to use or occupy any portion of a transient lodging rental
business in exchange for compensation, the act of using or occupying any portion of a transient lodging rental business
in exchange for compensation, or the compensation paid for such use or occupancy. The terms "rent" and "lease" shall
have the same meaning in this chapter.
B. Transient Lodging: A form of lodging in which a room, space or other accommodation is rented to a person for a
period of less than twenty eight (28) consecutive calendar days for use by the same tenant, to include any room,
space or other accommodation that is rented to the same tenant in successive terms, the total of which
consecutive terms is less than twenty eight (28) consecutive calendar days, but not to include any room, space or
other accommodation that is rented to a tenant who is a natural person and who signs, prior to the
commencement of the tenancy, a Transient Occupancy Tax 28-Day Exemption Form in the manner required by
this chapter.
C. Transient Lodging Rental Business: Any business having one or more rooms, spaces or other accommodations
that provides transient lodging to tenants in exchange for compensation. In the event a business rents a portion
of its rooms, spaces or other accommodations for terms of less than twenty eight (28) days and another portion
of its rooms, spaces or other accommodations for terms of twenty eight (28) days or more, only those rooms,
spaces or other accommodations rented for terms of less than twenty eight (28) days shall constitute a "transient
lodging rental business".
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: When used in this chapter, the Elko City Clerk.
TAX ON TRANSIENT LODGING: A tax imposed herein on the rental of transient lodging by the authority of the laws of
Nevada and especially Nevada Revised Statutes sections 268.095 and 268.096, and all amendments thereto.
TENANT: The person actually occupying a room, space or other accommodation in a transient lodging rental business,
regardless of the method or means of payment. (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004; amd. Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
4-6-2: TAX ON TRANSIENT LODGING:
There is hereby fixed and imposed on every licensee operating a transient lodging rental business within the City a
Transient Lodging Tax in the total amount of fourteen percent (14%) to be collected as follows:
Fourteen percent (14%) of the gross income actually received, excluding the Transient Lodging Tax, by each licensee
in exchange for transient lodging rentals, shall be paid as a tax on transient lodging. Complimentary transient lodging
(transient lodging which is provided at no cost to the occupant) is nontaxable. To be considered complimentary
transient lodging, the transient lodging must be provided on an individual basis and not as part of any established
package, advertised or otherwise, which includes other products or services. (Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
4-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 351/640
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or for another person, to commence or to carry on any transient
lodging rental business without first having procured a license from the Tax Administrator so to do; provided, that a
licensee may secure the license within ten (10) days of commencement of business and the license shall be issued
as of the date of the commencement of business.
B. The Tax Administrator shall, upon receipt of an application for a license, issue a license to such applicant who shall
keep the same posted in his place of business in a conspicuous place. (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004)
4-6-4: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
There shall be, and hereby is, exempted from the tax on transient lodging, each rental by any person who rents
transient lodging if:
A. The transient lodging is directly reserved and paid for by a Federal, State or local governmental entity, to include a
school district; provided, a Governmental Agency Exemption Claim Form must be completed and retained in
accordance with the retention standards set forth in subsection 4-6-11B of this chapter; or
B. The tenant signs, prior to occupancy, a contract, lease, or other written agreement, or signs a Transient Occupancy
Tax 28 Day Exemption Form, pursuant to which the tenant promises to stay at the subject transient lodging facility
for a period of at least twenty eight (28) days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the occupant does not stay at the
transient lodging facility for at least twenty eight (28) days, the operator shall pay to the City the Transient Lodging
Tax due for the period the room was occupied. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no rental shall be
deemed to have been made for a period of twenty eight (28) days or more unless the room or rooms rented to the
tenant are continuously occupied by the tenant for twenty eight (28) continuous calendar days without interruption.
(Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
4-6-5: TRANSIENT LODGING TAX TO BE COLLECTED FROM LESSEE:
Each licensee is, and shall be, required to add the amount of the Transient Lodging Tax onto the amount of the
transient lodging rentals due from each lessee. The amount of the tax shall be displayed separately from the price of
the transient lodging rent on the registration card or other record of the licensee. (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004)
4-6-6: DISPLAY OF NOTICE:
Each licensee shall prominently display in each room, space or other accommodation rented or at the option of the
licensee, in the lobby at or in the immediate vicinity of the registration desk, a sign reading substantially as follows:
NOTICE
This business is required by law to collect a fourteen percent (14%) transient lodging tax on any rental of transient
lodging of less than twenty eight (28) days.
The Management
(Ord. 794, 5-12-2015, eff. 7-1-2015)
4-6-7: LICENSES:
Licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the City Clerk. Such licenses may be issued by the City Clerk on
an annual calendar year basis; or on a semiannual calendar year basis, the first period being from January 1 through
June 30 of such year and the second period being from July 1 through December 31 of such year; or on a quarterly
basis, the first quarter commencing January 1 and ending March 31, the second quarter commencing April 1 and
ending June 30, the third quarter commencing July 1 and ending September 30 and the fourth quarter commencing
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 352/640
October 1 and ending December 31. All licenses issued shall be valid for the period of time specified in such license.
No licenses issued hereunder shall be transferable. There shall be no charge made to the licensee for any license
issued hereunder. (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004)
4-6-8: AUTHORITY TO COLLECT TAX:
The City Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to collect the proceeds of this Transient Lodging Tax, together with
any and all interest and penalties in connection therewith, and to enforce by all appropriate and lawful means the
provisions of this chapter, and to bring suit therefor as well as to proceed by any appropriate criminal action. The City
Clerk is also hereby authorized and empowered to collect information related to daily occupancy and average daily
rate; however, such information shall be deemed confidential pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 268.490
(records; confidentiality). (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004)
4-6-9: PAYMENT OF TAX, INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
Every licensee shall pay the Transient Lodging Tax to the City Clerk on or before the fifteenth day of the month when
such tax shall accrue and shall submit the payment with a completed form supplied by the City entitled "Operator's
Transient Lodging Tax Return". Payment of the Transient Lodging Tax shall become delinquent at five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on the fifteenth day of the month. All electronic payments must be transmitted and received by the City Clerk on or
before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the fifteenth day of the month. Notwithstanding the foregoing, mailed payments
postmarked on or before the tenth day of the month will not be assessed delinquent fees. (Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-
2018)
4-6-10: ALLOCATION AND USE OF TRANSIENT LODGING TAX FUNDS:
The Transient Lodging Tax in the total amount of fourteen percent (14%) of the gross income actually received,
excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient lodging rentals pursuant to section 4-6-2 of this chapter shall
be allocated and used by the City on the following percentages under the following categories. The Transient Lodging
Tax allocation shall be reviewed annually by the City Council:
A. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals for the Recreation Transient Lodging Tax Fund in the amount of six and one-eighth percent (61/8%)
shall be deposited in a special fund in the City Treasury to be known as or designated as the Recreation Fund.
B. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals for the Elko Convention and Visitors Authority Transient Lodging Tax Fund in the amount of two and
three-eighths percent (23/8%) shall be paid to the Elko Convention and Visitors Authority as collected on and after
July 1, 1998.
C. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals in the amount of one percent (1%), promotion of tourism Transient Lodging Tax, shall be paid as
follows:
1. Three-eighths (3/8) of all proceeds of the promotion of tourism Transient Lodging Tax must be paid to the
Department of Taxation for deposit with the State Treasurer for credit to the fund for the promotion of tourism.
2. Five-eighths (5/8) of all proceeds of the promotion of tourism Transient Lodging Tax must be deposited with the
Elko County Recreation Board created pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 244A.597, to be used to
advertise the resources of the County of Elko related to tourism, including available accommodations,
transportation, entertainment, natural resources and climate, and to promote special events related thereto.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 353/640
D. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals for the Western Folklife Center Transient Lodging Tax Fund in the amount of one-fourth of one
percent (0.25%) shall be paid to the Western Folklife Center Fund as collected on and after July 1, 1998.
E. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals for the Agricultural District 4 Transient Lodging Tax, in the amount of one-half of one percent (0.5%)
shall be paid to Agricultural District 4 as collected on and after July 1, 1998.
F. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals for the marketing/tourism promotion Transient Lodging Tax in the amount of one and three-fourths
percent (13/4%) shall be paid to the Elko Convention and Visitors Authority on the condition that it creates a
separate marketing and tourism promotion fund to account for all collections and expenditures made on and after
July 1, 2001.
G. All proceeds from the gross income actually received, excluding the Lodging Tax, by each licensee for transient
lodging rentals will first be applied to the Elko Regional Airport Debt Service Transient Lodging Tax Fund in the
amount of up to two percent (2%) and shall be paid to the Elko Regional Airport as collected on and after August 1,
2007. Any amounts in excess of the debt service requirement, as determined by the annual audit, shall be paid to
the Elko Convention and Visitors Authority on the condition that it creates a separate facility fund to account for all
collections and expenditures. No portion may be used for salaries or benefits.
H. All recipients of the Transient Lodging Tax shall render to the City an annual account showing in detail the use of all
Transient Lodging Tax received from the City. (Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
4-6-11: EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The Tax Administrator and his duly authorized agent are empowered to examine and audit the books, papers and
records of any licensee or person operating a transient lodging rental business and to make investigations in
connection therewith. Audits will cover a three (3) year period. The audit will be conducted at no expense to the
licensee.
A. Required Records: Each licensee is required to maintain daily records which support amounts reported on the
Operator's Transient Lodging Tax Returns. These daily records shall include, without limitation, the following
information:
1. Total rooms available and occupied.
2. Total daily gross room receipts.
3. Total amount of Transient Lodging Tax collected.
4. Number of rooms, spaces or other accommodations provided for no compensation.
5. Contract, lease, Transient Occupancy Tax 28-Day Exemption Forms or rental agreement.
6. Government Agency Exemption Claim Forms.
7. Any and all documentation used to complete the Operator's Transient Lodging Tax Return, to include all
documents that support the calculations shown on the return.
An acceptable record retention practice includes maintaining bound receipt books, guest folios, registration cards,
daily transaction reports, general ledgers, cash journals, register and/or computer printouts, computerized
records, and any other books and records deemed reasonably necessary to support all information supplied to
the City as required by this chapter. Licensees shall retain and provide all documents that support revenues and
exemptions reported to the City.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 354/640
B. Retention Of Records: Every licensee shall keep all records which must be maintained pursuant to this section for a
period of not less than four (4) years from the close of the accounting year to which the returns relate.
C. Availability Of Records: Upon written notification of a Transient Lodging Tax audit, the licensee shall provide the City
or City auditors with all records supporting the Transient Lodging Tax returns filed with the City of Elko during the
audit period. These records shall be made available to the City or City auditors at the transient lodging rental
business or the offices of the City of Elko within ten (10) business days of the date the notice is sent, unless other
arrangements are made with the City of Elko.
If the Transient Lodging Tax audit is conducted at the transient lodging rental business, the licensee shall provide
reasonable accommodations to the City auditors. The City auditors may be City employees or independent
contractors acting on the City's behalf.
Auditors may make copies of all original records reviewed in the course of conducting the audit. Auditors may
request copies of records which must be provided by the licensee either through copy, e-mail, CD or flash drive to
be retained as part of the audit work papers which substantiate the audit findings.
Failure of a licensee to retain or refusal of a licensee to furnish any such records required to be maintained
pursuant to this section may provide grounds for the assessment of a deficiency in the payment of the Transient
Lodging Tax for the period that is subject to the audit. The City may utilize any available data or other information to
calculate the correct Transient Lodging Tax for the period being audited.
D. Failure To Cooperate With A Transient Lodging Tax Audit: Upon determination by the City Clerk that a licensee is
failing to cooperate with an auditor conducting an audit of Transient Lodging Tax returns pursuant to this section,
the City Council may terminate, suspend or revoke the licensee's business license pursuant to section 4-1-14 of this
title. Failing to cooperate, as that term is used in this subsection, includes refusing to provide sufficient information
to the auditor in order to conduct the audit.
E. Notice Of Audit Determination: Following the completion of an audit pursuant to this section, the City will provide a
written determination of the audit results to the licensee. The foregoing notice may be served personally, by certified
mail, and/or e-mail.
F. Time Limitation: If the City Clerk assesses an additional amount for underpayment or nonpayment of Transient
Lodging Tax, the licensee has thirty (30) calendar days in which to pay the assessed amount and/or file a written
notice appeal of the findings with the City Clerk.
G. Appeals: Appeals of an assessment by the City Clerk pursuant to this subsection shall be placed on a City Council
agenda for consideration no later than sixty (60) days from the date the notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk.
The decision of the City Council to uphold the assessment, in whole or in part, shall be deemed a final decision for
purposes of judicial review. The licensee shall thereafter have thirty (30) calendar days in which to file a petition for
judicial review with the Fourth Judicial District Court in and for the County of Elko, State of Nevada.
Should the City Clerk determine that a credit for overpayment of a Transient Lodging Tax is due, the credit will be
refunded to the licensee within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the determination. (Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff.
7-1-2018)
4-6-12: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
If the Transient Lodging Tax is not paid on or before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the fifteenth day of the month in which it
becomes due, or if such day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the next
succeeding day not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, then the licensee shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of
the unpaid, due and delinquent Transient Lodging Tax, and the licensee shall also pay the costs of collection of the tax,
penalty, court costs and attorney fees. In addition, the licensee shall pay interest on the amount due at the rate of 1.5
percent per month from the date on which the tax became due until the date of payment. If payment of the Transient
Lodging Tax is not received within sixty (60) calendar days following the fifteenth day of the month when due, the City
may thereafter place a lien on the property upon which the transient lodging rental business is located in the manner
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 355/640
set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 268.095, as amended. If payment of the Transient Lodging Tax is not received
within seventy (70) calendar days following the fifteenth day of the month when due, the City may terminate, suspend
or revoke the transient lodging rental business's business license in the manner outlined in section 4-1-14 of this title.
(Ord. 832, 6-26-2018)
4-6-13: USES AND PURPOSES OF TRANSIENT LODGING TAX PROCEEDS:
The City Council shall use the proceeds of the Transient Lodging Tax provided by this chapter for the following use,
uses, purpose or purposes, or any one or more thereof, at such times, in such amounts and in such manner as they
shall determine, from time to time:
A. Recreation Fund Tax On Transient Lodging:
1. Operating and maintaining recreation facilities under the jurisdiction of the City Council.
2. Improving, extending and bettering such recreation facilities.
3. Constructing, purchasing or otherwise acquiring such recreation facilities.
4. Whenever any recreation facility is affected by or will be affected by any flood control project being constructed or
to be constructed under the provisions of any Federal law if the City Council finds that such flood control project
will improve, better and protect such recreation facility, the City Council shall have the power and authority to give
assurances to and perform any other acts required by and satisfactory to the Secretary of the Army that the
location and cooperation required for such flood control project by such Federal law will be furnished by the City
to the extent that the City Council shall determine.
5. To establish, construct, purchase, lease, rent, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise acquire,
reconstruct, improve, extend, better, alter, repair, equip, furnish, regulate, maintain, operate and manage
recreation facilities within or without the City, including personal property, real property, lands, improvements and
fixtures thereof, property of any nature appurtenant thereto or used in connection therewith, and every estate,
interest and right, legal or equitable, therein, including terms for years.
6. To accept contributions, grants or other financial assistance from the Federal government or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, corporate or otherwise, the State of Nevada or any of its political subdivisions, or from any
other source, for or in aid of any recreation facility within the area of operation of the City Council, and to comply
with such conditions, trust indentures, leases or agreements as may be necessary, convenient or desirable.
7. To use such funds to pay the necessary expense of imposition, collection and expenditure of this Transient
Lodging Tax and the proceeds thereof.
8. To use such proceeds to repay any loans, debts or bonded indebtedness that the City Council may incur in
connection with such recreation facilities, and that in that connection to pledge this Transient Lodging Tax and the
proceeds thereof as security for the repayment of any such loans, debts, obligations secured by bond, bonds,
and other indebtedness which may be incurred in connection with such recreation facilities.
9. For marketing and/or promotion of transportation services serving the City.
B. Elko Convention And Visitors Authority On Transient Lodging Tax Fund: To pay the proceeds thereof to the Elko
Convention and Visitors Authority, to be used by it for any lawful purposes, as it shall determine in carrying out its
powers under Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 227, as may be amended from time to time.
C. Promotion Of Tourism On Transient Lodging Tax Fund:
1. Three-eighths (3/8) of all proceeds of the tax must be paid to the Department of Taxation for deposit with the
State Treasurer for credit to the fund for the promotion of tourism.
2. Five-eighths (5/8) of all proceeds of the tax must be deposited with the Elko County Recreation Board created
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes sections 244A.597 and 244A.599 to be used to advertise the resources of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 356/640
the County related to tourism, including available accommodations, transportation, entertainment, natural
resources and climate, and to promote special events related thereto.
D. Western Folklife Center On Transient Lodging Tax Fund: To donate the proceeds thereof to the Western Folklife
Center, a Utah corporation licensed to do business in the State of Nevada, to be used by it to help operate and
finance cultural and educational activities within the City relating to the events and activities which said corporation
engages in within the City.
E. Agricultural District 4 On Transient Lodging Tax Fund: To donate the proceeds thereof to the Agricultural District 4 to
be used by it for any lawful purposes as it shall determine in carrying out its powers pursuant to applicable Nevada
Revised Statutes provisions.
F. Marketing/Tourism Promotion On Transient Lodging Tax Fund:
1. To use for marketing efforts to increase travel to Elko by tourists, on a national and/or regional level. The Elko
Convention and Visitors Authority will determine the appropriate marketing packages and programs to be funded
by this tax.
2. This tax may not be used for administration or overhead for the Elko Convention and Visitors Authority.
3. The City will exercise reasonable efforts to provide, on a monthly basis, summary reports of the confidential room
occupancy reports to the Elko Convention and Visitors Authority and the City Council as a tool to monitor the
success of the marketing efforts funded by this tax.
G. Elko Regional Airport Debt Service Transient Lodging Tax Fund: To use such proceeds to repay any loans, debts or
bonded indebtedness that the City Council may incur in connection with such airport facilities, and that in that
connection to pledge this Transient Lodging Tax and the proceeds thereof as security for the repayment of any such
loans, debts, obligations secured by bond, bonds, and other indebtedness which may be incurred in connection
with such airport facilities.
1. Any amounts in excess of the debt service requirement, as determined by the annual audit, shall be paid to the
Elko Convention and Visitors Authority on the condition that it creates a separate facility fund to account for all
collections and expenditures. No portion may be used for salaries or benefits. (Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
4-6-14: REFUND:
Any person aggrieved by the provisions contained herein shall present his claim to the City Council prior to seeking
any other form of administrative relief or judicial relief, except as otherwise required by law. The City Council shall have
the authority to grant any appropriate relief from the provisions of this chapter, to include the authority to refund, with
interest if appropriate, to any licensee, any Transient Lodging Tax improperly collected by the City Council or the City
Clerk from such licensee and to include the authority to grant relief to any person who is determined by the City
Council to have been adversely affected by any retroactive amendments to this chapter. (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004)
4-6-15: FORMS, COSTS AND REQUIRED REPORTING:
A. The City Clerk is hereby empowered and authorized to designate the form of and have prepared or printed all
stationery, supplies, records, notices, receipts, licenses and other forms that the City Clerk deems necessary or
advisable in connection with the collection, administration and disbursement of the proceeds of this Transient
Lodging Tax, and to obtain all supplies, records and other property and equipment deemed necessary by the City
Clerk in connection with the collection, administration, use and disbursement of the said Transient Lodging Tax
proceeds. All costs, expenses, charges and debts incurred by the City, or by the City Clerk under the provisions of
this chapter, in connection with the imposition, collection, administration, use and disbursement of this Transient
Lodging Tax and the proceeds thereof shall be paid out of the Recreational Fund provided for in this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 357/640
B. The licensee shall complete all forms required by this chapter in their entirety. The licensee may supply additional
information as an addendum to any form required by this chapter to the extent reasonably necessary to supply
complete and accurate information to the City. (Ord. 828, 5-8-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
4-6-16: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or failing or refusing to collect or pay the Transient Lodging
Tax proceeds as herein provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this
Code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed a separate offense. The City, by and
through its City Clerk, or Mayor and/or City Council, is further empowered and authorized to pursue all rights,
remedies, procedures, claims and causes of action it may have at law or in equity to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to collect this Transient Lodging Tax from the persons owing the same, by civil action, including, without
being limited to, injunctions. (Ord. 627, 11-9-2004)
Chapter 7
WRECKING YARDS; JUNK
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning described in this section, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
JUNK: Includes old iron, copper, brass, lead, zinc, tin, steel and other metal; metallic cable; wire; rope; cordage,
bottles; glass; bagging; rags; rubber; paper; wrecked, dismantled or discarded vehicles and machinery which are not
going to be repaired, rebuilt or restored to operation; bodies, parts and pieces of wrecked, dismantled or discarded
vehicles and machinery; and all other discarded or castoff articles or material of any kind.
JUNK DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling hides or junk.
JUNK SHOP: Any place where junk of any kind is bought or sold.
JUNKYARD OR SALVAGE YARD: The place or premises where the operation or business of salvaging, breaking up,
wrecking, dismantling, burning, accumulating, storing, buying or selling junk is conducted.
WRECKING YARD: A place where vehicles, machinery or equipment are dismantled or wrecked. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-2: LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, maintain, conduct or operate a junk shop, junkyard or salvage
yard, or wrecking yard, or do business as a junk dealer, within the city without first making application for andreceiving
from the city council or the city clerk a license to carry on or conduct such business pursuant to applicable licensing
provisions of this code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, maintain, conduct or operate a junk shop, junkyard or salvage
yard, or wrecking yard, or be a junk dealer, within the city except in strict compliance with the terms and conditions of
this chapter. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-4: ENCLOSURES REQUIRED:
All junk shops, junkyards and salvage yards and wrecking yards shall be located, established, maintained, conducted
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 358/640
and operated within an enclosed building, or within an area enclosed by a fence, which said fence shall be constructed
in accordance with the following specifications:
A. Construction: All fences shall be totally opaque; shall be constructed of wood, wood products, masonry, plastics or
metal which are standard or normal fencing materials; and shall be so constructed so that the portion of the fence
visible from the outside of the fenced premises shall be of uniform construction of any one or more of such standard
fencing materials and shall be the finished side of the fence.
B. Height: All such fences shall be of a height of not less than six feet (6').
C. Painting: All such fences which are constructed of other than new building materials, and all such fences whether
constructed of new or salvaged buildings which are painted, shall be painted a uniform color over the entire area
thereof facing away from fenced premises.
D. Building Permit Required: A building permit shall be required before any such fence shall be constructed and all
such fences shall be constructed in compliance with applicable ordinances of the city.
E. Signs: No sign, lettering, printing, advertising, pictures, designs or other writing shall appear on the side of any such
fence normally visible to the public unless a permit therefor shall have been issued in accordance with the
applicable ordinances of the city governing signs and outdoor advertising displays.
F. Openings: Openings in any such fences for the purpose of ingress and egress shall be limited to sixteen feet (16') in
width, and there shall be no more than one such opening foreach two hundred feet (200') of required fence. Such
opening shall be equipped with gates or doors designed to present an appearance as nearly uniform as possible
with the fence construction. Such gate shall be closed and locked at all times other than the normal operating hours
of the business conducted within.
G. Maintenance: All such fences shall be maintained and kept in good repair and the painted surfaces of such fences
shall be kept properly painted. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-5: REGULATIONS:
All junk dealer, junk shop, junkyard, salvage yard and wrecking yard business, activities and operations shall be carried
on only within the applicable enclosure required by section 4-7-4 of this chapter, and in accordance with the following:
A. Maintenance Of Premises: Such premises shall at all times be maintained in a manner not to create a nuisance or
menace to the health of the community or the residents nearby, or to create a place for the breeding of rodents and
vermin.
B. Garbage And Refuse: No garbage or other organic waste, refuse or rubbish, or inflammable or explosive liquids,
articles or substances shall be stored on or about such premises, provided, this provision shall not prevent the
installation and use on the premises for service station facilities for the fueling, lubrication and servicing of
automobiles, trucks and other vehicles and the installation of gasoline pumps with underground storage tanks for
dispensing automotive fuels; provided, further, that new, used and salvaged tires may be stored on such premises.
C. Use Of Containers Or Boxes: All rags, bagging and paper stored on the premises or any portion thereof shall be
bagged, baled, tied or placed in containers or boxes suitable to prevent the scattering of any such items.
D. Weeds And Vegetation: All weeds and vegetation, other than landscaping or other ornamental plantings, shall be
controlled and removed from the premises to the extent that no such weeds or vegetation on or about the premises
exceeds two inches (2") in height.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 359/640
E. Storage Of Junk: No junk or other materials shall be stored except within the enclosed area, specifically excluding
as an area of storage the sidewalk, alley, street, curb areas and vacant lots in, about or near the premises.
F. Stacking Height: Junk or other materials shall not be stacked within the enclosed area to a height exceeding six feet
(6').
G. Removal Of Gasoline And Oil: Whenever any vehicle is placed on the premises for any purpose other than for
repair and restoration to service, all gasoline and oil shall be immediately drained and removed therefrom, and
placed in a safe storage location. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-6: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be applicable to all junk dealer, junk shop, junkyard, salvage yard and wrecking yard operations,
whether the same is carried on as a separate and independent business or in conjunction with garages, repair shops,
service stations or other types of business. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-7: ZONING COMPLIANCE:
No junk shop, junkyard, salvage yard or wrecking yard shall be located, established, maintained or operated except in
a zone designated as industrial by the applicable zoning laws of the city. Presently existing junk shop, junkyard,
salvage yard or wrecking yard operations may continue in a zone other than industrial for a period of not longer than
five (5) years after this chapter becomes effective, and if during such time any such nonconforming use is abandoned,
or is discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more, such nonconforming use shall not be permitted to be
reestablished upon said location, but must be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-8: TIME FOR COMPLIANCE:
Presently existing junk shops, junkyards, salvage yards and wrecking yards shall have two (2) years from the effective
date hereof to comply with the provisions of section 4-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Junk shops, junkyards, salvage yards and wrecking yards which are presently located and continue to be located at
least four hundred feet (400') from any county road, state or federal highway, occupied dwelling houses (unless said
occupied dwelling house is owned by the same person who holds title to the land upon which the junkyard is located),
licensed business or platted street shall be excepted from the provisions and requirements of section 4-7-4 of this
chapter. Should any such road, street, highway, occupied dwelling house or licensed business be established within a
four hundred foot (400') distance of any such junk shop, junkyard, salvage yard or wrecking yard, then and in that
event, said junk shop, junkyard, salvage yard or wrecking yard must comply withsection 4-7-4 of this chapter within two
(2) years from the establishment of said road, street, highway, occupied dwelling, house or licensed business. (Ord.
158, 6-8-1965)
4-7-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The license of any person operating a junk shop, junkyard, salvage yard or wrecking yard, or who is licensed as a junk
dealer, may be forfeited or revoked by the city council for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 158, 6-8-
1965)
4-7-11: PENALTIES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 360/640
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3, of this code. Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965; amd. Ord. 241, 12-14-1976)
4-7-12: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the remedies provided in the preceding sections, any continued violation of this chapter may be abated
by appropriate proceedings instituted by the city or by any party in interest. (Ord. 158, 6-8-1965)
Chapter 8
ELKO TELEVISION CODE
4-8-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the ELKO CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-2: TERMS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number:
AFFILIATE: An entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with grantee.
BASIC CABLE: The tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local
broadcast television signals.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended.
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service;
and
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or any other lawful
communication service.
CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception and control equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service and
other service to subscribers.
FCC: The federal communications commission, or successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE: The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether or not such
authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, ordinance, contract, certificate or otherwise, which
authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service or other service to
subscribers.
FRANCHISE AUTHORITY: The city of Elko, Nevada, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
GRANTEE: TCI Cablevision of Nevada, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 361/640
GROSS REVENUES: The monthly cable service revenues received by grantee from subscribers of the cable system;
provided, however, that such phrase shall not include:
A. Revenues received from any national advertising carried on the cable system;
B. Any taxes on cable service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any
governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or
agency.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust corporation or governmental entity.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land, path,
alley, court, boulevard, sidewalks, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right of way, including, but
not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips or rights of way dedicated for compatible uses and any
temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchise authority in
the service area which shall entitle the franchise authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. "Public way" shall also mean any easement now or
hereafter held by the franchise authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public
service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights of way as shall within their
proper use and meaning entitle the franchise authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing
or transmitting grantee's cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to
thecable system.
SERVICE AREA: The present municipal boundaries of the franchising authority, and shall include any additions thereto
by annexation or other legal means.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services, provided by grantee and for which a separate charge is
made by grantee.
SUBSCRIBER: A person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom
with grantee's express permission.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Programming provided by or generally considered comparable to programming provided by
a television broadcast station. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-3: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
A. Grant: The city shall grant to grantee a nonexclusive franchise which authorizes the grantee to construct and
operate a cable system and offer cable service and other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over,
under or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that purpose to erect, install,
construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any public way
and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other related property or equipment as may be
necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.
B. Term: The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years from the effective
date of the franchise as set forth in subsection C of this section, unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance
with the terms of this chapter.
C. Acceptance; Effective Date: Grantee shall accept the franchise granted by signing ordinance 425 and filing the
same with the city clerk or other appropriate official or agency of the franchising authority within sixty (60) days after
the passage and final adoption of ordinance 425. Subject to the acceptance by grantee, the effective date of the
franchise ordinance shall be the date of acceptance by the grantee.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 362/640
D. Other Franchises: In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or
other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than grantee to enter into the city streets and
public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the
servicearea, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that
one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal
protection under the law. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-4: STANDARDS OF SERVICE:
A. Conditions Of Street Occupancy: All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment
installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of
interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
B. Restoration Of Public Ways: If during the course of grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of the cable
system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by grantee, it shall, at its expense, immediately replace and
restore such public way to a condition as good as the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such
disturbance.
C. Relocation At Request Of Franchising Authority: Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than
five (5) business days, the grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate on
the public way or remove from the public way, any property of the grantee when lawfully required by franchising
authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change
or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or
improvements by the franchising authority; but, the grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its
property subject to city ordinance, and if public funds are available to any utility company using such street,
easement, or right of way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be
made available to the grantee.
D. Relocation At Request Of Third Party: The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving
permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building,
provided: 1) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required
by the grantee, making such payment in advance; and 2) the grantee is given not less than five (5) business days'
advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
E. Trimming Of Trees And Shrubbery: The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth
overhanging onany of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with
the grantee's wires, cables or other equipment. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the franchising authority
or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and
expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the system undertaken
by grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations grantee may have to the franchising authority or
property owner pursuant to the terms of this subsection.
F. Use Of Grantee's Equipment By Franchising Authority: Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or
tariffs, the franchising authority shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, of any poles or
conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any public way; provided, that: 1) such use by
the franchising authority does not interfere with a current or future use by the grantee; 2) the franchising authority
holds the grantee harmless against and from all claims, demands, costs, or liabilities of every kind and nature
whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees
and costs.
G. Safety Requirements: Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an
orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC
and other federal, state and local regulations. The cable system shall not reasonably endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the service area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 363/640
H. Aerial And Underground Construction: In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution
facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric service are underground,
the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities
underground; provided, that such facilities are actually capable of receiving grantee's cable and other equipment
without technical degradation of the cable system's signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the
transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communication and electric
services are both aerial and underground, grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain
all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in
this subsection shall require grantee to construct, operate or maintain underground any ground mounted
appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers),
amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this subsection, in the eventthat all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public
utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date
hereof, grantee shall only be required to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution
facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time that such
are placed under ground.
I. Required Extensions Of Service: The cable system, as constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption
of this chapter, substantially complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee will be authorized by this chapter
to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the terms hereof within the
service area. Whenever grantee shall receive a request for service from at least fifteen (15) subscribers within one
thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable bearing strand feet (1/4 cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it
shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the
usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided, that such extension is technically feasible, and if it will not
adversely affect the operation, financial condition or market development of the cable system, or as provided for
under subsection J of this section.
J. Subscriber Charges For Extensions Of Service: No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for
unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground, existence of more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers, or a
density of less than fifteen (15) subscribers per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable bearing strand
feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital
contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. For the purpose of determining
the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by grantee and subscribers in the area in which
cable service may be expanded, grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per
mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per one thousand
three hundred twenty (1,320) cable bearing strand feet of its trunks or distribution cable, and whose denominator
equals fifteen (15) subscribers. Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on
a pro rata basis. Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by
such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
K. Service To Public Buildings: The grantee shall provide without charge one outlet of basic service to the
franchiseauthority's office building(s), fire station, police station and public school building that is passed by its cable
system. The outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable services in or throughout such
buildings; nor shall such outlets be located in common or public areas open to the public. Users of such outlets
shall hold grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including, but
not limited to, those arising from copyright liability. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
subsection, the grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the
feeder cable to said buildings or premises exceeds one hundred fifty (150) cable feet, unless it is technically
feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the
cable system to do so, or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such
drop line in excess of one hundred fifty (150) cable feet. In the event that additional outlets of basic service are
provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith, including,
but not limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of grantee, the building owner may also be required to pay the
service fees associated with the provision of basic service and the additional outlets relating thereto.
L. Emergency Override: In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the franchising
authority, make available its facilities for the franchising authority to provide emergency information and instructions
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 364/640
during the emergency or disaster period. The franchising authority shall hold the grantee, its agents, employees,
officers and assigns hereunder, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the
franchising authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable fees and costs. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-5: REGULATION BY FRANCHISE AUTHORITY:
A. Franchise Fee:
1. Amount; Conditions: Grantee shall pay to the franchising authority a franchise fee equal to three percent (3%) of
gross revenue received by grantee from the operation of the cable system on an annual basis; provided,
however, that grantee may credit against any such payments of: 1) any tax, fee or assessment of any kind
imposed by franchising authority or other governmental entity on a cable operator, or subscriber, or both, solely
because of their status as such; 2) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed, both
on utilities and cable operators and their services); and 3) any other special tax, assessment or fee such as a
business,occupation and entertainment tax. For the purpose of this section, the twelve (12) month period
applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year, unless otherwise
agreed to, in writing, by the franchising authority and grantee. The franchise fee payment shall be due and
payable ninety (90) days after the close of the preceding calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by
a brief report from a representative of grantee showing the basis for the computation. In no event shall the
franchise fee payments required to be paid by grantee exceed five percent (5%) of gross revenues received by
grantee in any twelve (12) month period; however, the franchising authority reserves the right to negotiate the
franchise fee with the grantee during the term of the franchise with any negotiated increase to take effect on an
anniversary date of the franchise.
2. Limitation On Franchise Fee Actions: The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder
shall be five (5) years from the date on which payment by the company is due. Unless within five (5) years from
and after said payment due date, the city initiates a lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fees in a court of
competent jurisdiction, such recovery shall be barred and the city shall be estopped from asserting any claims
whatsoever against the company relating to any such alleged deficiencies.
B. Rates And Charges:
1. The franchising authority may not regulate the rates for the provision of cable service and other services,
including, but not limited to, ancillary charges relating thereto, except as expressly provided herein and except as
authorized pursuant to federal and state law, including, but not limited to, the cable act and FCC rules and
regulations relating thereto. From time to time, and at any time, grantee has the right to modify its rates and
charges, including, but not limited to, the implementation of additional charges and rates; provided, however, that
grantee shall give notice to the franchising authority of any such modifications or additional charges thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date thereof.
2. In the event that basic service rate increases are subject to approval of the franchising authority, the grantee
may, at its discretion and without consent of the franchising authority, increase rates relating to the provisions of
basic service by an amount which is at least equal to five percent (5%) per year.
C. Renewal Of Franchise:
1. The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority
that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of
section 626 of the cable act (as such existed as of the effective date of thecable act), unless the procedures and
substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of
federal or state law.
2. In addition to the procedures set forth in said section 626(a), the franchising authority agrees to notify grantee of
its preliminary assessments regarding the identity of future cable related community needs and interests, as well
as, the past performance of grantee under the then current franchise term. The franchising authority further
agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the grantee prior to the time that the four (4)
month period referred to in subsection 626(c) is considered to begin.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 365/640
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection, the grantee and franchising authority agree
that at any time during the term of the then current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and
opportunity to comment, the franchising authority and grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations
regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the franchising authority may grant a renewal thereof. The
grantee and the franchising authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express
provisions of section 626 of the cable act. A reproduction of section 626 of the cable act as such existed as of the
effective date of the cable act will be attached to ordinance 425 as schedule 1 and incorporated therein by this
reference.
D. Conditions Of Sale:
1. Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a renewal or extension of grantee's franchise is
denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of
the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party,
any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system
valued as a going concern.
2. Grantee and franchising authority agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at grantee's
request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a
transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a
period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise;
however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six (6) months from the
effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified
transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, grantee
and franchising authority may avail themselves of any rightsthey may have pursuant to federal or state law; it
being further agreed that grantee's continued operation of its cable system during the six (6) months period shall
not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment, of any rights of either the franchising authority or the
grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection, neither franchising authority nor
grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law.
3. A copy of section 626 of the cable act, adopted herein by reference, is on file in the office of the city clerk.
E. Transfer Of Franchise: Grantee's right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or
otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate, without the prior consent of the franchising authority, such consent
not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage,
by other hypothecation or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of grantee in the franchise or cable system in
order to secure indebtedness. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-6: COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING:
A. Testing For Compliance: The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the cable system during
reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of
the grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the grantee is in compliance with the terms
hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken
only after giving grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2) business days, and providing a
representative of grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing
demonstrates that the grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable
costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that grantee has
substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the
franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the franchising authority agrees that such testing shall
be undertaken no more than two (2) times a year in the aggregate, and that the results thereof shall be made
available to the grantee upon grantee's request.
B. Books And Records: The grantee agrees that the franchising authority may review such of its books and records,
during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with
the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by
the grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC.Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or
confidential in nature. The franchising authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the grantee to it as
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 366/640
confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in
order to enforce the provisions hereof. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-7: INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND BONDS OR OTHER SECURITY:
A. Insurance Requirements: Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term
of the franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combined single limit for bodily injury, and property damage. Said insurance shall designate the franchising
authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancellable except upon thirty (30) days' prior written
notice to the franchising authority.
B. Indemnification: The grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the franchising authority, its
officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting
from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death) which arise out of the grantee's construction,
operation or maintenance of its cable system, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and costs.
C. Bonds And Other Surety: Except as expressly provided herein, grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain
bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The franchising
authority acknowledges that the legal, financial and technical qualifications of grantee are sufficient to afford
compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and franchising authority
recognize that the costs associated with bonds and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the
form of increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the franchising authority agrees to
require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated
need therefor. The franchise authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related
surety in an aggregate amount greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the substantial
performance of the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no bond or other surety will
be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the franchising authority agrees to give grantee at least
sixty (60) days' prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. Such reason must
demonstrate a change in the grantee's legal, financial ortechnical qualifications which would materially prohibit or
impair its ability to comply with the terms of the franchise or afford compliance therewith. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-8: ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. Notice Of Violation: In the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee has not complied with the
terms of the franchise, it shall notify grantee, in writing, of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
B. Grantee's Right To Cure Or Respond: Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in
subsection A of this section to: 1) respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance; or
2) to cure such default or, in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty
(30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps
being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
C. Public Hearing: In the event that grantee fails to respond to the notice described in subsection A of this section
pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection B of this section above or in the event that the alleged default is
not remedied within sixty (60) days after the grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to subsection A of
this section, the franchising authority shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting
shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchising authority which is scheduled at a time which
is no less than five (5) business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee of the time and
place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
1. Enforcement: Subject to applicable federal or state law, in the event the franchising authority, after such meeting,
determines that grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may:
a. Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this franchise, if any, including, without limitation,
any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such
amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 367/640
b. Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief;
c. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to
be revoked; or
d. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to
damages.
The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the
franchise by reason of any failure of the franchising authority to enforce prompt compliance.
2. Acts Of God: The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor
suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by
strikes, acts of God, power outages or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
4-8-9: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. Documents Incorporated And Made A Part Hereof: The following documents shall be incorporated herein by this
reference, and in the case of a conflict or ambiguity between or among them, the document of latest date shall
govern:
1. Any enabling ordinance in existence as of the date hereof.
2. Any proposal submitted by grantee pursuant to a franchise renewal procedure, as amended and supplemented
during the franchise renewal negotiation process.
3. Any franchise agreement between grantee and franchising authority reflecting the removal of the franchise, if
any.
B. Preemption: If the FCC, or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede
or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the franchising authority, the jurisdiction of the franchising
authority shall cease and no longer exist.
C. Actions Of Franchising Authority: In any action by the franchising authority or representative thereof mandated or
permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner.
Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
D. Notice:
1. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the
franchising authority or grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required
party five (5)business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by
certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S.
postal service.
2. The notices or responses to the franchising authority shall be addressed as follows:
CITY OF ELKO
1751 College Avenue
Elko, Nevada 89801
3. The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows:
TCI CABLEVISION OF NEVADA, INC.
1990 Idaho Street
Elko, Nevada 89801
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 368/640
with a copy to:
TELE-COMMUNICATIONS, INC.
Attention: Legal Department
Terminal Annex, P.O. Box 5630
Denver, Colorado 80217-5630
or:
5619 DTC Parkway
Englewood, Colorado 80111-3000
4. Franchising authority and the grantee may designate such other address or addresses, from time to time, by
giving notice to the other.
E. Descriptive Headings: The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof.
Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein. (Ord. 425, 7-28-1992)
Chapter 9
BROTHELS
4-9-1: PRIVILEGE LICENSE:
No applicant for a license under this chapter or other matters requiring affirmative Board approval in order to operate a
brothel has any right to the license or the granting of the approval sought. Any license issued or other Board approval
granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is a revocable privilege and no holder, licensee or other recipient of
the license or approval acquires any vested right therein or thereunder. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-2: PROSTITUTION NOT AN OFFENSE OR NUISANCE:
The operation of a brothel or house of prostitution within the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter does
not constitute a public nuisance or an offense to public decency. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-3: UNLAWFUL UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in prostitution, or keep, own or operate a brothel or house
of prostitution of any description within the City, except as provided in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, bartender, manager or other employee of a licensed brothel to allow any
person to practice prostitution or to solicit business for a sex worker or to procure any person for the purpose of
prostitution within the City, except within the premises of a licensed brothel and within the boundaries of the
Restricted Commercial District as set forth in the City Zoning Code. There will be no "out dates"; accordingly, sex
workers shall not be hired from a brothel for the purpose of prostitution to accompany a customer outside the
brothel at which the sex worker is employed. All soliciting of prostitution and acts of prostitution must take place
inside the premises of a licensed brothel.
C. In the trial of any case arising under the provisions of subsection A or B of this section, evidence of general
reputation shall be relevant and admissible evidence as to the question of the ill fame of any brothel and to the
question of the ill fame of any person alleged to be practicing prostitution. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-4: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 369/640
As used in this chapter, the following words will be defined as follows:
APPLICANT: Any person applying to the Board for a license under the provisions of this chapter, together with all
persons listed in subsections 4-9-6A and B of this chapter.
BOARD: The City Council of the City of Elko.
BROTHEL: A business that offers or provides prostitution.
BROTHEL WORKER: Any person employed by a brothel working and/or residing at a house of prostitution not
classified as a bartender or sex worker.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Elko.
EMPLOYED: Hired as an employee or independent contractor.
HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION: Any building or other structure in which prostitution is offered or provided, to include a
house of ill fame or bawdy house.
LICENSE FEE: Any money required in accordance with this chapter to be paid to the City to obtain, amend or renew a
license under this chapter.
LICENSEE: A person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter.
PERSON: A natural person, any form of business or social organization and any other nongovernmental legal entity
including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, association, trust or unincorporated organization. The term
does not include a government, governmental agency or political subdivision of a government.
POLICE: The Police Chief of the City of Elko.
PROSTITUTION: Engaging in sexual conduct with another natural person in return for a fee, monetary consideration or
other thing of value.
SEX WORKER: A natural person who for a fee, monetary consideration or other thing of value engages in sexual
intercourse, oral-genital contact or any touching of the sexual organs or other intimate parts of a person for the purpose
of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of either person.
WORK CARD OR WORK PERMIT: A permit issued by the police to applicants who meet the requirements of this
chapter permitting the applicant to perform work authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-5: LICENSING AND CONTROL BOARD CREATED:
A. City Council Designated: The City Council, referred to herein as the "Board", shall act as a Prostitution Licensing
and Control Board.
B. Duty: It shall be the duty of the Board to carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
C. Schedule Of Fees: The Board, by resolution, shall promulgate a schedule of the fees required by this title. The
schedule of fees may be amended from time-to-time by resolution of the Board.
D. Powers: Powers of the Board shall include, but shall not be limited to, the power to:
1. Receive all license applications submitted under the provisions of this chapter;
2. Investigate all applicants for a license under the provisions of this chapter;
3. Grant or refuse to grant the license provided for in this chapter;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 370/640
4. Receive complaints concerning alleged violations of this chapter;
5. Revoke or temporarily suspend or place restrictions and conditions on licenses issued under the terms of this
chapter;
6. Place licensees on probation;
7. Exercise any proper power and authority necessary to perform its duties pursuant to this chapter; and
8. Hear appeals from decisions of the police.
9. The powers of the Board enumerated above are not exclusive and shall not be interpreted in such a manner as
to limit any other powers that the Board may otherwise possess. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-6: LICENSE APPLICATION, CONTENTS:
Any person desiring to own or operate a brothel within the City (individually or collectively referred to as the "applicant"
or "applicants") shall first apply to the Board for a brothel license. The license application shall satisfy the following
requirements and contain the following information about the owner, the operator and any person who will act on behalf
of the owner or operator as a manager or other agent with management authority, together with all other information
identified in each subsection pertaining to the brothel and the house of prostitution:
A. Names, ages and addresses of all persons who have or will have any financial interest in the brothel or house of
prostitution, including the owner of the real property if the real property is leased to the owner or operator of the
brothel; provided, in the event the person having the financial interest in the brothel or house of prostitution is a
corporation, limited liability company or other business association, only persons having an ownership interest of
one-third (1/3) or more in the corporation, limited liability company or other business association shall be identified
on the application;
B. Names, ages and addresses of persons who are or will be personally responsible for the conduct and management
of the brothel;
C. A recent photograph and complete set of fingerprints of all persons listed in subsections A and B of this section;
D. Names and addresses of all other businesses in which the applicant has any financial interest, including the type of
such business and the nature of the applicant's interest;
E. Names and addresses of all employers of the applicant for the preceding ten (10) years;
F. All of the applicant's addresses for the preceding ten (10) years;
G. A list of all prior convictions of the applicant for any crime, excluding minor traffic violations, which list shall include a
statement of the offense, the place of its occurrence, the date of its occurrence, and the disposition of the case;
H. A complete and accurate financial statement of the applicant, together with an audit of the applicant's finances
conducted by a licensed certified public accountant;
I. The street address of the property upon which the proposed brothel is to be operated, together with copies of all
deeds, mortgages, deeds of trusts, liens or other encumbrances, leasehold interests, or other interests in or relating
to the house of prostitution;
J. Names, ages and addresses of all persons with leasehold interests in the house of prostitution;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 371/640
K. The business history of the applicant with respect to brothels and houses of prostitution, to include prior or
concurrent ownership, management, employment or any other legal relationship the applicant has or has had with a
brothel or house of prostitution;
L. Whether the applicant, in previously operating any business at any location in the United States, has had a business
license or privilege license revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason(s) therefor and a description of the
business activity or occupation that was subject to the suspension or revocation;
M. Any information needed to update or correct any information required by this chapter that is already on file with the
City;
N. Any other information reasonably deemed necessary or useful by the Board.
All information required under this section shall, upon enactment of this chapter and thereafter, be promptly updated
and corrected by the applicant whenever necessary to ensure that all such information on file with the City is
current and accurate. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-7: LICENSE APPLICATION, FILING AND INVESTIGATION:
A. Filing; Investigation Fee: All license applications submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be filed with the
City Clerk, along with a non-refundable fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board.
B. Investigation: Upon presentation of any license application to the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer such
application to the police for investigation. The police shall conduct a full investigation of all information contained in
the license application, which investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. A complete review of all records of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and any other appropriate governmental
organization concerning the criminal record of any applicant;
2. A personal interview with each applicant;
3. An interview, either personal or by mail, with all employers of the applicant and business associates of the
applicant, as shown in the license application;
4. An examination of the financial statement and financial background of the applicant; and
5. Any other investigation reasonably deemed necessary by the police.
C. Report Of Investigation Results: Within ninety (90) days the police shall report the results of the foregoing
investigation in writing to the Board, which report shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. A complete statement of the results of all portions of the investigation;
2. A list of any errors or omissions found in the application;
3. An evaluation of the personal qualifications, and financial status and background of the applicant.
D. Board Action: Within thirty (30) days after receiving the foregoing police report, the Board may:
1. Refer the application back to the police for additional investigation;
2. Require a personal interview with the applicant;
3. Require the applicant to submit additional information relative to the application; and/or
4. Grant, conditionally grant or refuse to grant a license under the provisions of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 372/640
E. Refusal To Grant License: The Board may refuse to grant a license to any applicant based on a determination that
the applicant or the application fails to satisfy any of the requirements of this chapter, or because granting the
application would not be in the best interest of public health, safety or welfare. The Board may take into
consideration any recommendation provided by the police in refusing to grant a license to an applicant.
F. Revocation Or Suspension Of License: The Board may permanently revoke, or temporarily or conditionally suspend
a license issued under this chapter; provided, the revocation or suspension shall be for cause; further provided, the
revocation or suspension shall be made by the Board following a public hearing conducted in accordance with this
chapter; further provided, in the event a license is revoked or suspended, the licensee or former licensee shall not
be entitled to a refund of any money previously paid to the City for or in anticipation of issuance of the license.
G. Grounds For Refusal, Revocation Or Suspension: The following shall, without limitation, constitute grounds for
refusal to grant a license to an applicant, or revocation or suspension of a license by the Board:
1. The applicant/licensee or the applicant's/licensee's spouse or any other individual listed on the application that
would have any interest in the brothel, has been convicted of a felony;
2. The applicant/licensee is financially insolvent or is inadequately financed;
3. The applicant/licensee has a history of financial instability;
4. The applicant/licensee has willfully omitted or incorrectly stated any material fact in the license application;
5. The applicant/licensee has a financial interest in or is associated with a business that is illegal where the
business is located;
6. Licensee would be contrary to the health, welfare or safety of the City or its residents;
7. The house of prostitution is not in the correct zoning district;
8. The applicant/licensee has one or more business relationships with persons who would be denied a license for
reasons other than financial instability or insolvency;
9. The applicant/licensee is a foreign business association that is not properly registered with the Nevada Secretary
of State;
10. The applicant/licensee is a Nevada business association that is not in active status with the Nevada Secretary
of State;
11. The applicant/licensee intends to utilize a manager or other agent to operate the brothel when the owner is not
present and the manager or other agent would not qualify for a license under this chapter;
12. A person who would not qualify for a license under this chapter has an ownership or possessory interest in the
brothel or house of prostitution;
13. The maximum number of brothels permitted under this chapter has been reached.
H. Resubmittal; Time Limit: Upon denying any application for a license under the provisions of this chapter, the
applicant shall have thirty (30) days within which to cure any defect in the application, and such application may be
again submitted to the Board for reconsideration within thirty (30) days after such denial. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-8: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have the following restrictions:
A. Violations Not Permitted: No operation may be conducted in violation of any applicable City, County, State or
Federal ordinance, statute or regulation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 373/640
B. Maximum Number Permitted: The maximum number of brothels permitted within the City limits is four (4). (Ord. 837,
1-8-2019)
4-9-9: BOARD MAY IMPOSE OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
The Board may, in its discretion and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City, and to promote
the orderly conduct of the operation, impose additional restrictions, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Limitation on the number of sex workers that may be working in a brothel;
B. Limitation on the type, signing and size of building in which a brothel may be operated;
C. The Board may impose restrictions pursuant to this section prior to, during or after issuance of license.
The police may issue procedural rules for the purpose of administering this chapter. All such rules shall be distributed
to affected applicants and licensees prior to implementation. Rules issued by the police pursuant to this section shall
be consistent with this chapter, must be approved by the Board before going into effect, and may be rescinded by the
Board at any time. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-10: ZONING:
No license shall be issued without the prospective licensee first obtaining proper zoning for the proposed house of
prostitution. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-11: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. Content Of License: Upon approval of all applications associated with a brothel, the Board shall issue a license for
the brothel to the applicant, which license shall state:
1. The name and address or location of the brothel;
2. Any restrictions or limitations imposed by the Board under section 4-9-9 of this chapter;
3. The date of issuance of the license;
4. The date of expiration of the license.
B. Term Of License: All licenses shall be issued for a term of no more than one year, commencing on January 1 of the
year the application was approved or the date of approval, whichever is later, and continuing thereafter until
January 1 of the following year.
C. Renewal: No later than thirty (30) days before the expiration date of any license, in the event the licensee seeks to
continue to operate the brothel for an additional year after the term, the licensee shall apply to the City Clerk, on
forms provided by the City, for a renewal. The City Clerk shall forthwith notify the police that a renewal application
has been filed, and if any written complaint regarding the brothel shall have been received during that current
license period, the police may cause the renewal application to be placed on the agenda of the next Board meeting,
at which meeting the Board shall either renew or deny the license. If placed on the agenda, the Board shall conduct
a hearing, and may summon witnesses, interview the licensee, interview any complainant, require additional
investigation by the police, or do any and all other acts which the Board deems necessary or appropriate for its
determination. If no such complaints have been received, the City Clerk shall issue the renewed license upon
compliance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 374/640
D. Failure To Renew: Failure of any licensee to apply for a renewal in the manner required by subsection C of this
section shall be grounds for the Board to revoke the license at its first regular meeting in January. Any license thus
revoked may be reinstated only upon compliance by the licensee with all requirements of this chapter applicable to
original license applications.
E. Changes In Ownership: In the event a brothel is owned by a business association, the business association shall
not acquire a new owner unless:
1. The licensee furnishes to the police a list of all proposed persons who desire to acquire an interest in the brothel.
2. The Board approves the new owner(s) in accordance with the same substantive and procedural requirements
applicable to new license applicants; and
3. The brothel pays a nonrefundable investigation fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board. (Ord. 837, 1-8-
2019)
4-9-12: LICENSE FEES:
A. Required: Every licensee shall pay a fee set by resolution of the Board for the privilege of operating a brothel in the
City. The fee shall be paid annually or semiannually, as determined by resolution of the Board.
B. Timing Of Payment; Due Date; Termination: The license fee shall be submitted with the annual renewal application
form, which shall be due on or before December 15 of each year during the term of the license. The failure of a
licensee to submit a complete application and license fee in the proper amount on or before December 15 shall
result in the termination of the license at the end of the current term.
C. Fee Increases: The license fee may be increased from time-to-time by resolution of the Board.
D. Partial Years; Timing Of Payment; Fee Amounts: The amount of the license fee for a license granted for a portion of
a calendar year which becomes effective on or before June 30 of that year shall be the amount required for a full
year. The amount of the license fee for a license that becomes effective after June 30 shall be one-half (1/2) of the
amount required for a full year. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-13: WORK PERMIT REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to work as a sex worker, bartender or manager at a brothel, or for any
employee, independent contractor or agent of the brothel, to reside on the premises of a licensed house of
prostitution, unless such person is the holder of a valid current work permit issued by the police in accordance with
this chapter.
B. Registration: Every sex worker, bartender, manager or employee working and/or residing on the premises of a
licensed house of prostitution shall be registered with the police on a form provided by the police, referred to herein
as a "work card", which shall include:
1. The name, age, address, physical description and current picture identification of the applicant, together with a
certified copy of the person's birth certificate;
2. A full set of fingerprints of the person, which shall be updated every six (6) years;
3. Complete employment record of the applicant for the preceding five (5) years;
4. All street and mailing address(es) of the person;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 375/640
5. Complete criminal record of the person, including all convictions, except minor traffic violations, which record
shall include a list with a statement of each offense, and for each offense, the place of its occurrence, the date of
its occurrence, its severity and its disposition;
6. The work card application for a sex worker must be accompanied by either an application fee in an amount set
by resolution by the Board or an annual renewal or revision fee in an amount set by resolution by the Board;
7. The work card application for a person who is not a sex worker must be accompanied by an application fee in
amount equal to the fee required to obtain a bar employee work permit under title 5, chapter 11 of this Code;
8. The work card shall be renewed annually.
9. A work card for a sex worker must be renewed each time the sex worker commences work at a different brothel
within the City.
C. Investigation: The police shall investigate, through all available means, the accuracy of all information supplied by
any applicant on the registration form.
D. Prohibited Employees: No person may work as a sex worker or bartender, manager, or as an employee,
independent contractor or other agent who resides on the premises of a licensed house of prostitution, who:
1. Has been convicted of the possession, use, sale or furnishing of any narcotic, hallucinogenic or dangerous drug
within the past five (5) years;
2. Is on probation resulting from a conviction of a felony;
3. Has been convicted of any crime involving theft, embezzlement or misappropriation of funds within the past five
(5) years;
4. Has been convicted of any crime involving violence or the use of any deadly or dangerous weapon within the
past five (5) years;
5. Has been convicted of any crime involving the illegal use of firearms within the past five (5) years;
6. Has willfully made any false statement or omission in the registration form required by subsection B of this
section; or
7. Is a person under twenty one (21) years of age.
E. Denial Or Revocation Authority: The police may deny or revoke the work permit of a sex worker or of a bartender,
manager, or of an employee, independent contractor or other agent who resides on the premises of a house of
prostitution, who does not qualify under this section or who is found to be violating this Code or State law. The
person whose work card has been denied or revoked may file an appeal to the Board within thirty (30) calendar
days from the date in which the work card was denied or revoked.
F. Card Requirements; Restrictions:
1. Each sex worker, bartender, manager, and each employee, independent contractor or other agent who resides
on the premises of a house of prostitution, shall file and maintain a current work card with the operator of the
brothel before commencing work at the brothel. No work card shall be transferable. All work cards shall state the
name of the licensed brothel where the work card holder works. No sex worker shall change his or her place of
work from one brothel to another without first notifying the police of the proposed change and obtaining a revised
work card.
2. No person may possess more than one work card at a time or work for more than one brothel at a time.
G. Security Requirements/Inspections For Brothels:
1. A brothel may be operated with business entrance and exit doors that are either locked or unlocked. If the brothel
elects to keep the business entrance and exit doors unlocked, they must remain unlocked at all times during
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 376/640
posted business hours and the business hours must be posted on the entrance door. Upon complying with these
conditions, the brothel need not provide keys to the Police Chief. If the brothel elects to keep the business
entrance and exit doors locked during business hours, the owner or manager shall provide the police keys to all
entrance and exit doors of the brothel. If door locks are changed, then current keys must be immediately provided
to the police.
2. a. A brothel license granted pursuant to section 4-9-1 of this chapter is a revocable privilege. By applying for and
receiving a brothel license, a person thereby gives consent and authorizes the police, or any other authorized
representative of the City to enter the brothel business premises or any part of the house of prostitution under the
control of the licensee and the principal office of the brothel at any time during brothel business hours for the
purpose of examining the premises or the books of account of the brothel to ascertain the truth or veracity of
statements made on the brothel license application and to verify that the licensee and the brothel are in
compliance with requirements of the license, this Code and State law;
b. The person in charge of a licensed brothel shall cooperate with the State Board of Health or any other agency
with jurisdiction during:
(1) Any investigation into the circumstances or cause of a case or suspected case, or of an outbreak or
suspected outbreak of an infectious, contagious or communicable disease;
(2) The carrying out of measures for the prevention, suppression or control of an infectious, contagious or
communicable disease, including procedures of exclusion, isolation and quarantine; and
c. The failure of an owner, manager, employee, independent contractor or agent of a brothel to cooperate with an
inspection authorized by this section: 1) shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the brothel
license; and 2) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in section 1-3-1 of this Code. (Ord. 837, 1-8-
2019)
4-9-14: MEDICAL EXAMINATION REQUIRED OF ALL SEX WORKERS:
A. Examination Requirements: Every licensee shall ensure that the requirements of the State Board of Health or any
other agency with jurisdiction are satisfied and that all medical examinations required by State Statutes and
regulations, this Code and the license, are undergone by all sex workers working at the brothel. The foregoing
medical examinations shall:
1. Be performed at least once a week. Medical examinations must be completed and the examination results made
available to the police weekly prior to medical exam record checks being conducted by the Police Department;
2. Be performed by or under the supervision of a physician or doctor of osteopathy duly licensed to practice
medicine in this State;
3. Include all tests specified by the State Board of Health for the detection and diagnosis of sexually transmitted
diseases including, but not limited to, weekly tests for gonorrhea and chlamydia; and a monthly blood test for
syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which tests shall be processed at a licensed and approved
clinical laboratory;
4. Include monthly tests approved by the State Board of Health for the detection of HIV. Appropriate specimens are
to be submitted to and processed at a licensed and approved medical laboratory;
5. Include other medically approved tests deemed advisable by the physician or doctor of osteopathy for
determining whether the sex worker is afflicted with any infectious, communicable or contagious disease;
6. Be performed at the location of the licensed operation, at the physician's office, at a hospital or clinic, as
determined by the physician;
7. Have all samples and specimens submitted to a State licensed and approved medical laboratory for testing, with
all tests performed and reported in accordance with NAC 441A.800 et seq., and all other applicable State
requirements; provided, without limitation, no person may work as a sex worker at a brothel if such test results
show the presence of chlamydia, syphilis, gonorrhea or the antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus;
8. a. Sex workers who have registered with the Police Department but are awaiting the required test results may
reside at the house of prostitution. The owner and the manager shall ensure that all sex workers awaiting test
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 377/640
results and residing at the house of prostitution remain off the floor, which includes the bar area, and that such
sex workers do not engage in any type of sexual activity until such test results have been received from the
physician or doctor of osteopathy who performed the examination;
b. If any sex worker's test results are positive for an infectious, contagious or communicable disease, the sex
worker must be pulled off the brothel floor immediately and the sex worker's work card turned over to the Police
Department. The sex worker must wait at the house of prostitution until the State Board of Health notifies the
sex worker. Once contact by the State Board of Health with the sex worker has taken place, nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit the sex worker from leaving the premises of the house of prostitution. If the sex worker
chooses to remain at the house of prostitution, the sex worker must remain off the floor, which includes the bar
area, and not engage in any type of sexual activity until a clearance to return to work has been communicated
to the Police Department by the physician or doctor of osteopathy who performed the examination. If the owner
is not physically present, the manager of the brothel shall notify the Police Department when a sex worker
leaves the brothel for any period in excess of twenty four (24) hours. Prior to returning to work after an absence
of more than twenty four (24) hours, a sex worker must get a medical examination, must obtain a clearance
from a licensed physician or doctor of osteopathy, and must pick up his or her work card at the Police
Department;
9. All sex workers shall be tested to determine if they are infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) by a licensed and
approved medical laboratory. If antibody testing shows a positive result for HBV, the sex worker will not be issued
a work permit. If the results of the HBV are negative, it will be the responsibility of the sex worker to follow up with
the vaccine series. Sex workers who are undergoing the hepatitis B vaccine series shall not be prohibited from
working in a licensed brothel.
B. Physician Duties: After performing the examination required in subsection A of this section, the examining physician
or doctor of osteopathy shall:
1. Notify the Police Department of every person examined and found not to be infected with a sexually transmitted,
infectious, contagious or communicable disease;
2. Notify the Police Department of every person examined and found to be infected with a sexually transmitted,
infectious, contagious or communicable disease;
3. Report the results of such examinations weekly to the police;
4. If any sex worker examined is found to be infected with a sexually transmitted, infectious, contagious or
communicable disease, the physician or doctor of osteopathy shall immediately notify the police and the brothel
owner, operator and manager of such condition.
C. Denial Based On Positive Result Of Test: No person who has been found to be infected with a sexually transmitted,
infectious, contagious or communicable disease by an examining physician or doctor of osteopathy may again work
as a sex worker in any brothel until such person has received and presented to the police examination results from
an examining physician or doctor of osteopathy stating that the disease which resulted in the denial of the work
permit has been cured and that the person is now free of any sexually transmitted, infectious, contagious or
communicable disease.
D. Authority Of Board: Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Board on its own motion or upon complaints
or reports from any person, from inquiring into the existence of any condition on the premises of any brothel or
house of prostitution which might constitute or cause a health hazard. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-15: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Minors:
1. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, except as otherwise specified in this chapter,
to enter a house of prostitution or be a patron of any brothel.
2. It is unlawful for any licensee, or for any sex worker or employee of such licensee, to compel, entice, encourage,
permit or suffer any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, to enter a house of prostitution or be a patron
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 378/640
of any brothel.
B. Advertising: It is unlawful for anyone who is not properly licensed by the City to own or operate a brothel, to
advertise prostitution within the City by use of print, television or radio media, computers, flyers, CB radio,
telephone books or any other form of advertising.
C. Work Without Permit: It is unlawful for any brothel, licensee or employee of any licensee to allow any sex worker,
bartender or manager, or any employee who resides on the premises of a house of prostitution, to work for or on
behalf of a brothel without that person first obtaining a valid work card from the police. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, persons performing part time maintenance or repair work or delivering supplies to a brothel or house of
prostitution are not required to obtain a work permit for the performance of such duties unless they reside on the
premises of the brothel or within the house of prostitution.
D. Translators: In the event a sex worker does not speak fluent English, a translator shall be supplied whenever
communication between the sex worker and City staff is requested by either the sex worker or the City or otherwise
required. The foregoing includes, without limitation, the requirement that there is a translator whenever a police
officer seeks to communicate directly with a sex worker. The translator must be a natural person who is properly
trained and competent to translate between English and the native language of the sex worker. The translator may
be present by telephone or other electronic means, so long as the means of communication is reliable and audible.
(Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-16: REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A. Causes: The Board may revoke or temporarily suspend any license issued under the provisions of this chapter or
place a licensee on probation with or without conditions for any of the following causes, which list of causes is not
intended to be exclusive:
1. Any cause that would constitute grounds for denial of a license under subsection 4-9-7E of this chapter;
2. Violation by the licensee of any provision of this chapter;
3. Violation by any sex worker, or other person who works on a regular daily or weekly basis for a brothel or in a
house of prostitution, of any provision of this chapter with respect to which the licensee knew or should have
known of the violation;
4. The licensee, with actual or constructive knowledge, permits the existence of any unlawful activity, or health or
safety hazard, within the house of prostitution;
5. The licensee employs a person as a sex worker when such person has not received a health examination as
required by section 4-9-14 of this chapter;
6. The licensee employs a person as a sex worker without having immediately available for inspection a current
report from an examining physician or doctor of osteopathy verifying that the sex worker is free of any sexually
transmitted, infectious, contagious or communicable disease;
7. Willful refusal of the licensee to comply with any order of the Board issued under the provisions of this chapter;
8. Any cause for revocation or suspension listed or described in this chapter; or
9. Any other cause which the Board may determine, in its sound discretion, to be harmful or injurious to the health,
welfare or safety of the general public.
B. Action Of Board: Before action is taken pursuant to subsection A of this section to revoke or suspend a brothel
license or to place a licensee on probation, unless an alternative procedure is specified elsewhere in this chapter,
the Board shall:
1. Conduct a hearing to determine the existence of the cause or causes of action, notice of which hearing shall
have been served upon the licensee or posted upon the premises where the licensed operation is conducted at
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 379/640
least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time of such hearing;
2. Permit the licensee to submit evidence and testimony;
3. Consider all evidence and testimony in support of and in opposition to the action pending;
4. Enter in the minutes of the Board the findings of the Board and reasons for any action taken by the Board, which
action may include:
a. Revocation or temporary suspension of the license, to include placing such conditions on the licensee or the
brothel as are determined to be reasonably necessary to cure the problem and eliminate the violation or other
harm. Conditions imposed by the Board may include requiring action by the licensee that must occur within a
reasonable specified time as an alternative to revocation or suspension; and/or, if necessary to protect the
health, safety or welfare of the public from imminent danger, temporary suspension of the license; or
b. Placement of the licensee on probation for a period of time, with or without conditions, which probation may
provide that a further violation of this chapter or the provisions of the license during the probationary period will
result in the revocation or suspension of the license.
5. Enter in the minutes of the Board an order specifying the action taken.
C. Notice Of Order: Notice of an order issued pursuant to this section shall be served upon the licensee or the
licensee's resident agent by personal service or certified mail, or posted upon the premises of the house of
prostitution occupied by the brothel in any conspicuous location.
D. Action Effective: Any action taken by the Board pursuant to this section shall be effective upon personal service or
delivery of the notice by certified mail to the licensee or the licensee's registered agent, or upon posting of the
notice upon the premises of the house of prostitution occupied by the brothel as specified in subsection C of this
section. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-17: EXCEPTION TO HEARING PROCEDURE (EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF BROTHEL
LICENSE):
Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, a brothel license may be suspended without a hearing
by a written emergency suspension order signed by the Mayor or one member of the Board and the police if, in the
opinion of the signatories, there exists an immediate and present danger to public health and safety which necessitates
the immediate closure of the brothel. Upon the issuance and service of such an order, which service may be effected
by personal delivery upon the owner or manager, or by posting the notice in a conspicuous location at the house of
prostitution, all brothel activity shall immediately cease and the brothel licensee may request a hearing before the
Board within three (3) business days in accordance with the Nevada Open Meeting Law. The proceedings thereafter
shall be held in accordance with section 4-9-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-18: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
All licenses granted under this chapter shall be limited to operations conducted on the property described in the
application and no brothel shall be expanded or moved without a new license application and approval. (Ord. 837, 1-8-
2019)
4-9-19: DEATH OR RESIGNATION OF PERSON LISTED ON LICENSE:
In the event of the death or resignation of a person listed on a brothel license whose participation in the brothel is
necessary for its continued operation, in order to prevent undue hardship to the licensee, the City Clerk, with the
concurrence of the police, may issue a ninety (90) day "temporary license" to the licensee's attorney-in-fact or
guardian, the personal representative of the licensee's estate, or the trustee of the licensee's trust, or any other person
determined by the City to be otherwise eligible to serve as a licensee in accordance with this chapter, pending the
processing of an application for a new brothel license; provided, however, that at the time any such temporary license
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 380/640
is issued by the City Clerk, a full and complete application for a new brothel license shall be on file with the City Clerk,
along with a nonrefundable investigation fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board; further provided, that at the
time any such temporary license is issued by the City Clerk, the matter shall be referred to the police for a complete
investigation of the new application for a new brothel license. The police shall thereafter submit the investigative
findings and recommendation for denial or approval of a new brothel license to the Board. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-20: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of this Code, amended by this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 837, 1-8-2019)
4-9-21: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 837, 1-8-
2019)
Chapter 10
LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES
4-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the LICENSING AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE: A. The offering of retail goods for sale which are classified as sexually
oriented business uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services
offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines, the sale and/or rental of
adult motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like. (Also see applicable sections of the city zoning code for
further requirements defining accessory sexually oriented business use.)
B. Dancing or live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on the presentation of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", if such live entertainment is only presented as an occasional activity of the business
operation and is presented not more than four (4) times in any calendar year.
C. Occasional activity as used in connection with an accessory sexually oriented business use means dancing or
live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on presentation of "specific sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" if such live entertainment is only presented as an occasional activity of the business operation
as herein regulated.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Elko.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 381/640
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PRINCIPAL SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as sexually
oriented business uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. Sexually Oriented Adult Video And/Or Adult Bookstore: A building or portion of a building used for the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape or motion
picture film if a substantial or significantportion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
B. Sexually Oriented Barbershop: Any barbershop which is licensed to cut hair, but features sexual exhibits or
displays:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
C. Sexually Oriented Beauty Salon: Any beauty salon which is licensed to cut hair, hairstyling, manicuring, but
features sexual exhibits or displays:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
D. Sexually Oriented Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of applying
paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is
wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas".
E. Sexually Oriented Cabaret: A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment
and if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation,
display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
F. Sexually Oriented Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a
customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
G. Sexually Oriented Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor which provides the service of engaging in
or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
H. Sexually Oriented Health Club Studio: A massage parlor or health club which provides the massage parlor,
services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 382/640
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
I. Sexually Oriented Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
J. Sexually Oriented Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
K. Sexually Oriented Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than
fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
contains such material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
L. Sexually Oriented Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of
figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers and who engage in "specifiedsexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such
customers.
M. Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or
slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image reproducing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
N. Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more
persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice contains
such material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
O. Sexually Oriented Novelty Business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which
stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
P. Sexually Oriented Sauna: A sauna which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service
provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
Q. Sexually Oriented Soda Pop Or Nonalcoholic Beverage Clubs: A nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial
establishment that does not serve alcoholic beverages but features sexual exhibits or displays:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
2. Live performances which are characterizedby the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified
sexual activities"; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
R. Sexually Oriented Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam
bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 383/640
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USES: Includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion
picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship
establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult
motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, "soda pop" or
nonalcoholic beverage club, adult barbershops, adult beauty salons, and other premises, enterprises, establishments,
businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are
capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Nevada Revised
Statutes section 201.235 et seq., are not included. As used in this chapter, for licensing and regulatory purposes,
sexually oriented business uses do not include houses of prostitution which are licensed, controlled, operated and
zoned under chapter 9 of this title.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse,
oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions inthe context of a sexual relationship, and any
of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing
costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical
restrain of any such persons; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: The increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty five percent
(25%), as the floor area existed on the effective date hereof.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or
similar means; or
C. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 384/640
4-10-3: CLASSIFICATION:
The following uses are classified as sexually oriented business uses:
A. Accessory: Accessory sexually oriented business uses which:
1. Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located and
comprise no more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of the entire business operation; and
2. Do not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise; or
3. Involve or include dancing or live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on the presentation of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", if such live entertainment is only presented as an occasional
activity of the business operation. To qualify as an accessory sexually oriented business use, said activity or
event shall be limited to no more than twenty one (21) consecutive days taking place at minimum thirty (30) days'
interval following a similar activity or event and such activities or events occurring no more than four (4) times
within a calendar year.
B. Principal: Principal sexually oriented business uses include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Body painting studio;
2. Adult video and/or adult bookstore;
3. Cabaret;
4. Soda pop or nonalcoholic beverage club;
5. Companionship establishment;
6. Conversation/rap parlor;
7. Health/sport club;
8. Sexually oriented hotel or motel;
9. Massage parlor, health club or studio;
10. Mini-motion picture theater;
11. Modeling studio;
12. Motion picture arcade;
13. Motion picture theater;
14. Novelty business;
15. Sauna;
16. Steam room/bathhouse facility;
17. Barbershops;
18. Beauty shops;
19. Private clubs.
C. Exception For Houses Of Prostitution: Houses of prostitution which are regulated under chapter 9 of this title are not
included within the classification of sexually oriented business uses as herein regulated. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 385/640
4-10-4: LICENSING REQUIRED:
A. Required; Exemptions:
1. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a principal sexually oriented business use without
having first secured a license as herein provided.
2. Except for dancing and live entertainment, as herein regulated, accessory sexually oriented business uses shall
not require a license pursuant to this section. An accessory sexually oriented business use which hires or
contracts for live entertainment or dancing must apply for and obtain a temporary business license for each
event. The application for the temporary license must be on a form provided by the city clerk.
B. Application: An application for a license for a principal sexually oriented business use must be made on a form
provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (.6"). Applicants who must comply with section 4-10-19 of
this chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of that section.
C. Qualifications: The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section and section 4-10-5 of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the fire department and
building official.
D. Signature: If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business use is an individual, the individual must
sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business use is
other than an individual, each individual who has an interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section4-10-5 and each applicant shall be considered a
licensee if a license is granted. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-5: LICENSE APPLICATION CONTENTS AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Content Of Application: The license application for a principal sexually oriented business use shall contain the
following:
1. Names, ages and addresses of all persons who have or will have any financial interest in the operation, including
the owner of the real property, if the real property is leased to the operator;
2. Names, ages and addresses of persons who are or will be personally responsible for the conduct and
management of the operation;
3. A recent photograph and complete set of fingerprints of all persons listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this
section;
4. Names and addresses of every other business in which the applicant has any financial interest, including the
type of such business and the nature of the applicant's interest;
5. Names and addresses of all employers of the applicant in the preceding five (5) years;
6. All the applicant's addresses for the preceding five (5) years;
7. A list of all prior convictions of the applicant for any crime, excluding minor traffic violations, which list shall
include a statement of the offense, the place of its occurrence, the date of its occurrence, and the disposition of
the case;
8. A complete and accurate financial statement of the applicant;
9. The street address of the property upon which the proposed operation is to be conducted.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 386/640
B. Referral For Investigation: Upon presentation of any license application to the city clerk, the city clerk shall refer
such application to the chief of police for investigation. The chief of police shall conduct a full investigation of all
information contained in the license application.
C. Report Of Investigation Results: Within forty five (45) days after any application is referred by the city clerk to the
chief of police, the chief of police shall report the results of his investigation in writing to the city clerk,which shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. A complete statement of the results of all investigations undertaken;
2. A list of any errors or omissions found to exist in the application; and
3. A recommendation by the chief of police for approval or denial of the license.
D. Refusal Conditions: The city clerk, at her own direction or at the request of the chief of police, shall refuse to grant a
license to any applicant:
1. Where an applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of any felony or a crime involving any of the
following:
a. Any offense relating to:
(1) Indecent exposure;
(2) Public sexual indecency;
(3) Public sexual indecency to a minor;
(4) Sexual abuse;
(5) Sexual conduct with a minor;
(6) Sexual assault;
(7) Sexual assault of a spouse;
(8) Molestation of a child;
(9) Lewd and lascivious acts.
b. Any of the prostitution or pandering offenses.
c. Any offense relating to:
(1) Production, publication, sale, possession and presentation of obscene items;
(2) Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications;
(3) Furnishing obscene or harmful items to minors;
(4) Public display of explicit sexual materials;
(5) Creation, transportation or distribution of obscene films, photographs or motion pictures of minors;
(6) Obscene or indecent telephone communications to minors for commercial purposes.
d. Any offense relating to:
(1) Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor;
(2) Sexual exploitation of a minor;
(3) Admitting minors to public displays of sexual conduct.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 387/640
e. Any offense relating to:
(1) Incest;
(2) Contributing to delinquency and dependency;
(3) Permitting life, health or morals of minor to be imperiled by neglect, abuse or immoral associations;
(4) Sex with animals.
f. Any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of the state, other states, other
cities or other countries.
g. Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses for which:
(1) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement
imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(2) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement
for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(3) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month
period.
2. Who has any financial interest in, or connection with, any business which is illegal where such business is
located.
3. When the proposed establishment is not in the correct zoning.
4. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
5. An applicant is delinquent in his or her payment to thecity of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him
or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business use.
6. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form, or has wilfully omitted or incorrectly
stated any material fact on the application.
7. An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this section within two (2) years immediately
preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
8. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented
business use within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a
sexually oriented business use has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.
9. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business use has not been approved by the fire department
and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
10. The license fee required by this section has not been paid.
11. An applicant has been employed in an sexually oriented business use in a managerial capacity within the
preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated that he or she is unable to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business use premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
12. An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with this code.
13. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or
applicant's spouse.
14. An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed above may
qualify for a sexually oriented business use license only when the time period required by this section has
elapsed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 388/640
15. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
classification or classifications of the sexually oriented business use for which it is granted, the expiration date,
and the address of the sexually oriented business use. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the sexually oriented business use so that theymay be easily read at any time.
E. License Restrictions: Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall have the following restrictions:
1. No operation may be conducted in violation of any applicable city, county, state or federal ordinance, statute or
regulation;
2. No change in ownership, partners or persons with any interest in the sexually oriented business use after being
approved for a license without first obtaining city approval in regards to any changes of ownership, partners, or
persons with any interest in the sexually oriented business use. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-6: LICENSE FEES; LICENSE INVESTIGATION FEES:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business use license shall be set by resolution of the city council. The
investigation fee for the purpose of issuing a license shall be set by resolution of the city council. In the event that the
license is denied upon application, the licensee fee shall be refunded; however, no part of the license investigation fee
shall be returned to the applicant. No part of the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license is suspended or
revoked. All licenses shall be issued on an annual basis from January 1 to December 31 of each year. The license fee
shall be paid annually or semiannually and shall be due on or before December 31 of each year. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-7: INSPECTION:
A. Authorized: An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, fire department and
building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business use for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. Refusal: A person who operates a sexually oriented business use, or his or her agent, or his or her employee,
commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the
police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-8: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Application: Each license shall be renewed only by making a renewal application as provided by the city clerk. The
cityclerk and chief of police shall review the renewal application and shall grant or deny the renewal license
application on the same basis as set forth in section 4-10-5 of this chapter. Applications for renewal shall be made
at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. If the city clerk or chief of police determines good and sufficient
cause is shown by the applicant for failure to file a timely renewal application, the city clerk may, if other provisions
of the section are complied with, grant the application.
B. Denial: When the city clerk or chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license
for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city clerk finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date denial became final.
C. Penalty: If any license fee provided for by this chapter shall remain unpaid for more than fifteen (15) days after the
same is due, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) shall be added to the license fee and collected by an officer or
employee of the city clerk's office. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-9: SUSPENSION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 389/640
The city clerk or chief of police may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days following written
notice and an opportunity to be heard if the city clerk or chief of police determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
A. Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter or with the uniform codes adopted by the city in this code or
applicable state laws, including those relating to buildings, electricity, plumbing, fire safety and mechanical
equipment; or violation of state law relating to the same;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business use premises as authorized by this chapter or any
other chapter of this code; or
C. Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business use in a peaceful and law abiding
manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-10: REVOCATION:
A. Authorized: The city clerk or chief of police may revoke a license preceded by written notice and an opportunity to
be heard if a cause of suspension in section 4-10-9 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended
within thepreceding twelve (12) months.
B. Conditions: The city clerk or chief of police may revoke a license if the city clerk or chief of police determines that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information to the city during the application process;
2. A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
3. A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
4. A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
licensee's license was suspended;
5. A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 4-10-5D1 of this chapter for which the time
period required in that section has not elapsed;
6. On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense
occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in subsection 4-10-5D1 of this chapter, for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business use
at the time the offenses were committed;
7. A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or
masturbation to occur in or on the licensed premises;
8. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, local lodging tax, or other taxes or fees
related to the sexually oriented business use;
9. Failure of any licensee to apply for a renewal as required in section 4-10-8 of this chapter shall be grounds for
the city clerk or chief of police to revoke the license. Any license thus revoked may be reinstated only upon
compliance by the licensee with all requirements of this chapter relating to original license applications.
C. Appeal No Effect: The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
D. Exception: Subsection B7 of this section does not apply to sexually oriented motels as a grounds for revoking the
license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view, or the licensee, or employee
knowingly allowed anyfelony to be committed on or about the premises of the sexually oriented motel.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 390/640
E. Term Of Revocation: When the city clerk or chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business use license for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city clerk or chief of police finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-11: APPEAL:
A. Authorized; Time Limit: If the city clerk or chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a
license, the city clerk or chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of the action, and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the city clerk or chief of police within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the city's action. The filing of an appeal
stays the action of the city clerk or chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a
final decision.
B. Procedure: The city council may hear the appeal itself or may appoint a committee of the city council or an
independent hearing officer to hear the matter, report findings of fact and a recommendation for disposition to the
city council. Hearings on the appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee or applicant shall have the right to
appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence in its behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
city council shall make a final decision.
C. Additional Requirements: The city council may condition denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license
upon appropriate terms and conditions. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business use
under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. 440, 4-12-
1994)
4-10-13: COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS FOR EXISTING BUSINESSES:
A. The regulations and provisions of this chapter set forth in sections 4-10-15 through 4-10-26 of this chapter shall
beapplicable to all persons and businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date hereof, and regardless of whether such persons and businesses are
currently licensed to do business in the city.
B. All such persons and businesses requiring sexually oriented business use licenses shall have fifty (50) days from
the effective date hereof to comply with the regulatory provisions of this chapter set forth in sections 4-10-15
through 4-10-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-14: PRINCIPAL SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USE LIVE PERFORMERS
REGISTRATION CONTENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 447, 7-12-1994)
4-10-15: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES:
A. Employment Of Minors: An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 391/640
B. Offense: A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS:
A. Employment Of Minors: A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years or
allow any person under eighteen (18) years of age on the premises.
B. Offense: A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity or seminudity or knowingly allows
another to appear in a state of nudity or seminudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be
viewed from the public right of way.
C. Offense By Minor; Defense: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if the person
appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution
under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons
of the opposite sex.
D. Barrier Required: A person commits an offense if the person provides any room in which the employee or
employees and the patron or patrons are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier at least
three feet (3') high. The patron or patrons shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees
shall remain on the other side ofthe barrier.
E. Bed, Sofa Or Mattress: A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-17: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED MOTION PICTURE
THEATERS:
A. Presence Of Minor: A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen
(18) years to appear in a state of nudity or seminudity in or on the premises of a sexually oriented motion picture
theater or allows any customer of the business under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises.
B. Defense: It is a defense to prosecute under subsection A of this section if the person under eighteen (18) years was
in a restroom not open to public view or to persons of the opposite sex. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-18: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED MOTELS:
A. Presumption: Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented
and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is a sexually oriented motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
B. Offense: A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business use license, he or she rents or subrents
a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he or she rents or subrents
the same sleeping room again.
C. Terms Defined: For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting
a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 392/640
4-10-19: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR
VIDEOS:
A. Requirements: A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business use, other than a
sexually oriented motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other videoreproduction which depicts specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business use license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram
of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more managers' stations and the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be
permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale
or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (.6"). The city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for a
renewal application if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant(s).
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the
chief of police or his designee.
4. It is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty
and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. In the case of a
sexually oriented motion picture arcade (or "peep show"), it is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises
and the licensed employees who are present to ensure that no more than one person occupies a viewing room or
"peep" booth at any time, and that all other entrances to peep booths or other viewing areas (and to the aisles,
walkways and hallways leading to peep booths or other viewing areas) are maintained free of any obstruction
such as a door, curtain, panel, board, slat, ribbon, cord, rope, chain or other device.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a
manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two (2) or
more managers' stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
anypurpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct
line of sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the owner and operator, and it shall also be the duty of all employees present in the
premises, to ensure that the line of sight and view areas specified in subsection A5 of this section remain
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is
present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection
A1 of this section.
7. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor
level.
8. It shall be the duty of the owner and operator, and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the
premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in
the premises.
9. No operator, owner or employee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between view rooms or booths.
10. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.
11. The operator or owner shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths
to determine if any openings or holes exist.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 393/640
12. The owner or operator shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
13. The owner or operator shall cause all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of,
or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other
porous material shall be used within forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
B. Offense: A person having a duty under subsection A of this section commits an offense if the person fails to fulfill
that duty. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-20: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO SEXUALLY ORIENTED "SODA POP" OR
NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CLUBS:
A. Presence Of Minors: A "soda pop" or nonalcoholic beveragecontrol club must not allow a customer, patron or
employee on the premises under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Compliance: Must comply with sections 4-10-24, 4-10-25 and 4-10-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-21: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO SEXUALLY ORIENTED BARBERSHOP:
A. Presence Of Minors: Any sexually oriented barbershop must not allow a customer, patron or employee on the
premises under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Compliance: Must comply with sections 4-10-24, 4-10-25 and 4-10-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-22: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO SEXUALLY ORIENTED BEAUTY SALON:
A. Presence Of Minors: Any sexually oriented beauty salon must not allow a customer, patron or employee on the
premises under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Compliance: Must comply with sections 4-10-24, 4-10-25 and 4-10-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-23: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO A SEXUALLY ORIENTED MASSAGE PARLOR OR
HEALTH STUDIO:
A. Presence Of Minors: A massage parlor or health studio must not allow a customer, patron or employee on the
premises under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Compliance: Must comply with sections 4-10-24, 4-10-25 and 4-10-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-24: REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES APPLYING TO ALL SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS USES, PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business use, including principal and accessory use, or any sexually oriented
business use employee, to:
A. Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed premises, except that in sexually oriented
business uses which exclude minors from less than all of the business premises, minors shall be permitted in
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 394/640
nonexcluded areas;
B. Allow, offer or agree to conduct any sexually oriented business use with persons under the age of eighteen (18)
years or in the presence of any persons under the age of eighteen(18) years;
C. Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the premises;
D. Allow or offer a patron to touch any specified anatomical areas or to touch any specified anatomical areas of a
patron;
E. Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or distribution of controlled substances on the licensed
premises;
F. Allow sexually oriented business use employees to possess, use, sell or distribute controlled substances, while
engaged in the activities of the business;
G. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities
harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of a sexually oriented business use employee
or business, the sexually oriented business use employee committing, offering or agreeing to commit prostitution,
attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution, soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
H. Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sexual act in the presence of any customer or patron;
I. Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in the presence of the sexually oriented business
use employee or on the premises of a sexually oriented business use;
J. Allow any person to appear in a state of nudity or seminudity in any area of the premises of a sexually oriented
business which can be viewed from the public right of way. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-25: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES OF PERFORMERS:
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or performer, while performing in any sexually oriented business use
licensed pursuant to this chapter, including principal and accessory uses:
A. To touch in any manner any other person except to receive money given hand to hand from a patron to the
performer;
B. To throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
C. Except as otherwise set forth herein, to accept any money, drink or any other object from any person while
performing;
D. To otherwise allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or object on the performer or
within the costume or person of the performer; or
E. To perform in an area other than on a stage raised to a height of not less than two feet (2') with the stage separated
by a setback area of a distance of not less than two feet (2') from any customer observation area measured in a
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 395/640
straight line from the nearest point of the stage to the nearest point of customer observation. The patrons shall
remain at least two feet (2') from the performers and the performers shall remain on the setback stage area at least
two feet (2') from any customer observation area.
The foregoing prohibitions shall not prohibit two (2) or more performers from touching each other while
performing, provided such touching does not involve the touching of specified anatomical areas whether clothed or
unclothed. (Ord. 447, 7-12-1994)
4-10-26: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES OF PATRONS:
It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any sexually oriented business use, including principal and accessory
uses, to touch in any manner any performer; to lay or place any money or object on any performer or employee of the
sexually oriented business use; or to give or offer to give to any such performer or employee of the sexually oriented
business use any money or object while such performer or employee of the sexually oriented business use is
performing; except that money may be placed on the stage which shall not be picked up by the performer except by
hand or may be given hand to hand from the patron to the performer. (Ord. 447, 7-12-1994)
4-10-27: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of this code, as amended by this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-28: CIVIL INJUNCTION:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a civil suit for injunction as well as prosecution for
criminal violations and liability for licensing sanctions such as suspension or revocation. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
4-10-29: STRICT LIABILITY AND LIABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF OTHERS:
A. The offenses and violations described in this chapter are strict liability offenses and violations requiring no proof of
culpable mental state.
B. A licensee of a sexually oriented business use is jointly and individually liable for violations of any offenses under
this chapter by the employees of the sexually oriented business use, and for all civil and criminal sanctions or
remedies for such violations and offenses, including, but not limited to, license suspension or revocation, prescribed
herein. (Ord. 440, 4-12-1994)
Chapter 11
AIRPORT PASSENGER FACILITY CHARGE
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the meanings
set forth in this section:
AIRPORT: The area of Elko municipal airport, located in Elko County, Nevada.
CHARGE EFFECTIVE DATE: The date on which the passenger facility charge is effective as provided in section 4-11-
6 of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 396/640
CITY: The city of Elko, Nevada.
CITY COUNCIL: The council created and empowered by the city of Elko pursuant to Nevada state law.
ENPLANED PASSENGER: A domestic, territorial or international revenue passenger enplaned at the airport in a
scheduled or nonscheduled aircraft in interstate, intrastate or foreign commerce; provided, that enplaned passenger
shall not include a passenger enplaning to a destination receiving essential air service compensation as provided by 14
code of federal regulations 158.9.
FAA: Federal aviation administration, department of transportation, United States of America.
MANAGER: The city manager of Elko, Nevada.
PASSENGER FACILITY CHARGE (PFC): The charge imposed on enplaned passengers pursuant to section 4-11-2 of
this chapter. (Ord. 497, 2-24-1998)
4-11-2: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
The city finds that:
A. The city owns and controls that certain airport and air navigation facility located in Elko County, state of Nevada, and
known as the Elko municipal airport (airport).
B. The airport promotes a strong economic base for the community, assists and encourages world trade opportunities,
and is of vital importance to the health, safety and welfare of the state.
C. The airport is a commercial service airport as that phase is defined in 14 code of federal regulations part 158, as
adopted by the FAA, being a public airport enplaning two thousand five hundred (2,500) or more scheduled air
passengers per year.
D. The deregulation of the airline industry, the restructuring of airline ownerships, and fluctuating market changes in the
field of commercial aviation have placed new financial challenges on the city.
E. The operation of Elko municipal airport as a public facility attracting scheduled airline passenger service by airline
carriers at the Elko municipal airport imposes financial responsibility on the city for airport facilities and operations.
F. The city will require substantial expenditure for capital investment, operation, maintenance and improvements for the
airport facilities to meet the future demand for passenger air travel.
G. The congress of the United States has authorized the adoption of a passenger facility charge program by local
airports pursuant to the aviation safety and capacity expansion act of 1990 (pub. L. 101-508, title IX subtitle B,
November 5, 1990) (hereinafter the "act").
H. It is in the city's best economic interest to adopt and in the interest of airline passengers that the city adopt a
passenger facility charge program as identified in this chapter to maintain and further expand the transportation
facilities of the city.
I. In establishing and implementing the passenger facility charge program, the passengers using the airport should
contribute to a greater degree toward the development of airport facilities used by passengers and continued
improvements thereof.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 397/640
J. The fees implemented by this chapter are reasonable for the use of the airport and aviation facilities by the general
public.
K. The purpose of this chapter is to enact a passenger facility charge program consistent with the above findings
andthis chapter and the regulations published pursuant thereto shall be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes expressed. (Ord. 497, 2-24-1998)
4-11-3: PASSENGER FACILITY CHARGE:
A. Establishment Of Passenger Facility Charge: Commencing not later than the first day of the second month thirty
(30) days after the approval of the FAA of the city's passenger facility charge program authorized by this chapter, or
on such date thereafter as the passenger facility charge can be collected as determined by the manager, there shall
be imposed at the Elko municipal airport a passenger facility charge as may be fixed and established from time to
time by resolution of the city council.
B. Expiration: The passenger facility charge authorized by this chapter shall expire on the date determined pursuant to
regulations adopted by the FAA.
C. Authorization Of Manager: The manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to execute the FAA application for
authorization of the city's PFC program, including the assurances contained therein and other documents
necessary for implementation of the PFC program on behalf of the city in a format approved by its legal counsel.
(Ord. 607, 7-29-2003)
4-11-4: ELIGIBLE PROJECTS:
The passenger facility charge collected pursuant to this program shall be expended for projects approved by resolution
of the city council and determined to the FAA to be eligible under the act and rules and regulations adopted by the FAA
pursuant to such statute. (Ord. 497, 2-24-1998)
4-11-5: COMPLIANCE WITH FAA REQUIREMENTS:
The passenger facility charge authorized by this chapter shall be collected and distributed pursuant to the rules and
regulations adopted by the FAA pursuant to such statute. (Ord. 497, 2-24-1998)
4-11-6: VIOLATIONS:
In the event any airline violates any term or condition of this chapter, the city may exercise any rights or remedies
allowed by law or equity. (Ord. 497, 2-24-1998)
4-11-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date hereof shall be retroactive to February 12, 1998. (Ord. 497, 2-24-1998)
Chapter 12
PROHIBITION OF ADVERTISING OBSCENITY
4-12-1: PROHIBITION AGAINST OBSCENITY IN ADVERTISING:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 398/640
No advertisement may contain or consist of any obscene item or material. (Ord. 695, 5-13-2008)
4-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:
ADVERTISEMENT: The attempt by publication, dissemination, solicitation or circulation to induce, directly or indirectly,
any person to enter into any obligation or to acquire any service or any title to or interest in any property, or any acts
related to the inducement, promotion or encouragement of a sale, regardless of the medium utilized.
COMMUNITY: The residents of the city.
ITEM: Includes any book, leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide,
motion picture, figure, object, article, novelty device, recording, transcription, phonograph record or tape recording,
videotape or videodisc, with or without music, or other similar items.
MATERIAL: Anything tangible which is capable of being used or adapted to arouse interest, whether through the
medium of reading, observation, sound or in any other manner.
OBSCENE: Any item or material which:
A. An average person applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to
prurient interest; and
B. Taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; and
C. Does one of the following:
1. Depicts or describes actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a
sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the
following: sexually oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or
2. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
3. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
4. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
5. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually
revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or
other physical restraint of any such persons; or
6. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
7. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or
8. Human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or
the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. (Ord. 695, 5-13-2008)
4-12-3: DETERMINATION OF OBSCENITY:
The determination of whether an advertisement contains an obscene item or material shall be judged with reference to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 399/640
ordinary adults, unless it appears, from the character of the item or material or the circumstances of its dissemination,
to be designed for children or a clearly defined deviant group. (Ord. 695, 5-13-2008)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
NUISANCE
5-1-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the NUISANCE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ELKO, may be cited as such,
and will be referred to hereafter as the "nuisance code".
B. Purpose And Scope:
1. It is determined and declared as follows:
a. The city has a substantial and legitimate interest in seeing that its community, including property, buildings and
premises within its limits, is kept in a safe and aesthetically pleasing condition;
b. The keeping or maintaining of property, buildings and premises at variance with the level of maintenance of
surrounding properties will result in blighting and/or unsafe conditions and substantial diminution in the
employment, use, aesthetic and property values of such surrounding properties; and
c. It is desirous to promote the maintenance of property, buildings and premises in order to enhance the
community appearance, and the safe, social and economic conditions of the community.
2. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and to promote
the maintenance of property, buildings and premises in orderto enhance the livability, community appearance,
and the safe, social and economic conditions of the community.
3. This chapter shall apply to all property, buildings and premises within the city without regard to the use, the date
of construction or alteration.
4. The city council prefers that actions to declare and abate a public nuisance proceed through municipal court;
however, nothing prohibits the city manager from proceeding before the city council. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Any term used herein in the singular shall include the plural, and any such term used in the plural shall include the
singular. The word "person" shall include any natural person, firm, company, partnership or corporation, and the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to any owner, lessor or lessee of the premises.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle:
A. Upon a city street, highway or road which is so disabled or in which a state of disrepair that its normal operation
is impossible or impractical;
B. That has been left unattended and dangerously close to a travel lane on a city street, highway or road so as to
possibly impede traffic; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 400/640
C. Which has not been moved or used for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days and reasonably appears to
have been deserted1.
ABATEMENT: The removal, stoppage or destruction of that which causes or constitutes a public nuisance, whether by
breaking or pulling it down, or otherwise destroying or effacing it.
CITY: The city of Elko.
CITY COUNCIL: The city of Elko city council.
CLASSIC ROD: Any passenger car or light commercial vehicle entitled to registration with the Nevada department of
motor vehicles as a "classic rod" which:
A. Has a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of one ton or less; and
B. Was manufactured not later than 1949, but at least twenty (20) years before the date of application for
registration2.
CLASSIC VEHICLE: Any passenger car or light commercial vehicle entitled to registration with the department of motor
vehicles as a "classic vehicle" which:
A. Has a manufacturer's rate carrying capacity of one ton or less;
B. Was manufactured at least twenty five (25) years before the date of application for registration; and
C. Contains only the original parts which were used to manufacture the vehicle or replacement parts that duplicate
those original parts3.
JUNK VEHICLE: A vehicle, including component parts, which:
A. Has been ruined, wrecked, dismantled or rendered inoperative;
B. Is unfit for further use in accordance with the original purpose for which it was constructed;
C. Is not registered with the Nevada department of motor vehicles; and
D. Has value principally as scrap which does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00)4.
OCCUPANT: Legal entity that, through rights of ownership or rental, has the use and enjoyment of the subject real
property for residential or commercial purposes.
OWNER: A legal entity listed as current or rightful owner as recorded in the official records of the Elko County
recorder's office.
PREMISES: Land and the building or structures upon it.
PROPERTY: Any real property, real estate, land, lot, or part of real property, real estate, land or lot.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A tenant, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or other person having control over a
structure or parcel of land and, in the case where thedemolition of a structure is suggested as a means of abatement,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 401/640
any lienholder whose lien interest is recorded in the official records of the Elko County recorder's office.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
STREET ROD: Any passenger car or light commercial vehicle entitled to registration with the Nevada department of
motor vehicles as a "street rod" which:
A. Has a manufacturer's rate carrying capacity of one ton or less; and
B. Was manufactured not later than 19485.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally aboveground.
TRAILER: Any wheeled tow behind a vehicle that can be utilized for any intended commercial, private, residential or
industrial function.
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE: Any vehicle or component thereof on which there is not displayed evidence of current
registration with the Nevada department of motor vehicles or current registration with a similar agency of another state.
VEGETATION WHICH IS A PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any natural or person planted products that have been allowed to
grow unkept and have become hazardous, a fire hazard or have become a rodent, diseased or insect determined
habitat upon any open, graded or improved parcel, lot or property within the city limits.
VEHICLE: A piece of mechanical equipment intended for the conveyance or temporary housing of persons or personal
property or parts thereof, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, boats, campers, camper shells, vans, motor
homes, converted buses, motorcycles, ATVs and similar vehicles.
WEEDS: A useless and troublesome plant of negligible or no value and usually of uncontrolled growth. (Ord. 589, 10-
3-2002)
5-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit or maintain a public nuisance, or wilfully omit or refuse to perform anylegal
duty relating to the removal of any such public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease, or
permit to be used, any building or portion thereof, knowing that the same is intended to be, or is being used for,
committing or maintaining any such nuisance. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Each and all of the things, properties, acts, commissions, omissions, performances, failures and operations in this
section set forth, within the limits of the city, are hereby declared to be and are, and each of them is, declared to be and
is a public nuisance:
A. Businesses, premises and acts. Any business, occupation, premises, act or thing which is not ordinarily a nuisance
per se, is, and each of them is, hereby declared to be a nuisance when, by reason of its or their location, nature,
time or method of operation, or effect, it or they shall intend to injure or interfere with the health, peace, comfort,
convenience, safety or enjoyment of the public or one or more persons in the neighborhood.
B. Every place:
1. Wherein any swindling game or device therefor shall be kept;
2. Wherein any fighting between animals and/or birds shall be conducted; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 402/640
3. Wherein any intoxicating liquors are kept for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
C. Every act unlawfully done and every omission to perform a duty, which act or omission:
1. Shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of any considerable number of persons;
2. Shall unlawfully interfere with, befoul, obstruct or tend to obstruct, or render dangerous for passage or use, a
lake, river, stream, canal, ditch or public park, square, street, alley, bridge or highway; or
3. Shall in any way render a considerable number of persons insecure in life or the use of property.
D. Dangerous blasting. Blasting, when the same is injurious to neighboring property owners or to neighboring property.
E. Explosives. The manufacture, storing or keeping of explosives in large quantities, without the special permissionof
the city council.
F. Unguarded cellar doors. Cellar doors on sidewalks, when not properly guarded or protected.
G. Dangerous excavations. Excavations so close to any public street or alley as to render it dangerous for a person
using the way lawfully and with ordinary care, unless such excavation is properly guarded against the occurrence of
accident.
H. Obstruction on streets or alleys. The obstruction of any street or alley, or part thereof, except such part as may be
necessary in the erection and construction of buildings or other improvements upon the adjoining property.
I. Offensive matter. The discharge of any sewage, garbage, refuse or other noxious matter in any street, alley, gutter or
highway. The accumulation of refuse and other waste to the point it annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health,
comfort or repose of any person.
J. Dense smoke. Any chimney, stationary engine, boiler, smokestack or other machine, engine, receptacle, pipe or
conduit from which is emitted black or dense smoke or fumes, or smoke, fumes or gases containing soot, cinders or
other matter, at such times or places or in such quantities as to be injurious to the public health or as to result in
such deposits of soot or other substances as to injure or interfere with the health, comfort, peace or enjoyment of
neighboring residents.
K. Noxious or dry weeds. Weeds which are by their nature noxious or which when dry constitute a danger or menace of
catching or spreading of fire.
L. Vegetation which is a public nuisance. Any natural or person planted products that have been allowed to grow
unkept and have become hazardous, a fire hazard, or become a rodent, diseased or insect determined habitat
upon any open, graded or improved parcel, lot or property within the city limits.
M. Burning weeds and rubbish. The burning of weeds or other rubbish, except with the permission of, and in
accordance with, the regulations of the proper authorities by obtaining a burn permit from the city fire department
when sanctioned.
N. Public nuisance shall further mean any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage, building, structure or any part of any
of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole, smokestack, vehicle, or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk,
subspace, dock or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of
the condition in which the same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, safety, life,
limb or property, orcause any hurt, harm, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city, in any one or
more of the following particulars:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 403/640
1. By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health and safety of the community.
2. By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon, about or around the aforesaid property.
3. By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the property, and/or being vacant, and/or failing to
complete improvements of any nature, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of the property in the
immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such property is situated or such
condition exists.
O. Hazardous materials. Any substance as defined as a hazardous material by the code of federal regulations 49 or
any substance defined as a hazardous waste by the code of federal regulations 40, which, because of improper
transportation, storage, use or disposal, may cause an unreasonable risk to safety, health and/or property. The spill
or escape of any such substance may, in the discretion of the fire chief or police chief, be immediately declared a
public nuisance and ordered abated at the expense of the at fault party and/or owner of such substance.
P. Outside storage of vehicles, trailers, equipment, building material and other property, unless protected in such
manner as to prevent the harboring of insects, flies, rodents, snakes and other animals.
Q. Junk, abandoned and/or unregistered vehicles.
1. Except as stated herein, the keeping of, for any reason, any junk, abandoned and/or unregistered vehicle or
vehicles on any highway, street or other thoroughfare or upon any public or private property within the city.
2. The provisions of subsection Q1 of this section do not apply to:
a. Persons licensed pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 487.050 or 487.410;
b. Junk or unregistered vehicles on private property of a licensed dealer, manufacturer, distributor or rebuilder of
vehicles;
c. Junk or unregistered vehicles on private property used as a farm, ranch, mine or licensed vehicle repair shop;
d. Junk or unregistered vehicles on private property used by any person engaged in the restoration of one or
more vehiclesentitled to registration as a street rod, classic rod or classic vehicle;
e. No more than two (2) junk vehicles that do not qualify under subsection Q2a through Q2d of this section;
f. No more than two (2) unregistered vehicles which:
(1) Are on private property and, if on the ground, have all tires inflated and affixed thereto or, if raised, have all
tires affixed thereto.
(2) Have no shattered window glass, and the hood, fender, doors, truck and all other body components affixed
thereto and maintained in a closed position, and have not sustained collision damage.
3. The abandonment of a vehicle upon any highway, street or other public thoroughfare, or upon any public or
private property within the city.
4. The police chief or any peace officer who has reasonable grounds to believe a vehicle has been abandoned shall
attach a notice to said vehicle, in the form of a citation for illegal parking, and if said vehicle has not been
removed within forty eight (48) hours after such notice is attached to said vehicle, the police chief or peace officer
is authorized to remove or cause to be removed any such vehicle from any street, highway, public thoroughfare,
public or private property, for the purpose of storage or disposition, to any garage or storage facility within the city.
5. If the owner of the junk, abandoned and/or unregistered vehicles fails to remove the vehicle as designated in the
notice of violation served under subsection Q4 of this section, the city manager, the building inspector, the fire
chief, the chief law enforcement officer or the city engineer, or any of them or their authorized designee, is
authorized to have the junk, abandoned and/or unregistered vehicle towed from the place of violation to a
designated place. The owner of the abandoned vehicle, including secured parties and the owner and any
secured parties of the junk or unregistered vehicle, as well as the property owner or responsible party where the
junk or unregistered vehicle is improperly located, shall be held liable for the costs of removal and storage. (Ord.
589, 10-3-2002)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 404/640
5-1-5: WRITTEN COMPLAINT OF EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Whenever a written complaint is filed with the office of the city clerk alleging the existence of a "public nuisance", as
defined herein, within the city, the office of the city clerk shall notify the city manager, who shall have the appropriate
city official investigate said complaint. Nothing herein shallprevent the police chief, fire chief, building inspector or other
city personnel from identifying and reporting a nuisance. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF WRITTEN COMPLAINT:
The official to whom such notification is given by the city manager, shall investigate the facts claimed to amount to a
nuisance and shall report verification, or lack thereof, to the city manager within ten (10) days. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-7: NOTICE OF PROPERTY OWNER AND OCCUPANT:
A. Prior to providing written notice to the property owner and/or occupant as provided for in subsection B of this
section, the police chief or his designee, fire chief or his designee, or building official or his designee, may mail a
notice of the complaint regarding the nuisance to the owner or appropriate person in charge or in control of the
premises upon which the nuisance exists. Such written notice shall provide that the commencement of work to
remove the nuisance must take place within a maximum of ten (10) days of mailing of the notice, otherwise, the
nuisance shall be filed with the city manager for further action.
B. Upon receipt of the verification required by section 5-1-6 of this chapter, or if the nuisance is not removed as
prescribed by the notice provided by the police chief, fire chief or building official, the city manager shall, unless the
matter is referred to the city attorney as provided hereafter, mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
of the complaint of existence of a nuisance to the owner or appropriate person in charge or in control of the
premises upon which the nuisance exists. As a separate or additional remedy, the city manager may provide the
city attorney's office a copy of all investigative material for the purpose of filing an action in the municipal court for
prosecution of a violation of this code and abatement of the nuisance. In the event of a conviction in municipal
court, the judge, in addition to his or her other customary sentencing powers, may exercise any of the powers
conferred upon the city council upon a finding that a public nuisance exists. (Ord. 601, 5-25-2003)
5-1-8: PROVISIONS OF NOTICE:
If the city manager elects to serve notice on the appropriate person, the notice shall require:
A. Time Limit For Removal: Commencement of work for the removal of the nuisance within five (5) days after mailing of
the notice, and removal of the nuisance by a specified datewhich shall be within a reasonable time after the
commencement of the work; or
B. Hearing Request: Within five (5) days of the mailing of the notice, a request in writing from the owner or other
appropriate person that a hearing be held before the city council to determine if in fact a nuisance does exist,
whether such nuisance should not be abated or removed, or that it be shown that there is no nuisance or that the
nuisance was caused by the city. The date specified in the notice by which the owner or other appropriate person
must abate the condition is tolled for the period during which a hearing is requested and a decision is received.
C. Evidence Presented At Hearing: The city council may proceed to take evidence at the hearing so noticed and the
person so noticed is entitled to be heard. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-9: ABATEMENT ORDER BY CITY COUNCIL:
After such hearing, if in the judgment of the majority of the city council a nuisance does in fact exist, the city council
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 405/640
shall order the same to be abated or removed within such reasonable time as the city council shall designate and the
city council shall instruct the city clerk to give notice to the owner or other appropriate person in the manner herein
above set out, to abate and remove the same, which said notice shall require the commencement of work, to abate or
remove the same within five (5) days after proof of receipt of said notice and to complete the same within a reasonable
time thereafter as designated by the city council. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-10: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
A. Authorized: If work to abate and remove said nuisance is not commenced within said five (5) day period after proof
of receipt of said notice and posting of notice, or said nuisance is not abated or removed within the reasonable time
designated by the city council, the city, through its various departments, shall have authority to enter upon the
property to abate or remove the nuisance, and upon the completion of said abatement, departments shall file with
the city clerk a statement of costs to include the amount of work done, all expenses and costs incurred of any
nature whatsoever, a description of the premises upon which the work was done, and the name of the person, if
known, chargeable with such costs and expenses, all as more specifically set forth hereafter. The city council
thereupon at a regular meeting shall determine if said costs and expenses were proper, the name of the person
chargeable therewith and the description of the premises against which a lien shall be placed.
B. Lien For Cost Of Removal: The city council may provide that the expenses of removing or abating the nuisance shall
be a lien upon the property upon which the nuisance is located. Such lien shall be perfected by certified mail of a
notice of the lien to the owner, or other appropriate person, and forwarded to the last known address as set forth in
Nevada Revised Statutes section 268.4124(4)(a), and by filing with the county recorder a statement by the city clerk
of the amount of expenses due and unpaid and describing the property subject to the lien.
C. Extent Of Abatement: In abating such nuisance, the city may go to whatever reasonable and just extent may be
necessary to complete the abatement of the public nuisance and should it be practicable to salvage any material
derived from the aforesaid abatement, the city may sell the salvaged material at public sale for the best price
obtainable and shall keep an accounting of the proceeds thereof.
D. Proceeds Of Sale Of Materials: The proceeds, if any, obtained from the sale of any material salvaged as a result of
an abatement of a public nuisance by the city shall be deposited to the general fund of the city and any deficit
between the amount so received and the cost of the abatement may be levied as a lien against the property in
question by the city council and collected as any other assessment by the city; however, any other alternative
collection method may be utilized by the city to recoup the deficit. Should the proceeds of the sale of such salvaged
material exceed the cost of abatement, the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property from which the
public nuisance was first abated when a proper claim to the excess is established.
E. Assistance Utilized In Abatement: In abating a public nuisance, the city council may call upon any of the city
departments or divisions for whatever assistance shall be deemed necessary or may by private contract cause the
abatement of the public nuisance.
F. Statement Of Costs Filed: The city shall, within fifteen (15) days after completing the removal and abatement, cause
a statement of costs to be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-11: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT:
A. Contents Of Notice: Upon receipt of the statement of costs, the city clerk shall provide, by certified mail or hand
delivery, to the property owner of the property on which the public nuisance has been abated, notice of the amounts
set forth in the statement, plus an additional amount sufficient to defray the costs of the notice and stating that the
costs of abating the nuisance is a lien upon the property. The city clerk shall further state the full amount must be
paid withintwenty (20) days of the certified mail or hand delivered notice or an objection filed within twenty (20) days
of the certified mail or hand delivered notice. If the payment or objection is not received, the city clerk shall perfect
the lien by filing a statement with the county recorder of the amount of expenses due and unpaid in accordance with
the city charter section 2.290.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 406/640
B. Objection; Hearing: If objection of either the property owner or their representative are received by the city clerk prior
to the expiration of the twenty (20) day period, the city clerk shall refer the matter to the city council for review at the
next regular meeting. The owner shall be notified in writing by regular mail that the city council shall hear evidence
concerning the statement of costs at the specified date and time.
C. Uphold Of Decision: If, after the hearing, it is determined the proposed lien or any part of it is proper and authorized,
the city council shall direct the city clerk to record with the county recorder a statement of the amount of expenses
due and unpaid and a description of the property subject to the lien. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-12: OVERHEAD CHARGE, CIVIL PENALTIES:
The city council may provide any other civil penalties for persons responsible for such nuisance as the city council
deems proper under the circumstances and in accordance with the provisions of the city charter section 2.290. (Ord.
589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-13: ABATEMENT COST COLLECTION:
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the maintenance of a suit by the city against any of the persons herein
mentioned to collect the expense of such abatement or removal or the prosecution criminally under the ordinances of
the city of any person creating, maintaining, causing or committing a nuisance or owning or in possession, charge or
control of the real property upon which a nuisance is created, maintained, caused or committed. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-14: NATURE OF LIEN:
Any lien for the expense of abatement and civil penalty as provided herein shall:
A. Be perfected by filing with the county recorder a statement by the city clerk of the amount of expenses due and
unpaid and describing the property subject to the lien, which sum shall include any civil penalty assessed by the city
and shall bearinterest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum unless otherwise mandated by law.
B. Be coequal with the latest lien thereon to secure the payment of general taxes.
C. Not be subject to extinguishment by the sale of any property on the account of the nonpayment of general taxes.
D. Be prior and superior to all liens, claims, encumbrances and titles, other than the liens of assessments and general
taxes. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-15: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
A. Generally: The remedies herein are cumulative and the city may proceed under one or more such remedies.
B. Violations: In addition to any cost incurred, any person in violation of any of the provisions of this nuisance code:
1. Upon conviction, shall be guilty of a city offense and punished as provided in section 1-3-1 of this code;
2. Shall be subject to the abatement notices, appeal procedures and lien or civil action provisions of this chapter;
3. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues, whether pursued criminally or civilly, constitutes a separate
violation for purposes of criminal prosecution or civil proceedings; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 407/640
4. Upon a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction that a nuisance exists, the court may order the city to secure
and close the property. In addition, the court may order the owner to pay the city for all costs and fees incurred by
the city in abating the condition and order any other appropriate relief.
C. Transfer Not Relief: The transfer of any and all interest in any manner of any property, building or premises against
which a notice of violation has been issued shall not relieve the parties served with such notice.
D. Requirements For Transfer: Any legal entity, real or statutory, who transfers an interest, including, but not limited to,
a sale, trade, lease, gift or assignment in any property, building or premises against which a notice of violation has
been served shall either:
1. Obtain a written assumption of liability from the new owner of record for the items listed in the notice of violation;
or
2. Acknowledge, in writing, its responsibility for compliancewith the notice of violation.
A copy of the assumption or acknowledgment shall be presented to the city within ten (10) days of the transfer.
E. Responsible Person: The owner of record, as recorded in the county recorder's office records, of the property upon
which a violation of this nuisance code shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over the property,
building or premises. If more than one person shall be recorded as the owner, said person shall be jointly and
severally presumed to be persons having lawful control over the property, building or premises. (Ord. 589, 10-3-
2002)
5-1-16: EMERGENCY DECLARATION AND ABATEMENT:
All contrary provisions in this chapter notwithstanding, whenever the building inspector or in his or her absence, the city
manager, determines a public nuisance exists and the public health, safety or welfare may be in immediate danger,
then he shall notify the mayor and/or a majority of the city council who may call an emergency council meeting, in
accordance with the open meeting law and section 2.060 of the city charter, to seek an abatement order from the city
council. When emergency abatement is authorized, notice to the owner is not required prior to abatement; however,
the provisions regarding notice of the statement of costs shall apply. (Ord. 589, 10-3-2002)
5-1-17: METHOD OF ADOPTION AND EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
That upon adoption, the city clerk is hereby directed to have the ordinance codified herein published, by title only,
together with the council members voting for or against its passage, in the "Elko Daily Free Press" newspaper, a
newspaper printed and published in the city, for at least one publication.
This chapter shall be effective upon the publication mentioned above.
This chapter shall apply to all nuisances concerning any properties, conditions and uses with the city irrespective of
whether the nuisance, use or condition was commenced or existed prior to the addition of this chapter. (Ord. 589, 10-3-
2002)
Chapter 2
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
5-2-1: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously and wilfully disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood, or person
or family, by loud or unusual noises, or by tumultuous and offensive conduct, threatening, traducing, quarreling,
challenging to fight, or fighting. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 408/640
5-2-2: ASSEMBLING TO DISTURB THE PEACE OR TO COMMIT UNLAWFUL ACT:
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble for the purpose of disturbing the public peace, or
committing any unlawful act, and not disperse, on being desired or commanded so to do by a judge, justice of the
peace, sheriff, coroner, constable, police officer or other public officer. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-3: PROVOKING COMMISSION OF BREACH OF PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to, by word, sign or gesture wilfully provoke, or attempt to provoke, another person
to commit a breach of the peace. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-4: EXCESSIVE NOISE AND VIBRATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make, permit, continue or cause to be made or to create any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city that is audible to a person with ordinary hearing
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any district zoned residential except for:
1. Sound emanating from scheduled athletic or special event on public property;
2. Sounds from or at parades, or street fairs and similar festivals sponsored, permitted or sanctioned by the city of
Elko;
3. Noise from all governmental operations;
4. Noise from any sanitation operations;
5. Noise from all lawful fireworks or noisemakers on holidays;
6. Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster, to
restore or repair public or private utilities, or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger;
7. Subject to subsection C of this section, private construction activities; and
8. Noise from lawful business activities (except for private construction activities).
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to allow any idling of vehicles for a period of longer than thirty (30)
minutes in any district zoned residential, industrial or commercial, or in any location within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of a district zoned residential.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in private construction activities between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. without the prior written approval of the city of Elko.
D. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTURBING: Noise which is perceived by a person of ordinary sensibilities as interrupting the normal peace and
calm of the area.
UNNECESSARY: Any excessive or unusually loud sound or any sound which is of such character, intensity and
duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of any person.
UNREASONABLY LOUD: Noise which is substantially incompatible with the time and location where created to the
extent that it creates an actual or imminent interference with peace or good order. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 409/640
5-2-5: SOLICITATION, ACCOSTING OF PERSONS AND OCCUPATION OF PROPERTY WITHOUT
PERMISSION:
It shall be an unlawful offense for any person to engage in any of the following conduct:
A. Soliciting anyone to engage in or engaging in lewd or dissolute conduct in any public place or in any place open to
the public or exposed to public view;
B. Without both prior permission from the property owner and a valid license issued by the city (if a license is required),
accosting any other person in any public place or in any place open to the public for the purpose of begging for
food, money or other articles, or for the purpose of selling or attempting to sell any form of personal property, to
include food items or small articles; provided, as used in this paragraph, the term "accosting" shall mean
approaching, speaking to or touching another person in a challenging or aggressive way;
C. Going from house to house begging for food, money or other articles; or
D. Lodging in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession or in control thereof;
E. Occupying public streets, curbs or roadway medians for the purpose of begging for food, money or other articles
when doing so creates a safety hazard. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-6: OBSCENE LANGUAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any profane or obscene language upon any street or alley, or in any public
place, within the hearing of any person. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-7: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the limits of the city, to designedly make an indecent or obscene exposure of
his or her person to the person of another. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-8: PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION:
It is unlawful to urinate or defecate on public property except in a public restroom or to urinate or defecate on private
property in the view of any person on public property. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-9: PROHIBITION AGAINST SITTING OR LYING IN DOORWAYS:
A. No person shall sit or lie down in any entrance to any building if that entrance is posted with a sign prohibiting such
conduct. For purposes of this section, "entrance" means the entire area between the outer edge of an entrance to a
building and the exterior door, and includes the entry way, doorway or vestibule.
B. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to any person sitting or lying down in any entrance to a
building due to a medical emergency. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-10: BLOCKING OF SIDEWALKS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 410/640
A. A person shall not, with the intention of interfering with the free passage of pedestrians thereon, physically block or
attempt to block with his or her own body or an object or vehicle, that portion of a public sidewalk used for
pedestrian travel.
B. A person shall not physically block or attempt to block with his or her own body or any object or vehicle, with the
intent of interfering with the free ingress or egress of pedestrians or vehicular traffic, the entrance to or exit from any
public or private property abutting a public sidewalk. (Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
5-2-11: PENALTIES:
Every person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
(Ord. 782, 6-10-2014)
Chapter 3
ANIMALS AND FOWL
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The person appointed by the chief of police for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
of this chapter, together with his/her deputies and authorized representatives.
ANIMAL SHELTER SUPERVISOR: The person appointed by the city manager for the purpose of administering the city
policies and regulation over the care and custody of animals at the city animal shelter, over the care and maintenance
of the city animal shelter facilities, over the care of the books and records of the city animal shelter and over the
budgetary and personnel concerns of the city animal shelter.
ANIMALS: Any and all types of livestock, dogs and all other animals, both domesticated and wild, male and female,
singular and plural.
CAT FANCIER: Any person owning, keeping or possessing on his or her property in safe and adequate facilities in
excess of three (3) cats, as shall be permitted pursuant to subsection 5-3-9C of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any licensed establishment at which dogs are bred, raised for sale, trained, rented, boarded,
cared for or quarantined, for profit, excluding dental, medical or surgical care. This definition shall not apply to the
premises of a private dog fancier and the animals raised thereon.
CRUELTY OR TORTURE: Every act of omission or commission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death
is caused to any animal.
CUSTODIAN: Any person who has custody of any animal or permits the same to be kept or to stay on or about such
person's premises.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which shall bite, attempt to bite or have a propensity to bite any human or animal,
except that any animal that bites or attempts to bite any person or other animal unlawfully upon its owner's premises or
which is provoked or teased, shall not be deemed a dangerous animal.
DOG: Both male and female.
DOG FANCIER: Any person owning, keeping or possessing on his or her property in safe and adequate facilities in
excess of three (3) dogs as shall be permitted pursuant to subsection 5-3-9C of this chapter.
FOWL: Any and all fowl and poultry, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 411/640
HOUSEHOLD PETS: The following list of domesticated animals are defined as household pets:
A. Domesticated dogs, excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals.
B. Domesticated cats, excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays.
C. Vietnamese potbelly pig not used for commercial or breeding purposes.
D. Domesticated races of golden hamster.
E. Domesticated races of guinea pigs.
F. Domesticated races of rats or mice.
G. Two (2) or less domesticated rabbits not used for commercial or breeding purposes.
H. Parrots, parakeets or finches.
I. Two (2) or less ducks or doves not used for commercial or breeding purposes.
J. All captive bred canaries.
K. Domesticated races of goldfish.
L. Aquarium fish, meaning those species which are listed in H. Axelrod and W. Vorderwinkler, "Encyclopedia Of
Tropical Fishes", 29th edition, 1988, except those species prohibited by the Nevada division of wildlife.
M. All nonvenomous reptile species, except those species prohibited by the Nevada division of wildlife.
N. All species of the class Insecta.
O. Two (2) or less chukker, partridge, valley quail, pheasant, peafowl not used for commercial or breeding
purposes.
P. Gerbils.
Q. European ferrets.
R. Hedgehogs.
S. Two (2) or less laying hens not used for commercial or breeding purposes kept in a secured chicken coop.
IMPOUND: Shall not include or be construed as the voluntary turning in of any animal or fowl by the owner or
custodian of such animal or fowl.
NEUTERED DOG: A dog, whether male or female, which has been surgically rendered incapable of producing
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 412/640
offspring, as evidenced by a signed statement to that effect by a licensed veterinarian.
NONNEUTERED DOG: A dog, whether male or female, which has not been surgically rendered incapable of
producing offspring, as evidenced by a signed statement to that effect by a licensed veterinarian.
PET SHOP: Any profitmaking or commercial establishment, premises or part thereof, maintained for the purchase,
sale, exchange or hire of animals of any type; except that the term shall not include livestock auctions.
PUBLIC PLACES: Includes streets, alleys, public buildings, parks, schoolyards, and all other property owned or
controlled by the city of Elko, county of Elko or state of Nevada.
RUNNING AT LARGE: Except as herein expressly provided, shall mean within the city and off the premises of the
owner, or custodian of the animal or fowl, and not accompanied by the owner, a member of the immediate family of the
owner, or the custodian of such animal or fowl, and controlled by a leash (not to exceed 8 feet) or at "heel" beside a
competent person and obedient to that person's commands.
SECURED CHICKEN COOP: A covered cage or pen which houses poultry and controls free movement.
VETERINARIAN: A person who is validly currently licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state of Nevada.
WILD ANIMALS AND DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: All living members of the kingdom Animalia, including those born or
raised in captivity, except the following animals which are defined as domesticated animals:
A. The species Canis familiaris (domesticated dogs, excluding purebred wolves, coyotes or jackals). Hybrids with
wolves are also defined as wild animals until a rabies vaccination for wolf hybrids has been approved by the
Nevada state board of veterinary medicine and the city has received notification of such approval. At such time
hybrids with wolves will be defined as domesticated animals.
B. The species Felis catus (domesticated cats, excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays).
C. The species Equus caballus (domesticated horses).
D. The species Equus asinus (donkeys).
E. The species Bos taurus (cattle).
F. The subspecies Ovis aries (domesticated sheep).
G. The species Capra hircus (domesticated goats).
H. The subspecies Sus scrofa domestica (swine, including Vietnamese potbelly).
I. Domesticated races of the species Gallus domesticus (chicken) or Meleagris gallopavo (domesticated turkey).
J. Domesticated races of the species Mesocricetus auratus (golden hamster).
K. Domesticated races of the species Cavia aperea porcellus (guinea pigs).
L. Domesticated races of rats or mice.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 413/640
M. Domesticated races of the species Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbits).
N. All captive bred members of the species of the families Psittaeidae (parrots, parakeets), Anatidae (ducks,
geese), Fringillidae (finches), and Columbidae (domesticated doves and pigeons).
O. All captive bred members of the species Serinius canaria of the class Aves (canaries).
P. Domesticated races of the species Carrassius auratus (goldfish).
Q. Aquarium fish, meaning those species which are listed in H. Axelrod and W. Vorderwinkler, "Encyclopedia Of
Tropical Fishes", 29th edition, 1988, except those species prohibited by the Nevada division of wildlife.
R. All nonvenomous reptile species, except those species prohibited by the Nevada division of wildlife.
S. All species of the class Insecta.
T. All members of the subfamily Phaisianae (chukker, partridge, valley quail, pheasant, peafowl).
U. The species Bison (American bison).
V. The species Meriones unguiculatus (gerbils).
W. The species Llama glama (llama).
X. The species Mustela putorius (European ferret).
Y. The family Erinaceidae (hedgehogs). (Ord. 804, 5-25-2016)
5-3-2: CITY ANIMAL SHELTER:
A public city animal shelter is hereby provided and established, and the same shall be located at such place in the city
as shall be fixed from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-3: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND ANIMAL SHELTER SUPERVISOR:
A. Animal Control Officer: Unless otherwise provided by the chief of police, there shall be an animal control officer.
B. Animal Shelter Supervisor: The city manager shall appoint an animal shelter supervisor. If at any time there should
be no duly appointed and acting animal shelter supervisor, the duties of the animal shelter supervisor shall be
performed by a person appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-4: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND ANIMAL SHELTER SUPERVISOR:
A. Animal Control Officer: Animal control officer duties are as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 414/640
1. The animal control officer is hereby empowered to enforce all provisions of this chapter and all laws of the state
relating to the care, treatment, control, regulations and impounding of animals. The animal control officer is
further empowered to take up, impound and safely keep any animal found to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
2. The animal control officer shall deliver to the animal shelter supervisor and keep a true and complete record of
the number and description of all animals and fowl taken into his/her custody, with the date of their receipt, and
the date and manner of their disposal.
3. The animal control officer is hereby authorized and directed to take up and impound any animal kept or found on
private or public property if such animal has been observed by said animal control officer to be in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, or if such animal is being subjected to torture or cruelty as defined in Nevada
Revised Statutes section 574.050. The officer should exercise caution when utilizing this right of entry. If the
owner by some act, bars the officer's way onto the premises, the officer should retire from the scene. The animal
control officer shall leave written notice of impoundment on the premises from which the animal is taken at the
time it is taken.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or attempt to interfere with the animal control officer, any police
officer, the animal shelter supervisor, or any shelter employees in the performance of any duty imposed by the
provisions of this chapter and every person who shall unlawfully take or attempt to take any dog seized pursuant
to the provisions hereof, from the custody of the animal control officer or any police officer and every person who
shall remove or attempt to remove from the city animal shelter any dog, cat or other animal or fowl impounded
therein, without having first redeemed the same as provided, or obtained permission from the animal control
officer or animal shelter supervisor to do so, shall be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter.
B. Animal Shelter Supervisor: Animal shelter supervisor duties are as follows:
1. The animal shelter supervisor shall act as the chief administrator of the city animal shelter and shall provide for
the intake and care of animals brought to the city animal shelter by the animal control officer, police officers, and
other persons as authorized by this chapter.
2. The animal shelter supervisor shall keep a true and complete record of the number and description of all animals
and fowl taken into custody, with the date of their receipt, and the date and manner of their disposal, with the fees
and charges collected on account of the animals and fowl, and the disposition thereof. The record shall be kept in
a book provided for that purpose, which shall be the record book of the office of the animal shelter supervisor,
and not be removed therefrom. He/she shall also keep conspicuously posted, at the entrance of the animal
shelter and in his/her office, a list of all animals impounded and detained by him/her. He/she shall also provide
necessary subsistence for all animals and fowl while in his/her custody.
3. The animal shelter supervisor shall provide for the daily sanitation, maintenance and repair of the animal shelter
facilities and shall promptly notify the city manager in the event major maintenance and repair needs are
discovered.
4. The animal shelter supervisor shall administer in conjunction with the human resource department and the city
manager, the city policies and procedures concerning personnel matters, including, but not limited to, disciplinary
matters, record keeping, wages and benefits.
5. The animal shelter supervisor shall participate in the city budgetary process concerning the animal shelter to the
extent required by the city manager. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-5: INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR:
The city council shall have the authority to provide for by contract the maintenance and operation of the city animal
shelter by an independent contractor. In such event, the contract may modify and supersede provisions contained
herein regarding the office of the animal shelter supervisor and his duties. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-6: ANIMAL ADVISORY BOARD:
(Rep. by Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 415/640
5-3-7: PURCHASES FOR CITY ANIMAL SHELTER:
Unless such powers are otherwise provided for by contract by the city council, the animal shelter supervisor shall have
the power to purchase on the credit of the city, all necessary forage or feed for impounded animals and fowl, and shall
certify to all accounts therefor, which upon presentation to the city council, if found correct, shall be ordered paid. (Ord.
662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-8: FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING BY ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND ANIMAL SHELTER
SUPERVISOR:
It shall be the independent duty of the animal control officer and animal shelter supervisor to deliver to the city finance
department, on a timely basis or as required by the financial department, all monies received in the performance of
their duties. All expenditures by the animal control officer or animal shelter supervisor shall be made pursuant to the
city purchasing policy. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-9: DOG LICENSE AND DOG OR CAT INOCULATION REQUIRED:
A. License And Inoculation Required: Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person owning,
harboring or having the care, custody or possession of any dog or cat or ferret to keep or maintain any such dog or
cat or ferret in any place in the city, unless such dog is licensed and such dog or cat or ferret is inoculated as
provided in this chapter. For purposes of prosecution, failure to license and failure to inoculate are separate
offenses. All cats or ferrets over four (4) months of age shall be inoculated against rabies by a veterinarian. A
person having a dog or cat fancier's permit or a special use permit, as set forth in subsection C of this section, may
make an application to the animal control officer for inspection of their dogs or cats by the animal control officer; and
shall then pay the annual fee set by resolution of the city council on their spayed/neutered or
nonspayed/nonneutered dog or cat to the city.
B. Requirements For Licensing: The city clerk, the deputy city clerk or authorized representatives shall not license any
dog until:
1. It has been inoculated against rabies by a veterinarian and the owner or custodian of said dog has produced a
certificate of inoculation from such veterinarian, the expiration date of which shall not occur prior to October 1, of
the calendar year from which the license is issued; or
2. The owner or custodian of said dog shall furnish a statement from a veterinarian to the effect that said dog need
not be or should not be inoculated; or
3. The owner or custodian of such dog shall provide the city clerk with proof satisfactory to such clerk, in lieu of a
certificate of inoculation, that said dog has been inoculated with canine and antirabies vaccine approved by and
in the manner prescribed by the state department of agriculture.
C. Number Permitted; Permit Requirements: No person shall keep more than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats over four
(4) months of age at any place, on any premises, or in any one residence, located within the city, used or occupied
by human beings, without first obtaining a dog or cat fancier's permit or a special use permit as authorized in
subsection K of this section from the city; the dog or cat fancier permit, which shall be issued by the city clerk or
his/her designee. The signature of the city clerk or his/her designee shall affirm that animal control has reviewed the
application and consulted with the city clerk or his/her designee regarding the application. Said application for a
fancier's permit, may be refused for a time to meet the requirements of subsection E of this section. If the
application for a fancier's permit is granted, said permit shall be issued with such restrictions or on such conditions
as may be deemed necessary or advisable by the animal control officer to prevent the keeping of such dogs or cats
from becoming a nuisance and is subject to revocation for violation of the restrictions or conditions. A dog or cat
fancier's permit shall be issued for an annual fee as set by resolution of the city council, which is not subject to
proration or refund. Any dog or cat fancier meeting the provisions of this subsection and having a validly issued
permit in his possession need not have the property where the dogs or cats are maintained rezoned. A dog or cat
fancier may not in any event keep and maintain on his property more than a total of six (6) adult dogs or six (6)
adult cats (unless permitted pursuant to subsection K of this section) over the age of four (4) months. Such permit
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 416/640
shall be for a term of one calendar year, unless sooner revoked by the process for revocation set forth under this
chapter.
D. Commercial Kennels; Pet Shops: Every person owning, operating or maintaining a commercial kennel and/or pet
shop within the city must first obtain a kennel and/or pet shop license in addition to any business license required
from the city to operate said kennel and/or pet shop. The issuance of any license therefor shall at all times be
subject to planning and zoning regulations of the city; provided, however, that this section as to the business license
shall not apply to quarters maintained by political entities for the purpose of using animals in law enforcement or
animal control or to quarters maintained by veterinarians for the purpose of surveillance or treatment of animals on
a temporary basis.
E. Inspection Of Premises: Any person required to obtain any permit under any of the provisions of this section shall
permit their premises to be inspected by the animal control officer at reasonable times and the animal control officer
shall approve the fancier's permit if he finds all of the following to be true:
1. Keeping the dogs or cats at the location specified in the application will not violate any ordinance, rule or
regulation of the city or any law of the state; and
2. The premises contain an adequate enclosure for keeping the dogs or cats; and
3. Maintenance of the dogs or cats will not endanger the peace, health or safety of persons residing in the city; and
4. The premises are capable of being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and any dog or cat therein will
not be subject to neglect, cruelty or abuse; and
5. Keeping and maintenance of the dogs or cats will not constitute a nuisance.
F. License Fee:
1. Every person owning or having the care, custody or control of, or maintaining any dog or dogs, four (4) months
old or older in the city, shall pay to the city clerk an annual license fee as set by resolution of the city council for
each neutered dog and each nonneutered dog. All owners of dogs said to be neutered must have proof of
neutering or a certificate from a veterinarian. Such license shall be for the calendar year, or the parts thereof
remaining after the date such license is obtained and shall be payable in advance.
2. No prorations or deductions shall be made on fractional parts of any year. All dog licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which issued. The annual license fee of dogs not previously licensed hereunder shall
be due and payable when such dog reaches four (4) months of age or upon acquiring ownership or possession of
an unlicensed dog four (4) months of age or older, or upon the owner or custodian of any dog four (4) months of
age or older establishing residence in the city. If any dog license fee payable hereunder is not paid within sixty
(60) days from the date it became due, a penalty as set by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city
clerk with and in addition to the regular annual license fee for such dog. It shall be the duty of the person making
application for any dog license to provide the city clerk with the name and address of the owner or custodian of
such dog and the name, breed, color or custodian of such dog owned or kept by such owner or custodian. Upon
proof, by the applicant for any dog license, of the inoculation herein required, the payment of the proper annual
license fee and any penalties applicable and upon providing the information herein required, the city clerk, the
deputy city clerk or the duly authorized representative of the clerk, shall issue an appropriate dog license or
certificate stating the calendar year for which such license fee is paid, the date of payment, the name and
residence address of the persons to whom such license is issued, and the description of the dog and shall issue
a metal or plastic tag number to correspond with the license or certificate with the calendar year stamped
thereon. If such dog tag shall be lost at any time prior to the expiration date thereof it shall be the duty of the
owner, or person having control of the dog for which said lost tag was issued to procure a new tag and pay a fee
as set by resolution of the city council to the city clerk.
G. Inoculation; Reinoculation: All dogs or cats and ferrets kept, harbored or maintained in the city limits, four (4)
months of age or older shall be inoculated by a veterinarian with an antirabies vaccine approved by and in the
manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed by the state department of agriculture, from time to time;
provided, that every dog or cat shall be reinoculated at not more than twenty four (24) month intervals thereafter if
inoculated with modified live vaccine, or at not more than twelve (12) month intervals if inoculated with killed
vaccine. Ferrets shall be reinoculated at not more than twelve (12) month intervals. It shall be unlawful for the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 417/640
owner or custodian of any dog or cat or ferret to keep, maintain or allow such dog or cat or ferret to remain within
the city limits unless such dog or cat or ferret shall have been inoculated with antirabies vaccine by a veterinarian at
the time and in the manner specified in this chapter.
H. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats owned by or in the custody or in the control
of persons who are nonresidents of the city and are temporarily within the city for a period of not to exceed fifteen
(15) days, nor to dogs or cats brought into the city exclusively for the purpose of participating in any dog or cat
show or exhibition, nor to a dog which has been trained and is actually being used to act as a guide for the blind;
provided, that no such dog shall run at large in the city and no owner or custodian of such dog shall permit the
same to run at large in the city.
I. Transferability; Refunds: Dog tags and licenses shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refund shall
be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the owner's leaving the city before the expiration of
the license.
J. Use Of Proceeds: All proceeds collected under the provisions of this section for the licensing of dogs and cats shall
be deposited in the general fund of the city and budgeted for the use and benefit of the animal shelter.
K. Special Use Permit:
1. The city council may by special exception, authorize the keeping of up to eight (8) dogs or ten (10) cats. A person
seeking such special use permit shall file a written application therefor with the city council. Each application shall
be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by a schedule adopted by resolution of the city council and
filed in the office of the city clerk. Where, in the opinion of the city council such authorization or exception may be
granted if accompanied by appropriate conditions and safeguards, the city council shall impose such conditions
and safeguards and make them part of the permit. Said special use permit may be revoked for violations of the
conditions, restrictions or safeguards imposed therein.
2. No special use permit authorization by the city council shall be authorized unless the city council determines that
keeping more than six (6) dogs or cats meets the requirements of subsection E of this section and the following
requirements:
a. The specific site is an appropriate location for such use;
b. The special use will not be injurious, dangerous or a nuisance to the public health, or hazardous to the public
safety;
c. Will not produce noise, odor or other public nuisance conditions in amounts objectionable or detrimental to the
normal use of adjacent property; and
d. If located in residential zoned area, will not be injurious to the character or amenities thereof.
L. Revocation Of Fancier Or Special Use Permit: Any fancier's permit or special use permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to further restrictions and revocation. Upon application of any interested person, the
animal control officer shall investigate and review whether any fancier permit or special use permit shall be
restricted or revoked. If the animal control officer determines to recommend restrictions or revocation, the animal
control officer shall prepare an order to show cause setting forth the recommendation, the reasons therefor, the
circumstances of any complaints received by the city and the date, time and location for a hearing on the matter
before the city council. Said order shall be served on the permittee by personal service or certified mailing at least
ten (10) days before the intended hearing. At the hearing, the determination of the city council shall be final. In
emergency situations for public safety or animal welfare, the animal control officer may impound animals during the
pendency of restriction or revocation proceedings.
M. Renewal Of Fancier Or Special Use Permit: Fanciers' permits and special use permits shall automatically renew
upon the payment of the required fees for such permits; provided, however, the animal control officer may inspect
the premises prior to such renewal and institute procedures consistent with a permit revocation or denial where
circumstances so warrant. Moreover, no permit which is the subject of pending revocation procedures may be
renewed prior to the outcome of such process. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 418/640
5-3-10: DOG COLLAR; LICENSE TAG:
Every owner or custodian of a dog licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall provide such dog with a suitable
collar or harness around the neck or forepart of the body of such dog to which the license tag issued by the city and the
required inoculation tag shall be affixed, and shall see that the collar and the tag are constantly worn. It shall be
unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to permit said dog to be on the streets or public places in the city unless
such dog is collared and/or harnessed with the city license tag and inoculation tag for such dog affixed thereto as
required herein, or on any streets or other public places in the city, and any dog which is not wearing the city license
tag, inoculation tag and collar or harness as herein provided may be taken up, impounded and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-11: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed under this chapter, to
suffer, permit or allow such animal to run at large within the city. For the purposes of this chapter, all animals within the
city and off of the premises of the owner or custodian of such animal and not in an automobile, trailer or similar
confinement, or which is not effectively restrained by leash, chain, strap or cord not exceeding eight feet (8') in length
attached to the collar or harness of such animal and held by some person or fastened to some stationary object shall
be deemed running at large. This provision shall not apply to special areas that may be designated by the city manager
for training programs or purposes under direct obedience command. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-12: ANIMALS TRESPASSING:
Any person may apprehend, capture or take up the same by any reasonable and humane means any animal or fowl
trespassing upon his property to his injury or annoyance and immediately turn it over to the owner or custodian of such
animal or fowl, or to the animal control officer or to any police officer of the city, who shall impound and dispose of such
animal or fowl pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to turn over any animal or
fowl to the animal control officer or a police officer of the city without revealing who the owner or custodian of such
animal or fowl is, if such person knows the identity of the owner or custodian. It shall be unlawful for any person other
than the animal control officer or any police officer in the performance of their official duties, to apprehend, capture or
take up any animal or fowl under the provisions of this chapter and retain possession or control of the same for more
than eight (8) hours. (Ord. 263, 8-22-1978)
5-3-13: DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT; INDECENT EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any female dog or cat in heat to keep, harbor or otherwise maintain
such dog or cat in the city, unless the same is confined in a boarding kennel or veterinary hospital or on the owner's
property in a totally enclosed area, during the entire period such dog or cat is in heat. Any female dog or cat in heat
which is not so confined is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded and
disposed of under the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any stud horse or bull, or other animal, indecently, or let any male
animal to any female animal unless the same be done in some place wholly enclosed and out of public view. (Ord.
249, 7-26-1977)
5-3-14: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Dangerous Animal Defined: It shall be prima facie evidence that an animal is dangerous when it has bitten any
person, other than a person who was trespassing upon the property of the owner or custodian of the animal, or is
attacking or has bitten, injured or killed any livestock or other animal, or is an animal of a vicious character, habit or
disposition.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 419/640
B. Notification Of Bite: Whenever the owner of any animal has knowledge that such animal has bitten a human being,
he shall immediately notify the police department of the incident, and confine such animal in a suitable quarantine
area consisting of a completely enclosed area which prevents the animal from coming into physical contact with
other animals or people, for a period of ten (10) days, or until a written release is secured from a licensed
veterinarian. If the owner is not present or if the owner does not have a suitable quarantine area, the animal control
officer or any police officer may seize such animal, whether on or off the owner's premises, and such animal shall
be impounded, at owner's expense, for observation, and shall not be released for a period of ten (10) days or until a
written release is issued by a licensed veterinarian. Except as provided hereafter, if a dog has been impounded and
the owner appears and claims the animal, the animal control officer shall release the animal to the owner, upon
proof that the owner has a suitable area in which to quarantine the animal. Upon release of the animal to its owner,
the owner shall immediately confine the animal for the remainder of the ten (10) day period. At the discretion of the
animal control officer, with the approval of the animal shelter supervisor, an animal may remain impounded at the
expense of the city during the pendency of criminal charges due to public safety concerns. Any person contesting
the continuation of an impound under this provision may seek relief from the municipal court by motion.
C. Destruction: If any animal so impounded develops rabies, or becomes vicious beyond control, said animal shall be
destroyed in a humane manner.
D. Killing Or Removing: No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having
been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove the same from the
city limits without written permission from the animal control officer.
E. Possession Prohibited; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly own or keep any vicious or
dangerous animal within the city. It shall be no defense to a violation of this section that the owner has obtained a
license for such animal. This section does not prevent the keeping of a "guard" or "sentry" dog so long as such dog
is trained to such a degree that it complies with this section and adequate warning of such dog is provided
whenever or wherever required by statutory or case law of the state.
F. Substantial Bodily Harm: If any animal bites or attacks a person, and such bite or attack results in "substantial bodily
harm", as defined by Nevada Revised Statutes, such animal shall be immediately surrendered to the animal control
officer, and shall forthwith be destroyed in a humane manner, and shall be subsequently tested for rabies.
G. Determination Of Dangerous Or Vicious By Court: In the event an animal is found by a court to be dangerous or
vicious, the court shall order, in addition to the other fines and penalties, that such animal be euthanized at the
owner's or custodian's expense. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-15: ANIMAL ATTACKING PERSON, ANOTHER ANIMAL OR FOWL:
It shall be lawful for any person to kill or destroy any dangerous or vicious animal when it has attacked any person who
is not trespassing on the premises of the owner or custodian of such animal and it is necessary for the protection of
any person, or to prevent the killing or injuring of another animal or fowl by such vicious animal. (Ord. 263, 8-22-1978)
5-3-16: WILD ANIMALS:
A. Prohibition; Exception: It is unlawful for any person to possess or own any wild animal within the city, except for the
purpose of public display in any circus, zoo or educational display, or if the wild animal is being used for medical
purposes by a hospital or medical laboratory.
B. Impound; Destruction: Wild animals owned or maintained in violation of this section shall be impounded, destroyed
in a humane manner or otherwise disposed of in some reasonable manner.
C. Conditions For Keeping: The keeping of any animal defined by this chapter as wild, but which the owner and the
animal control officer certify as not being dangerous or vicious at the time of the enactment of this chapter, may be
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 420/640
continued upon the following terms and conditions:
1. The animal may not be a wild animal prohibited by state or federal laws from being kept by humans such as, but
not limited to coyotes, raccoons, bats and skunks.
2. A certificate of waiver of compliance must be issued by the city clerk to any such owner of a nondangerous and
nonvicious wild animal upon written application by such owner for such certificate. The city clerk shall designate
the form of such application, but shall at least require a statement of the name and address of the owner, the
place where such wild animal is being kept and sufficient information to identify the wild animal. The city clerk
shall keep a record of all such certificates issued.
3. No such waiver shall be made without a certificate.
4. No such certificate shall be issued unless the owner certifies in the application that the wild animal is at all times
being kept under the control of the owner and kept under conditions which are clean, free of health hazards or
any other offensive or unwholesome condition.
5. Such certificate shall terminate upon the sale, removal, death or other disposition of the nondangerous and
nonvicious wild animal to which the certificate relates.
6. No certificate issued shall be transferable.
7. Application for such certificate must be made at the city clerk's office within two (2) months from February 14,
1995. Any person who fails to make such application within such time shall be deemed to have terminated and
abandoned the right to keep the nondangerous and nonvicious wild animal prohibited by this chapter and any
such wild animal shall be either removed from the city by the owner or shall be impounded and destroyed in a
humane manner or otherwise disposed of in some reasonable manner. (Ord. 441, 2-14-1995)
5-3-17: PLACES WHERE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS OTHER THAN HOUSEHOLD PETS MAY BE
KEPT:
A. Areas Permitted: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise, harbor, care for, graze, feed or maintain any one
or more domesticated animals, other than household pets, anywhere within the city limits, except in or on the
following described areas or premises:
1. The area commonly known as Elko County Fairgrounds, as it may be modified from time to time.
2. In zoning districts where the keeping of domesticated animals other than household pets is specifically permitted
by title 3, chapter 2 of this code, if any.
3. Livestock yards and livestock auction yards while commercially licensed by the city.
4. Premises of veterinarians while licensed by the city.
5. Slaughterhouses and meatpacking houses while commercially licensed by the city.
B. Nonconforming Uses:
1. In the above described areas, no such domesticated animals other than household pets shall be kept or
maintained so that they are within one hundred feet (100') of any dwelling house (other than that occupied by the
owner of such domesticated animal or household pet), any public building, park, school or hospital; or any other
public place.
2. Keeping, having or maintaining any domesticated animals other than household pets in areas prohibited by this
chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a danger to the public health and safety.
3. The keeping of any domesticated animals other than household pets by the owner thereof in areas prohibited by
this chapter which existed at the time of enactment of this chapter or any applicable amendment is a
nonconforming use subject to section 3-2-19 of this code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 421/640
C. Livestock Grazing: It shall not constitute a violation of this chapter for livestock to graze in the following areas or for
the following uses:
1. In zoning districts where livestock grazing is specifically permitted by title 3, chapter 2 of this code, if any; or
2. On undeveloped public land managed by a federal or state agency for livestock grazing purposes; provided, the
public land must be enclosed by a perimeter fence suitable for containing livestock; further provided, the livestock
grazing use within the enclosed area may not conflict with other permitted uses within the city limits, to include,
without limitation, adjacent residential or commercial uses.
3. By the city for the control or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 804, 5-25-2016)
5-3-18: IMPOUNDING:
A. Authority To Impound: It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, any assistants to the animal control officer,
and every police officer in the city to apprehend, take up, seize and take into custody any domesticated animal or
household pet found running at large or trespassing contrary to the provisions of this chapter, any unlicensed dog,
any dog which is not wearing the license and inoculation tag required, any dog or cat in heat which is not confined
as required herein by this chapter, any other domesticated animal or household pet which under the provisions of
this chapter is to be impounded and, subject to the provisions in this chapter relating to at large animals, dangerous
animals and animals attacking persons or livestock, to impound such domesticated animal or household pet in the
city animal shelter or other suitable place. When dogs or cats are found running at large, and their ownership is
known to the animal control officer, such dogs or cats need not be impounded, but the agent may, at his discretion,
cite the owners of such dogs or cats to appear in court to answer to charges of violation of this chapter. (Ord. 662,
2-28-2006; amd. Ord. 804, 5-25-2016)
B. Estrays: Estray livestock regulated under Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 569 shall be administered pursuant to
the provisions and regulations applicable thereto. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-19: NOTICE TO OWNER; REDEMPTION:
A. Not later than one day after the impounding of any animal or fowl, the animal shelter supervisor shall attempt to
notify the owner or custodian of such animal or fowl. Within seven (7) days of the date of impound, the owner or
custodian of any dog or cat so impounded may reclaim such dog or cat upon inoculation or proof of inoculation as
in this chapter required, the payment of the license fee and penalties, if any, for such animal if unpaid, and all costs
and charges incurred by the city for impounding and maintenance of such dog or cat. Upon expiration of seven (7)
days from the date of impound, any dog or cat not redeemed by its owner or custodian shall be subject to adoption
or other disposition at the discretion of the animal shelter supervisor. Dogs and cats may not be adopted from the
city animal shelter unless the prospective owner shall agree in writing to have such animal neutered or spayed. The
city council, by resolution, shall set the minimum charges that shall be paid to the city for the animal shelter fund
through the animal shelter supervisor, the city clerk, or the city animal shelter for: impounding any dog or cat, and
for keeping any dog or cat; for giving notice and reclaiming; for destroying any dog or cat upon written release and
request of the owner; all fees and charges that may have been incurred by the city to have such dog or cat
examined by a veterinarian, together with the costs of any inoculation, treatment, medications and drugs deemed
necessary or advisable by such veterinarian, and any costs of advertising and sale. If the animal is unvaccinated,
the owner shall also be required to pay an additional sum (said sum to be set by the fees charged by licensed
veterinarians) to the city animal shelter, for which he shall obtain a receipt. Said receipt may be presented to any
licensed veterinarian of the city within seventy two (72) hours after the time the dog is released to his custody and
the veterinarian will administer the required vaccination. Said veterinarian shall then bill the inoculation charge
authorized by the animal shelter employee's receipt to the city through the city clerk's office.
B. The owner or custodian of any animal or fowl, other than dogs and cats, so impounded may reclaim such animal or
fowl upon payment of all costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding, maintaining and selling such
animals or fowl. Upon the recommendation of the city council, by resolution, shall set the minimum impounding
charges payable to the city at the time of redemption including the capture, control and transportation of such
animals or fowl, all costs and charges incurred by the city in connection therewith; for impounding and giving notice
thereof; for keeping and feeding; all fees and charges that may have been incurred by the city to have such animal
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 422/640
or fowl examined by a veterinarian, together with the costs of any inoculation, treatment, medications and drugs
deemed necessary or advisable by such veterinarian, and any costs of advertising and sale.
C. The animal shelter supervisor, or designee or any police officer, may require proof of ownership from any person
attempting to redeem any animal or fowl (as the owner or custodian thereof). (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-20: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED, UNREDEEMED OR INFECTED ANIMALS OR FOWL:
It shall be the duty of the animal shelter supervisor to keep all animals and fowl impounded under the provisions of this
chapter for a period of not less than seven (7) days, unless sooner redeemed, released by the owner or disposed of
pursuant to this chapter. If at the expiration of seven (7) days from the date of impound any animal or fowl is unclaimed
it may be adopted as herein provided and if no person requests to adopt such animal or fowl under the procedures
herein provided, such animal or fowl may be destroyed in a humane manner. Any animal or fowl which appears to be
suffering from rabies, mange or other infections or dangerous disease shall not be released but may be forthwith
destroyed by humane means. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-21: ADOPTION AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS OR CATS:
If the ownership of a dog or cat is not proven within seven (7) days, then such dog or cat may be destroyed in a
humane manner under the direction of the animal shelter supervisor; provided, however, that any such unredeemed
dog or cat hereby authorized for destruction may be adopted by any person requesting the same, who shall pay a
pound fee, as set by resolution of the city council, the appropriate license fee as provided in section 5-3-9 herein, the
cost of rabies vaccination and shall agree to have the adopted dog or cat neutered or spayed. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-22: ADOPTION AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS OR
CATS OR FOWL:
A. All animals other than dogs or cats and fowl impounded and not redeemed within the seven (7) days provided
herein, or destroyed pursuant to this chapter, shall be advertised for adoption by the animal shelter supervisor by
written notice posted conspicuously at the entrance to the city animal shelter and at the city police station. The
notice of adoption shall be substantially in the following form and describe therein the kind and number of animals
and fowl to be adopted, with a general description of each animal, including color, age, marks, brands, and owner if
known, together with the date and place taken into custody:
NOTICE OF ANIMAL SHELTER SUPERVISOR'S SALE FOR ADOPTION
Notice is hereby given to the owner or owners of the animals and fowl hereinafter described, and to whomsoever
it may concern, that there are impounded at the present time in the city animal shelter the following described
animals and fowl:
(Descriptions)
That if said animals and fowl are not claimed and redeemed pursuant to title 5, chapter 3, of the Elko city code,
within seven (7) days from date of this notice, the same will be sold for adoption by the animal shelter supervisor, at
public sale for adoption at in the city, at the hour of on day of , to the highest bidder. Any and all bids may be
rejected.
B. If any animal is branded or is wearing an identification collar or other means of identification, a copy of the above
notice shall be sent to the owner of such brand as determined by the official brand book of the state, as compiled by
the state department of agriculture or to the person so identified. If the brand or other means of identification is not
legible or the owner cannot be determined, such mailing may be dispensed with.
C. The animal shelter supervisor shall conduct the auction sale at the time and place specified in such notice. At such
sale, the animal shelter supervisor shall sell such animals or fowl to the highest bidder for cash; provided, that if all
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 423/640
bids received for any animal or fowl shall be less than the charges for redemption plus any and all further costs and
expenses incurred by the city in connection with any such animal or fowl and the expense of the sale, the animal
shelter supervisor may reject any and all bids. If no bids for such animal or fowl have been rejected pursuant
hereto, such animal or fowl may be destroyed or sold at private sale or otherwise disposed of by the animal shelter
supervisor, the city to retain all proceeds therefrom.
D. If the ownership of the animal or fowl is not proved within seven (7) days, then such unredeemed animal or fowl,
whether domestic or wild, may be destroyed in a humane manner, but such animal may be given or sold to any
person who shall pay the costs of impoundment and any costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with
any such animal or fowl. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-23: PROCEEDS OF REDEMPTION, SALES AND ADOPTIONS:
All proceeds collected under the provisions of this chapter for the redemption of any animals or fowl and all proceeds
from the sale, adoption or disposition of animals or fowl pursuant hereto, shall be deposited in the general fund of the
city and budgeted for the use and benefit of the animal shelter. (Ord. 355, 7-10-1984)
5-3-24: IMPOUNDING LARGE ANIMALS:
A. Authority: The animal control officer is authorized to enter into any agreements necessary to capture, control,
transport, care for, feed and maintain large animals such as horses, cows, sheep and other animals which cannot
be maintained in the city animal shelter when it becomes necessary to take them into custody or impound them
pursuant to this chapter. All expenses thus incurred are to be charged to the owner or owners upon redemption.
B. Notice: Should the animal control officer or any police officer be called upon to take into custody or impound any
large animals such as horses, cows, sheep, mules or any other animal which cannot be maintained in the city
animal shelter and the owner of such animal is known to such officer or the name of the owner or custodian can be
reasonably obtained, then such officer in his discretion may, prior to apprehending or impounding any such large
animal, contact such owner or custodian or any agent or representative thereof and notify them to immediately take
such animals into custody and immediately remove such animals from the city limits. If such owner has not caused
such animals to be removed from the city limits within one day from the date such officer contacts the owner or the
owner's agent or representative pursuant hereto, then such officer shall take possession of and impound such
animals pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 249, 7-26-1977)
5-3-25: ANIMAL NOISES; NUISANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or possess any animal which, by loud or frequent habitual
barking, howling, yelping, braying or other noise, causes annoyance to the neighbors or to any person in the vicinity. In
addition to any other fines and penalties imposed by the court in the event of a conviction of this section, the court shall
have full powers to order abatement of the nuisance caused by the animal. (Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-26: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
Except as herein otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
A. To maliciously or mischievously apprehend, detain, secrete or impound the animal or fowl of another person, or to
knowingly aid or abet in the commission of any such act by some other person. Any such person aiding or abetting
shall be considered a principal.
B. To maltreat, starve, torture, injure or poison any animal, or having the right or authority under this chapter to kill any
animal, to kill such animal in any way except in a humane manner.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 424/640
C. To trap any animal with other than a humane "live" trap, which will inflict no physical injury upon the animal; to lure or
entice, by means of food or otherwise, any animal into other than a humane "live" trap; to leave any animal trapped
by such person without food, water or shelter, for an unreasonable period of time.
D. To dispose of any trapped animal in any fashion not otherwise provided by law. If disposal is not permitted by law,
said person shall call the animal control officer to have said animal picked up, or deliver it to the city animal shelter,
or otherwise dispose of it as directed by the animal control officer.
E. To overcrowd any animal in any crate, box or other receptacle, or fail to provide food, water, shelter or sanitation for
the same.
F. To kill any animal running at large, except as provided in this chapter in connection with dangerous, fierce, vicious or
infected animals or animals attacking persons or livestock. (Ord. 249, 7-26-1977)
G. To take off or remove from any animal its collar or harness or city license tag or inoculation tag without the consent
of the owner or custodian of such animal. (Ord. 263, 8-22-1978)
H. To place any city dog tag or inoculation tag on any dog other than the dog to which such tag was issued or
registered.
I. To take any animal or fowl out of the custody, control or possession of the animal control officer or city animal shelter
or any police officer exercising his duty under this chapter by stealth, fraud, force or falsely claiming to be the owner
or custodian of such animal or fowl.
J. To interrupt or hinder the animal control officer or any police officer discharging his duties under the provisions of this
chapter.
K. To abandon any animal, living or dead, in a public street, road, alley or any other public place, or upon the private
property of himself or another.
L. To unjustifiably administer any poisonous drug or substance with intent that the same shall be taken by an animal,
whether such animal be the property of himself or another, or whether said drug or substance exposed upon such
person's property, the private property of another, or any public place; provided, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent or restrict the animal control officer or health officer in the exercise and performance of the
powers and duties in this chapter.
M. To wilfully throw, drop or place, upon any road, highway, street, alley or public place, or upon the private property of
himself or another, any glass, nails, pieces of metal or other substances or devices calculated to wound, disable or
injure any animal.
N. To carry or enclose, or cause to be carried or enclosed, in or upon any vehicle or conveyance, any animal in a cruel
or inhumane manner.
1. No person having charge or custody of any animal, as owner or otherwise, shall place or confine such animal or
allow such animal to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such
period of time as may endanger the health or well being of such animal due to heat, cold, lack of food or drink, or
such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death.
2. The animal control officer or any police officer of the city who finds an animal in a motor vehicle in violation of this
subsection may break and enter the motor vehicle if necessary to remove the animal. The officer removing the
animal shall take the animal to the city animal shelter or to a veterinarian clinic for safekeeping and shall in the
event the person having custody cannot be otherwise contacted, leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 425/640
a written notice bearing his name and office and the address where the animal may be claimed by the owner
thereof. The animal will be surrendered to the owner if the owner claims the animal within seven (7) days from
the time the animal was removed from the motor vehicle and pays all reasonable charges that have accrued for
the maintenance of the animal. In the event the owner cannot be contacted, or expresses no interest in
reclaiming the animal within seven (7) days after contact or efforts to contact, the animal shelter may dispose of
the animal in a humane manner.
O. To sell, or offer for sale, barter or give away baby chicks, ducklings, other fowl under four (4) weeks of age or rabbits
under two (2) weeks of age, as pets or novelties. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the display or
sale of natural chicks, rabbits, ducklings or other fowl, in proper breeder facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in
the business of selling the same to be raised for commercial purposes.
P. To display, sell or offer for sale, barter, give away or otherwise dispose of any animal upon any street, sidewalk,
public building, public park or other public place, with the exception of the city animal shelter.
Q. To use any live animal as or for a target.
R. To dye or color any animal for purposes of concealing its identity. (Ord. 249, 7-26-1977)
5-3-27: DUTY TO STOP, RENDER AID AND NOTICE:
Every operator of any vehicle upon the streets and ways of the city shall immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or
running down any animal, stop and give such aid as he is reasonably able to render. He shall immediately notify the
owner, if present or known, and if not, the animal control officer, furnishing the facts relative to such injury. It is the duty
of such operator to remain at or near the scene until the owner or animal control officer arrives, and such operator
immediately identifies himself to the owner or animal control officer and gives the owner or animal control officer his full
name, address and driver's license number. Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give aid by taking
the animal to a veterinary hospital and thereafter notifying the animal control officer. Emergency vehicles are not
required to stop but shall notify the animal control officer furnishing sufficient facts relative to such injury. (Ord. 249, 7-
26-1977)
5-3-28: VETERINARIAN CERTIFICATES AND TAGS:
Every veterinarian inoculating any dog or cat against rabies shall, upon such inoculation, issue a tag to the owner
suitable for wearing by such dog on its collar or harness or otherwise affixed and a certificate to the owner of such dog
or cat setting forth at least the name and address of the owner, a description of the dog or cat sufficient to identify the
dog or cat, the type and lot of vaccine used, and the dated reinoculation is required. Every veterinarian spaying any
female dog or cat shall, upon such spaying, issue a certificate to the owner of such animal, stating the necessary
information relating to the operation. (Ord. 263, 8-22-1978)
5-3-29: PENALTIES:
The penalties provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code shall apply to this chapter. In addition, any violation or continued
violation of this chapter, or any nuisance, may be enjoined or abated by appropriate proceedings instituted by the city.
All penalties provided under this chapter shall double in amount or term if succeeding similar offenses occur within a
three (3) year period. The receipt and conviction of three (3) violations of this chapter by the owner or custodian of any
animal within a three (3) year period shall constitute prima facie evidence for a nuisance. All fines imposed by the
municipal judge and/or collected for the violation of this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and
budgeted for the use and benefit of the animal shelter. (Ord. 355, 7-10-1984)
5-3-30: DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS AND FOWL UPON REQUEST OF OWNER OR CUSTODIAN:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 426/640
The animal shelter supervisor may dispose of any animal or fowl immediately upon receipt of the appropriate fee and a
written request of the owner or custodian of such animal or fowl in substantially the following form:
CONSENT AND RELEASE
This consent and release executed by (owner-custodian), of (address), city of Elko, state of Nevada, as releasor to
the city of Elko, its agents and employees, releasee.
The animal/fowl with respect to which this release is executed, is a male/female (breed or description). Its license
number is .
That the releasor, set forth above, is the owner or custodian of the animal/fowl and requests that the releasee
perform euthanasia upon such animal/fowl and releasee expressly consents thereto.
Releasor hereby releases and forever discharges releasee from all claims, damages and causes of action that may
arise from the death of such animal/fowl and from the procedures employed therein.
In witness thereof, releasor executes this release this day of , 20 .
Releasor
(Ord. 662, 2-28-2006)
5-3-31: ANIMALS TRESPASSING ON AIRPORT:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed under this chapter, to
suffer, permit or to allow such animal to trespass on the runway, property and premises of the Elko municipal airport
located within the city and known as J.C. Harris Field. Any animal so trespassing shall be presumed to be endangering
the health, safety and welfare of a considerable number of persons and be dangerous to human life. It shall be lawful
for the animal control officer or a police officer of the city or county to kill or destroy any such trespassing animal. (Ord.
273, 5-8-1979)
5-3-32: COMMITTING OF NUISANCES:
It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any animal to permit, either wilfully or through failure to
exercise due care or control, any such animal to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk or any public street or public
park; or any nuisance upon any real property under the control of or in the possession of any other person; or upon the
floor of any common hall in any apartment house, tenement house, hotel or other multiple dwelling; or upon any
entranceway, stairway or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk; or upon the floor of any theater, shop, store,
office building or other building used in common by the public; or upon the floor or stairway of any depot or station or
public waiting room; or upon any floor, stairway, entranceway, office, lobby, foyer or patio used in common by the
public. (Ord. 404, 1-22-1991)
5-3-33: ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of any animal to permit the
animal to defecate upon the public property of this city or upon the private property of another unless the person
immediately removes the feces and properly disposes of it; provided, however, that nothing herein contained
authorizes such person to enter upon the private property of another without permission.
B. Possession Of Container: It shall be unlawful for any person to walk a dog on public property of this city or upon the
private property of another without carrying at all times a suitable container or other suitable instrument for the
removal and disposal of dog feces.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 427/640
C. Exceptions: Handicapped persons who use seeing eye dogs are exempt from this section. Persons whose dogs are
participating in dog shows or direct command obedience classes are exempt from this section while their animals
are actually participating in such shows or classes, but all feces must be removed and disposed of immediately
upon the conclusion of the show or class. (Ord. 404, 1-22-1991)
5-3-34: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT AND HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD:
A. Specified: The responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall rest upon the head of the
household at which a dog or other animal is being kept or harbored, whether or not the ownership of such dog or
other animal is claimed by any other person residing in said household. A husband or wife, or two (2) or more
adults living together, may be jointly or separately charged as heads of the household where a dog or other animal
is kept or harbored if the requirements of this chapter are not complied with.
B. Minors: It shall not be a defense to an alleged violation of this chapter that the true and registered owner of a dog or
other animal is of such minor age as to prohibit answer in court, and upon such occurrence, the parent or guardian
of such minor owner shall be required to appear instead and assume full responsibility for the actions or omissions
of their minor. The parent, guardian or custodian of any child under eighteen (18) years of age who owns, keeps,
harbors or has custody of an animal shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal. (Ord. 441, 2-14-1995)
Chapter 4
CIVIL DEFENSE
5-4-1: CIVIL DEFENSE DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, the term "civil defense" shall include measures necessary to provide for the mobilization,
organization and direction of civilian populace and necessary support agencies to prevent or minimize the effects of
fire, flood, storm, earthquake and epidemic, as well as the effects of enemy or subversive activities directed against the
populace, communities, industrial plants, facilities and other installations. (Ord. 127, 2-3-1957)
5-4-2: COUNCIL OF DEFENSE; MEMBERSHIP:
The council of defense is hereby created and shall include the following:
Mayor
Director of civil defense (as appointed)
Police chief
Fire chief
City health officer
City engineer
American Red Cross representative
Others including representatives of business, labor and patriotic organizations as may be appointed by the city
council. (Ord. 127, 2-3-1957)
5-4-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL OF DEFENSE:
It shall be the duty of the council of defense and it ishereby empowered to:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 428/640
A. Develop a civil defense plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city.
B. Prepare and recommend for consideration by the council regulations necessary to implement the civil defense plan.
C. Consider and recommend to the council of defense for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. (Ord. 127, 2-3-
1957)
5-4-4: CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR:
A. Created: There is hereby created the office of the civil defense director. Such officer shall be appointed by the
mayor.
B. Power: The civil defense director is hereby empowered:
1. To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to civil defense.
2. To require and direct cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of civil defense plans.
3. During periods of emergency, to direct the services of any city officers or employees.
4. During periods of emergency, to obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and
property of people and bind the city for the value thereof, and if required immediately, requisition the same. (Ord.
127, 2-3-1957)
5-4-5: CIVIL DEFENSE CORPS; GENERAL:
The civil defense corps shall consist of officers and employees of the city with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them
during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who make agreements with the defense director shall
be charged with duties necessary for the protection of life and property in the city during an emergency, who shall
constitute the civil defense corps. (Ord. 127, 2-3-1957)
5-4-6: DIVISIONS OF THE CIVIL DEFENSE CORPS:
The functions and duties of the civil defense corps shall be distributed among the divisions as listed below. Each
division shall be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the council of defense. The chief of
divisions will include public officials such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments and heads of agencies
dealing withtransportation, communications, and other sundry services, as well as private business persons, who
through their profession, knowledge and experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized
knowledge and experience. The divisions are hereby established as follows:
Law enforcement division;
Fire services division;
Medical and health division;
Engineering and utilities division;
Transportation division;
Communications division;
Welfare division;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 429/640
Information and education division. (Ord. 127, 2-3-1957)
5-4-7: VOLUNTEERS:
All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering for civil defense service shall serve without
compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the
city performing similar duties. (Ord. 127, 2-13-1957)
5-4-8: PENALTIES:
A. Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful during an emergency to:
1. Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense corps, and enforcement of any lawful rule or
regulation in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the virtue of the provisions of this chapter.
2. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the
enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or
protection thereof.
3. Wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the council of defense.
B. Punishment: Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
as provided in title 1, chapter 3, of this code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed
aseparate offense. (Ord. 241, 12-14-1976)
Chapter 5
SPECIAL POLICE
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined, and shall be construed as hereinafter
set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning:
OFFICIAL POLICE OFFICER'S BADGE: A badge of the size, type and design as used by the regular police force of
the city.
PRIVATE PATROL: Any person carrying on the business or occupation of night watch person, night watch service,
private police officer or any other occupation, the purpose of which is to afford additional police or fire protection for hire
or reward.
SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER: For the purpose of this chapter, shall include any individual acting as a peace officer,
member of a private patrol, or an owner of a private patrol who actively engages in policing duties, club guard, hotel
guard, bank guard, armored car guard, night watch person, other than a regular police officer of the city.
SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER'S BADGE: A badge of the size, type and design as designated by the chief of police for
the use of persons commissioned by the chief of police to act as special police officers as hereinafter provided. Such
badge shall have enameled on the face thereof "special" in addition to anyother words or device, and shall so differ in
shape and design from the official police officer's badge as to be, when displayed or worn, readily distinguishable
therefrom. All such badges shall be consecutively numbered and the number shall appear on the face of each such
badge. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-2: SPECIAL COMMISSION; APPLICATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 430/640
A. Form; Information Required: Every person who shall seek a commission to act as a special police officer shall make
application to the chief of police on regulation forms as prescribed by the chief of police, which application must
contain the following:
1. The name and address of the person to whom the commission is to be issued.
2. The duties of the person who requires the issuance of such commission, provided, no commission shall issue for
the performance of any duties other than those specifically set forth in this application, nor shall any commission
be authority for the performance of any duties not herein set forth.
3. A description, two (2) passport size photos, signature and fingerprint of the person to whom the commission is to
be issued.
4. The name, address and signed request of the employer of the applicant showing the necessity for the issuance
of such commission.
5. Such other information and disclosures as such regulation forms may from time to time require.
B. Granting Of Application; Considerations: The chief of police must first satisfy himself that the granting of the
commission will be conducive to the public welfare and safety, and for this purpose the chief of police may consider
any facts or evidence bearing on the moral fitness and reputation of those seeking the commission, and any other
facts of evidence tending to enlighten the chief of police in this respect, provided, no special police officer's
commission shall be issued to any person previously convicted of a felony or of two (2) or more misdemeanors
involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-3: CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PRIVATE PATROLS MAY BE ESTABLISHED:
Private patrols may be established upon proper application to the chief of police under the following conditions:
A. Permit Required: No person shall manage, conduct or carry on the business of a private patrol, unless under and by
authority of a written permit from the chief of police, and upon payment of any fees as prescribed by this chapter or
any other applicable provision of this code.
B. Application For Permit; Information To Be Shown: Permits required by subsection A of this section may be issued by
the chief of police upon the written application of any person; provided, that the chief of police must first satisfy
himself that the management, conduct and carrying on of such private patrol will be conducive to the public welfare
and safety, and for this purpose, the chief of police may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the moral fitness
and reputation of those who will be charged of such private patrol, and any other facts or evidence tending to
enlighten the chief of police in this respect. Such application for a permit must contain the following:
1. The name and address of the person to whom the permit is to be issued.
2. The duties of the person who requires the issuance of the permit.
3. A description, two (2) passport size photos, signature and fingerprint of the person to whom the permit is to be
issued.
C. Suspension Of Permit: Any permit to manage, conduct or carry on a private patrol may be temporarily suspended by
a written order signed by the chief of police.
D. Revocation Of Permit: When the chief of police shall have issued any permit under the terms of subsection B of this
section, the same may be revoked at any time thereafter by the chief of police, if the chief of police becomes
satisfied that the management, conducting or carrying on of such private patrol does not or will not be conducive to
the public welfare and safety for any reason, or that such private patrol has been conducted in an illegal or improper
manner. The chief of police may make rules governing the management, conducting or carrying on of private
patrols, and may revoke or suspend permits issued for the management or carrying on of any such occupation
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 431/640
when the manager or person in charge thereof violates or permits any infraction of any such rules, or any law of the
state or any provision of this code; provided, however, that no permit issued under authority of this chapter for the
management, conducting or carrying on of any such private patrol shall be revoked unless a hearing and notice be
given the permittee in such manner as the chief of police may decide. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
E. Change Of Location Of Business: The chief of police may allow a permittee to change the location of the business
office of his private patrol business without requiring a newpermit to be obtained, upon the filing of an application for
such change of location and the payment of a fee as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
F. When Private Patrol Deemed Special Police Officer: Any owner of a private patrol shall be deemed a special police
officer if actively engaged in policing duties. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every person who shall secure a commission as a special police officer or a permit as an owner of a private patrol,
shall be required to subscribe to an oath of office to be administered by the chief of police. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-5: BADGES:
"Special police officer" badges shall be issued by the chief of police only to persons who have secured commissions as
special police officers from the chief of police and who have paid all fees required therefor by this chapter. (Ord. 128, 7-
26-1957)
5-5-6: REGULATIONS GOVERNING SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS GENERALLY:
Every holder of a special police officer's badge shall comply with the following provisions and regulations:
A. Home Address Filed With Chief Of Police: It shall be the duty of every person to whom a special police officer's
badge has been issued to furnish and keep on file with the chief of police, a true home address of such person.
B. Badge Carried While On Duty: It shall be the duty of every person having a special police officer's commission from
the chief of police to have on his person a special police officer's badge while performing the duties of a special
police officer.
C. Badges Worn On Outside Of Front Of Uniform: Any private patrol, guard, bank guard, hotel guard, club guard, night
watch person or other person who wears a uniform, while performing any of the duties of his position as a special
police officer, shall wear a special police officer's badge on the outside front of his uniform so that the same is
available at all times while performing such work.
D. Use Of Unauthorized Badges: No person shall wear or have in his possession any special police officer's badge
unless such badge has been regularly issued in accordance with theprovision of this chapter.
E. Return Of Badges Upon Severance Of Employment: It shall be the duty of any person after he has severed his
employment with any private patrol or who has ceased to perform the duties which required the issuance of a
special police officer's badge, to return the special police officer's badge to the chief of police. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
F. Charge For Rental Of Badge: The chief of police shall make a charge, as set by resolution of the city council, for the
issuance of every special police officer's badge and for every badge issued to replace a lost badge, which sum shall
be considered as rental for the use of the badge, which shall at all times be and remain the property of the city.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 432/640
G. Cost Of Investigation Of Applicant: The chief of police shall also make a charge, as set by resolution of the city
council, to cover the costs of investigation of any applicant for a commission as a special police officer, or to cover
the costs of an investigation of an application for a permit to operate a business of private patrol. (Ord. 290, 8-26-
1980)
H. Authority Of Chief Of Police To Prescribe Uniform: The chief of police shall have the power and authority to adopt
and prescribe the uniform to be worn by all special police officers, guards, bank guards, hotel guards, club guards
or other special officers required to wear badges while performing the duties of such special police officer. (Ord.
128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-7: PRIVATE DETECTIVES:
Private detectives and special investigators are not subject to the provisions of this chapter nor qualified as such to
obtain a special police officer's commission under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-8: BADGE FOR ONE LOCATION:
The issuance of a special police officer's commission under the provisions of this chapter shall be authority for the
performance of his duties only at the particular place of employment at which he was employed at the time of the
issuance of said commission, provided this section shall not apply to private patrols. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-9: TRANSFERS:
Any person transferring his place of employment or procuring employment at some place of business other than that
for which the special police officer's commission was granted to him, ishereby required to report such change to the
chief of police and submit the name, address and signed request of the new employer that such special police officer
be permitted to work in his employ, and in addition, such special police officer is required to make full disclosures as to
any change in his status or address. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-10: BADGE TO BE RETURNED:
Upon severance, discharge or other termination of employment for which a special police officer's commission has
been issued, such special police officer is required to return to the chief of police his special police officer's badge and
any credentials he may have pertaining thereto. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-11: TERM:
Special police officer's commission issued under this chapter shall remain effective until the expiration of one year after
the date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and shall be renewed upon application to the chief of police and payment
to the city of a fee as set by resolution of the city council for each renewal. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
5-5-12: NOT TO BE CITY EMPLOYEES:
Special police officers shall not be employees of the city and shall not be paid thereby for services as said officers.
(Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-13: CONDUCT OF SPECIAL POLICE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 433/640
No special police officer shall:
A. Carry Deadly Weapons: Carry a blackjack, or other deadly weapon, unless authorized by the chief of police;
provided, however, that a special police officer may carry a firearm.
B. Performance Of Duties While Intoxicated: Perform the duties of a special police officer while under the influence of
intoxicants.
C. Partaking Of Intoxicants While On Duty Or In Uniform: Partaking of intoxicants while on duty as a special police
officer or while in uniform though not on duty.
D. Permitting Another To Use Commission Or Badge: Permit anyone to use the commission or badge issued to him.
E. Wearing Uniform Or Badge Of Regular Police Officers: Wearany uniform of a pattern, design or in the semblance of
the uniform duly adopted by the city council for the use of regular members of the city police department, or wear
any badge or insignia of a pattern or design that may be mistaken for or confounded with the badge or insignia of a
regular police officer. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
F. Interference: Interfere with or attempt to influence the lawful business of any person, nor shall any special police
officer to whom a commission has been granted use his credentials and/or badge, or otherwise represent his
authority to be for the performance of duties other than those which appear in his application as provided by section
5-5-2 of this chapter, provided, any special police officer to whom a commission has been granted who shall either
by express fraudulent representations or by omitting a duty to correct a false misleading impression of his authority
shall obtain money, property, position of trust, or other thing of value shall, upon conviction, be punished as
provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
G. Loitering: Loitering around or entering houses of ill fame, loitering around, entering for purposes of patronizing or to
patronize any house of ill fame or other place used for prostitution, unlawful use of narcotics or prohibited drugs, or
other places where immoral or illegal acts or practices are carried on.
H. Impersonating Regular Police Officer: At any time conduct himself by word or manner to lead others to believe that
he is a regular police officer of the city. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-14: SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER WITHOUT PERMISSION:
No person shall work as a special police officer without first having secured a commission from the chief of police, as in
this chapter provided. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-15: MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF OFFICIAL BADGES:
No person shall manufacture, make, sell, design or transfer any official police officer's badge or special police officer's
badge without the written authorization of the chief of police therefor, such person may deliver such badges only to the
chief of police, and may manufacture only the number of badges authorized by the chief of police. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as affecting the manner in which contracts for the purchases of badges by the city shall be
let. (Ord. 128, 7-26-1957)
5-5-16: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF BADGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully wear, exhibit, use or wilfully make, sell, loan, give or transfer to another
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 434/640
any badge, insignia, emblem, device or any label, certificate, card or writing, which falsely purports to be authorized for
the use of one who by law is given the authority of a peace officer, or which so resembles the authorized badge,
insignia, emblem, device, label, certificate, card or writing of a peace officer as would deceive an ordinary reasonable
person into believing that it is authorized for the use of one who by law is given the authority of a police officer. (Ord.
128, 7-26-1957)
Chapter 6
CONVICTED PERSONS
5-6-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter the words "convicted persons" is hereby defined as follows: Any person who has been
or who shall hereafter be convicted of a felony, of any offense punishable as a felony, in any court of the state, or in any
federal court, or in any court of competent jurisdiction in any territory belonging to the United States, or who has or who
shall hereafter be convicted of a violation of any law in any other court than the courts of the state, whether municipal,
county, state, federal or territorial, which offense, if committed in the state, would have been a felony or which would
have been punishable as a felony under the laws of the state; also any person who has been or is hereafter convicted
in the state, or elsewhere, of the violation of any law relating to the following subject or subjects:
A. Narcotics: Relating to or regulating the possession, distribution, furnishing or use of any narcotics;
B. Concealed Weapons: Regulating or prohibiting the carrying or possession of or ownership of any concealed
weapon, or deadly weapon, of any weapons capable of being concealed, or regulating or prohibiting the possession
of, sale of or use of any device, instrument or attachment designed to or intended to be used for the purpose of
silencing the report of, or concealing the discharge or flash of, any firearm;
C. Tear Gas: Regulating or prohibiting the use, possession, manufacture or compounding of tear gas or any other gas
which may be used for the purpose of temporarily or permanently disabling any human being;
D. Attempt To Commit Offenses: Any attempt to commit, or any conspiracy to commit, any offenses described or
referred to in this section;
E. Drug Addicts: Any person who has been or is hereafter convicted of or is hereafter adjudicated as a drug addict,
asdefined by the laws of any state, shall also be deemed a convicted person.
Provided, further, that in the event any person who is now, or who has been, or who may hereafter be placed on
probation for the committing of any of the above enumerated offenses whose conviction is set aside in the manner
provided by law, shall not be deemed a convicted person. (Ord. 124, 2-14-1956)
5-6-2: CONVICTED PERSONS TO REGISTER:
Every person convicted, as provided in section 5-6-1 of this chapter, shall register with the chief of police and provide
information, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. True Name And Aliases: His true name and all aliases which he has used or under which he is or may have been
known.
B. Description Of Person: A full and complete description of his person.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 435/640
C. Character Of Crime: The kind, character and nature of each crime of which he has been convicted. The place where
such crime was, or crimes were, committed and the places of conviction of the same.
D. Name Under Which Convicted; Date: The name under which he was convicted in each instance and the date
thereof.
E. Name And Location Of Penal Institutions: The name, if any, and the location of each prison, reformatory, jail or other
penal institution in which he was confined or to which he was sentenced.
F. Location And Address Of Residence: The location and address of his residence, stopping place, living quarters or
place of abode; if more than one residence, stopping place or abode, that fact must be stated and the location and
address of each given.
G. Statement And Kind Of Residence: A statement of the kind of residence, stopping place, living quarters or place of
abode in which he resides, whether the same is temporary or permanent and whether the same is a private
residence, hotel, apartment house, or other building or structure.
H. Time Residence Has Been Occupied: The length of time he has occupied such place of residence, stopping place
or place of abode, and the length of time he expects or intends to remain in the city.
I. Form Of Statements: All such statements to the chief of police shall be made upon city forms therefor prescribed by
the chief of police. Such statements shall contain such otherand further information as may be required by the chief
of police for the purpose of aiding and assisting him in carrying into effect the provisions and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
5-6-3: ALL CONVICTED PERSONS TO REGISTER:
Every convicted person who enters and remains in the city for twenty four (24) hours shall within twenty four (24) hours
after the expiration of such twenty four (24) hour period, furnish to the chief of police, a written statement on like form
and containing all of the information required by the written statement referred to in section 5-6-2 of this chapter and
shall, in addition thereto, state in writing in such statement the date that he entered the state and each of his places of
residences or abode for the three (3) month period next preceding the date of his arrival in the city. (Ord. 261, 6-27-
1978)
5-6-4: FINGERPRINTS REQUIRED:
Every convicted person shall, at the time of registering and furnishing the information required by sections 5-6-2 and 5-
6-3 of this chapter, be fingerprinted by the chief of police, who shall cause such fingerprints to be made a part of the
record provided for by the foregoing sections and section 5-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
5-6-5: FILING AND USE TO BE MADE OF STATEMENTS:
The statements and fingerprints hereinbefore provided for shall at all times be kept by the chief of police in files
maintained and kept by the chief of police; and shall not be open to inspection by the public, or by any person other
than the regularly appointed, qualified and acting deputies and employees in the office of the city attorney and the chief
of police; provided, however, that copies of such statements and fingerprints may be transmitted to any office of sheriff
or chief of police in the state, or to the head of department of the state engaged in the enforcement of any criminal law
of this state, or to the head of any federal law enforcement agency, or to any sheriff or chief of police of any
municipality or head of any other law enforcement agency, in any state or territory outside of the state, when request is
made in writing by such sheriff or any other head of any law enforcement agency asking for the record of a certain
person, or for the record of a person whose fingerprints reasonably correspond with the fingerprints submitted with
such request, and stating that such record is deemed necessary for the use of such law enforcement officer or agency
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 436/640
in or concerning the investigation of any crime or any person who is accused of committing a crime which is reported to
have been committed,and further stating that the record will be used for such purposes; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the chief of police from furnishing to the sheriff of any county, the chief of
police of any municipality or the head of any other law enforcement agency which maintains any system of registration
of convicted persons. Copies of the statements required to be filed under the provisions of this chapter, together with
fingerprints of the person making such statements when and if such sheriff, chief of police, or other head of any law
enforcement agency furnishes to the city attorney and chief of police, copies of statements and fingerprints procured by
him, and it is hereby made the duty of the chief of police to arrange for the exchange of such information. (Ord. 124, 2-
14-1956)
5-6-6: NOTIFICATION OF CHIEF OF POLICE OF CHANGE OF RESIDENCE:
Any convicted person who is required to register under the provisions of this chapter, who changes his place of
residence, stopping place or living quarters shall, within forty eight (48) hours after the changing of his place of
residence, stopping place or living quarters, notify the chief of police of such fact, and furnish to the chief of police the
new address of his new residence, stopping place or living quarters, in the same manner and with the same detailed
information as is required in the filing of the original statement under the provisions of sections 5-6-2 and 5-6-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
5-6-7: FALSE OR MISLEADING INFORMATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person required by any provision of this chapter to furnish a statement or report to give a
statement or report which contains any false or fictitious address, or any address other than a true address, or furnish
in the making of any such report any false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to any information
required by any of the provisions of this chapter to be made or furnished. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
5-6-8: PENALTIES:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3, of this code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
Chapter 8
RADIO INTERFERENCE
5-8-1: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly maintain, operate or cause to be operated any machine, device,
apparatus or instrument of any kind whatsoever, or any electrical lines or plants of any description, the operation of
which will cause reasonably preventable electrical interference with radio reception; provided, however, that all such
electrical lines or plants or machines, devices, apparatus or instruments may be used if the same are properly
equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio reception, and are not negligently
operated. (Ord. 95, 9-9-1948)
5-8-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not be held or construed to embrace or cover the regulation of any transmitting, broadcasting or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 437/640
receiving instrument, apparatus or device used or useful in interstate commerce, or the operation of which instrument,
apparatus or device is licensed or authorized by or under the provisions of any act of congress of the United States.
(Ord. 95, 9-9-1948)
5-8-3: RADIO INSPECTOR; AUTHORITY:
The duly appointed radio inspector of the city shall be ex officio radio inspector and shall have power at all times to
conduct investigations to ascertain whether or not any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any kind is causing
interference with radio reception and shall be empowered with police authority to make such search and investigation
as is necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 95, 9-9-1948)
5-8-4: ELIMINATION OF INTERFERENCE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling or operating any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of
anykind, which is interfering with radio reception, to equip the same with a filter or condenser or other instrument or
contrivance which will eliminate said interference with radio reception, upon being notified to do so by the radio
inspector. (Ord. 95, 9-9-1948)
5-8-5: PENALTIES:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Each day during which said violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
Chapter 9
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
5-9-1: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OR DISPLAY OF WEAPONS:
A. Firearms: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm anywhere within the limits
of the city; provided, that nothing herein shall prevent the establishing and running of a shooting gallery properly
enclosed and permitted by license of the city council; and provided further, that nothing herein shall apply to any
sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer, who shall discharge any pistol or firearm in the
lawful exercise of the duties of his office.
B. Slingshots, Air Guns: It shall be unlawful for any person to negligently discharge or cause to be discharged any bow,
crossbow, slingshot, air gun and/or BB gun, or similar weapon, whereby any rock, piece of metal or missile is
hurled, propelled and/or driven with sufficient force to cause damage to property and/or injury to persons, animals
and/or birds, unless within a shooting gallery or special events function approved by the city. (Ord. 784, 6-10-2014)
5-9-2: PETIT LARCENY:
A person commits petit larceny if the person:
A. Intentionally steals, takes and carries away, leads away or drives away:
1. Personal goods or property, with a value of less than six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00), owned by another
person;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 438/640
2. Bedding, furniture or other property, with a value of less than six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00), which the
person, as a lodger, is to use in or with his lodging and which is owned by another person; or
3. Real property, with a value of less than six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00), that the person has converted into
personal property by severing it from real property owned by another person.
B. Intentionally steals, takes and carries away, leads away, drives away or entices away one or more domesticated
animals or domesticated birds, with an aggregate value of less than six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00), owned by
another person.
C. A person who commits petit larceny is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalty, the court shall order
the person to pay restitution. (Ord. 784, 6-10-2014)
5-9-3: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
A person who, in any case or under any circumstances not otherwise specially provided for, wilfully resists, delays,
hinders, or obstructs a law enforcement officer in investigating a crime or discharging or attempting to discharge any
legal duty of his or her office shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 784, 6-10-2014)
Chapter 10
FALSE ALARMS1
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning herein given them:
ALARM: The giving, signaling or transmitting by any public safety station or to any police department, fire department
or any officer or employee thereof, by telephone, public safety station, public alarm station, automatic transmitted
alarm, in person, or otherwise, a report statement, or information to the effect that there is an emergency, a fire, an
accident, the commission of a crime or violation of a city ordinance or a need for police, firefighter or ambulance
assistance.
AUTOMATIC TRANSMITTED ALARM: An alarm which is sent to an installation using supervised dedicated circuits to
transmit an alarm from one or more protected premises to a remote location at which appropriate action is to be taken.
(Ord. 395, 11-28-1989)
5-10-2: INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARMS; TAMPERING WITH ALARM APPARATUS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Wilfully and maliciously tamper with, molest, injure or break any public fire, police or ambulance alarm apparatus,
wire or signal.
B. Intentionally make, turn in, send, give, transmit or sound any false alarm of fire, or of the need for police or
ambulance assistance by means of any alarm system, alarm or signal, or by any other means or methods.
C. Make, file, turn in, send, give, transmit or sound any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report
concerningthe commission or alleged commission of any crime or violation of city ordinance occurring within the
city.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 439/640
D. Aid or abet in the commission of a violation of any of the criminal provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 395, 11-28-1989)
5-10-3: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of section 5-10-2 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. If substantial bodily harm or death is sustained by any person as a result
of such false alarm, upon conviction, such person shall be punished by the maximum fine and imprisonment provided
in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 395, 11-28-1989)
5-10-4: ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL FEES FOR UNINTENTIONAL TRANSMISSION OF FALSE
ALARMS:
Any person or business who unintentionally makes, turns in, sends, gives, transmits or sounds more than two (2), in
any calendar year, false alarms of fire, or the need for police or ambulance assistance by means of any public fire
alarm system or alarm or signal, or by any other means or method shall be assessed by the city a fee of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) for each such false alarm in excess of two (2) per calendar year. If the person who has
transmitted any such false alarm notifies the fire, police or ambulance department before the fire, police or ambulance
department responds to the false alarm, then no fee shall be assessed for that false alarm. (Ord. 395, 11-28-1989)
Chapter 11
BAR EMPLOYEES; WORK PERMITS
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Shall mean and include any and all distilled or rectified spirits, potable alcohol, brandy,
whiskey, rum, gin, aromatic bitters, beer, lager beer, ale, wine and every other liquid or solid containing alcohol capable
of being consumed by a human being.
BAR EMPLOYEE: Those employees of establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold at retail on the premises
who serve alcoholic beverages to patrons for consumption on the premises and shall include, but not be limited to,
bartenders, cocktail waiters and waitresses, bar assistants, room service waiters and waitresses that serve alcoholic
beverages, beverage clerk, but shall not include the employees of cafes or restaurants or dinner houses whose
primary duty is the service of foods.
TEMPORARY WORK PERMIT: A work permit which is valid only for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from its
date of issue and is not renewable.
WORK PERMIT: Any card, certificate or permit issued by the city council or by the chief of police, authorizing the
employment of the holder as a bar employee. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-2: POLICY:
The city council finds, and it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that, to protect and promote the public
health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, it is necessary that the city council
ascertain and keep itself informed of the identity, prior activities and present location of all bar employees in the city;
and maintain confidential records of such information; and require the registration with the police department, and the
thumbprinting, fingerprinting and photographing of bar employees; and to require the chief of police to investigate the
background and qualifications of each applicant for a bar employee work permit under this chapter, before any such
work permit is granted; and to periodically investigate into legal qualifications of each applicant holder of a work permit
under this chapter, to the end that such work permit shall not be granted to or held by unqualified, disqualified or
unsuitable persons. To better define the policy of the city and this chapter, the following persons may be declared to be
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 440/640
unqualified, disqualified or unsuitable persons to be granted or to hold bar employee work permits under the provisions
of this chapter:
A. A person who within the past three (3) years, has been convicted of:
1. A felony or of any crime which, under the laws of this state, is punishable as a felony;
2. In this state, or elsewhere, any crime of which fraud or intent to defraud was an element;
3. Larceny in any degree;
4. Buying or receiving stolen property;
5. Unlawful possession, use, selling, dispensing, exchanging, supplying, giving away or distribution of any
"controlled substance", as that term is defined in the uniform controlled substance act, or any "dangerous drug",
as that term is defined in Nevada Revised Statutes title 40, chapter 454, or of marijuana, or of a narcotic drug;
6. Any sex offense or crime involving moral turpitude;
7. The violation of any law, whether the same is or is not punishable as a felony, regulating or prohibiting the use,
carrying, possession or ownership of any concealed weapon or deadly weapon;
B. A person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
C. A person who the chief of police determines is not a suitable person to receive a work permit under the provisions of
this chapter, having due consideration for the proper protection of the public health, safety, morals, good order and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city;
D. Any person who has not received mandatory server training approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-3: UNLAWFUL TO BE EMPLOYED AS BAR EMPLOYEE WITHOUT WORK PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to be employed as a bar employee unless such person is the holder of a valid, current
work permit issued in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-4: APPLICATION; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. Application Form; Information: Application for a bar employee work permit shall be submitted to the chief of police in
writing, under oath, setting forth the following information: applicant's name, age, present permanent residence
address; a list of all residences for the past three (3) years prior to the date of such application; a list of the names
and addresses of all employers of the applicant for the past three (3) years prior to the date of such application; and
a list of all convictions of those crimes enumerated in section 5-11-2 of this chapter.
B. Prints And Photographs: At the time of filing such written application, the applicant shall submit to the taking of his or
her thumbprints, fingerprints and photograph for use in processing the application and for filing in the records of the
police department and the criminal justice information center of the Nevada crime commission.
C. Mandatory Server Training: Obtain mandatory server training approved by the chief of police.
D. Temporary Permit May Be Issued: Whenever any person applies for a work permit in compliance with this chapter,
the chief of police may, in his discretion, issue such applicant a temporary work permit.
E. Duty Of Chief Of Police In Processing Application: It shall be the duty of the chief of police:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 441/640
1. To receive and process the applications for work permits provided in this chapter.
2. To take the thumbprints, fingerprints and photographs of all applicants and immediately send a copy of such
imprints to the criminal justice information center of the Nevada crime commission, or such other law enforcement
agency as the chief of police may determine, with the request that all information as to the previous record, if any,
of such person be immediately transmitted to the chief of police. On application for renewal, or upon the change
of name of any holder of a work permit, the chief of police may submit only the applicant or holder's name to the
criminal justice information center, or may require the submission of new thumbprints and fingerprints. If the
applicant discloses a felony within the last three (3) years to the potential employer, a letter must be provided
from the employer to the chief of police stating that they are aware of the applicant's criminal history.
3. To investigate the qualifications of all applicants for work permits under this chapter and to grant or deny such
application within forty five (45) days from the date such application is filed.
4. The chief of police may deny any application made by any applicant who does not meet the requirements of this
chapter, or who has failed to disclose, misstated or otherwise misled the chief of police in respect to any facts or
statement contained within the application, or who has refused or neglected to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter.
5. The chief of police may revoke any work permit issued under this chapter when it shall appear to the satisfaction
of the chief of police that:
a. The holder of the work permit has, subsequent to the issuance of the work permit, been convicted of any of the
crimes or offenses specified in section 5-11-2 of this chapter.
b. The holder of the work permit failed to disclose, misstated or otherwise misled the chief of police in respect of
any fact or statement contained in his or her application for a work permit.
c. The holder of the work permit refuses or neglects to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
d. The holder of the work permit is no longer a suitable person to hold such work permit after due consideration
by the chief of police of the proper protection of the public health, safety, morals and good order and the
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
F. Fee: Every person applying for a work permit under the provisions of this chapter shall pay, at the time of application,
the sum as set by resolution of the city council, as a condition precedent to having issued to him or her the work
permit provided in this chapter.
G. Renewal: Every person who has been issued a work permit pursuant to this chapter must have that work permit
renewed every six (6) years thereafter. This renewal date will correspond with the six (6) year expiration date of the
original application and fingerprint date. Every person issued a work permit pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, seeking a replacement for the loss of a permit, or a name change shall be required to pay additional fees
as set by resolution of the city council. Issuance of renewal work permits shall not be automatic but shall be subject
to such search of the police department records, the state criminal justice information records, and other law
enforcement agency records and such background investigation as the chief of police shall determine is necessary
to determine the applicant's qualifications to hold such work permit.
H. Issuance Of Permit: Upon complying with the provisions of this chapter, and meeting all qualifications required, the
chief of police shall issue the applicant a work permit under this chapter, subject to revocation as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-5: APPEALS:
Any person whose application for a work permit has been denied or revoked by the chief of police may appeal to the
city council for a hearing to show cause why the work permit should be issued or should not be revoked. Such appeal
must be filed with the city clerk on or before the thirtieth day following such denial or revocation. Such appeal shall be
heard by the city council within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. At such hearing, the city council shall receive
such evidence and take such testimony as it deems necessary. After such hearing, the city council shall review the
testimony taken and any other evidence submitted and shall within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 442/640
announce its decision sustaining or reversing the denial or revocation of the work permit. Such city council may, by
unanimous vote, upon evidence of the good moral character and rehabilitation of the applicant, waive any of the
disqualifications stated in section 5-11-2 of this chapter, and condition or restrict any such waiver having due
consideration for the proper protection of the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the city. The filing of such appeal shall constitute consent by the applicant to use all criminal histories,
records and information that has been acquired or compiled in connection with the application and the action taken
thereon. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-6: CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS:
All criminal histories, and records acquired, supplied or compiled by the chief of police, the city council, the police
department or any law enforcement agency or record center pursuant to this chapter are confidential and no part
thereof may be disclosed except in the proper administration of this chapter, or to an authorized law enforcement
agency, to the Nevada gaming control board and commission, to the city council, to the city attorney, to police officers
of the city police department and to the criminal justice information center of the Nevada crime commission or to any
successor thereof or substitute therefor. Any dissemination of records, criminal history or other information acquired in
the administration of this chapter shall be made in compliance with the policies and procedures of the Nevada crime
commission. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-7: UNLAWFUL TO EMPLOY BAR EMPLOYEES WITHOUT WORK PERMITS:
It is unlawful for any person owning or operating an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold at retail to
patrons for consumption on the premises, to employ any bar employee who does not hold a valid, current work permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
5-11-8: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of
this code. (Ord. 766, 11-27-2012)
Chapter 12
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
5-12-1: CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Unless such use is permitted under any other applicable provision of this code, or unless the location has been
designated as a "camping area" by resolution of the city council and the location has been zoned to permit
"camping" as a principal, temporary or accessory permitted use, it shall be unlawful to camp on public property
(including, without limitation, public parks) within the city limits. For the purpose of this chapter, "to camp" or
"camping" means to use real property of the city for living accommodation purposes such as, without limitation, the
following:
1. Overnight sleeping activities or making preparations to sleep overnight outside of a vehicle (to include a
recreational vehicle), such as the laying down of bedding on the ground for the purpose of sleeping overnight;
2. Storing personal belongings outside of a structure, except that property lawfully on the person of or associated
with a person engaged in lawful activities may be retained by that person;
3. Making any fire, other than in a fire or barbecue pit approved by the city or in an area designated for such use by
the city, and other than the use of a portable charcoal or propane grill used according to the manufacturer's
instructions;
4. Using any tent, shelter, or other structure for sleeping overnight; provided, that during daylight hours a person
may sleep in a vehicle (to include a recreational vehicle) lawfully parked for a period not to exceed four (4) hours;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 443/640
or
5. Cooking, other than in a fire or barbecue pit approved by the city or in an area designated for such use by the
city, and other than the use of a portable charcoal or propane grill used according to the manufacturer's
instructions.
For purposes of this subsection, "overnight" is defined as the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to
sunrise.
B. The activities described in subsection A of this section, constitute camping when it reasonably appears in light of all
the circumstances that the participant, in conducting these activities, is in fact using the area for living
accommodation purposes, regardless of the intent of the participant or the nature of any other activities in which the
participant may also be engaging.
C. The prohibitions listed in subsection A of this section, shall not restrict any person from doing the following activities:
1. Sitting or lying down on public property due to a medical emergency;
2. Moving about public property with the aid of a wheelchair, walker or similar device;
3. Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on public property pursuant to an applicable
permit;
4. Participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar event
conducted on public property pursuant to an applicable permit;
5. Camping at a location approved by the city in connection with a traveling show properly licensed pursuant to this
code.
D. No person shall be charged with a violation of this section unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this
section after having been notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct is unlawful. (Ord. 783, 6-10-2014)
5-12-2: PROHIBITING TEMPORARY HABITATION OF PRIVATE PLACES OR LANDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to temporarily inhabit, dwell, cohabit, prepare and eat meals, sleep, trespass, camp
or remain upon any private places or private lands within the city without the prior written permission of the owner or
lessee of such places or lands. No person shall be charged with a violation of this section unless the person engages
in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by a law enforcement officer or a person (or
representative of a person) in lawful possession of the property that the conduct is unlawful. (Ord. 783, 6-10-2014)
5-12-3: PROHIBITING BUSINESSES FROM USING ANY CITY OWNED PARK AND/OR
ADJOINING RIGHT OF WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any business to conduct business within any city owned park and/or adjoining right of way,
including, but not exclusively, streets, curbs, gutters or parks, except for the following persons or entities under the
following conditions:
A. Any person holding a vendor permit pursuant to section 4-1-16 of this code.
B. Any person holding a special event permit pursuant to this code.
C. Any person holding a traveling show business license pursuant to this code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 444/640
D. Private parties/gatherings in which the business has been hired to provide food, beverages and/or entertainment.
Payment for the services provided shall be made by the organizer of the private party/gathering and shall not be
charged individually to the party/gathering participants. At no time will the business be open to the public.
E. Any business operating under a concessionaire agreement with the city.
F. Any business contracted or hired by an organized sporting event to provide food, beverages, and/or entertainment.
(Ord. 783, 6-10-2014)
5-12-4: PENALTIES:
The penalties provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code shall apply to this chapter. (Ord. 783, 6-10-2014)
5-12-5: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence,
paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or
circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other
persons or circumstances. (Ord. 783, 6-10-2014)
Chapter 13
LOST AND FOUND PROPERTY
5-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as LOST AND FOUND PROPERTY. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-2: DUTY OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
Every officer and employee of the city, who shall find any lost money or property in or upon any public ground, street,
highway, road, alley, sidewalk, public building or other property of the city, or when in the course of his duties as a city
employee shall otherwise come into possession of any personal property, the owner of which is unknown, shall deliver
the same to the officer or the person in charge of the place where such money or property is found or to the head of the
department where such employee is employed or to the chief of police. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-3: RIGHTS OF FINDERS:
A. Claim; Conditions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever any item of lost or abandoned
property has been found and delivered to the chief of police or one of his subordinates for care, custody and
control, by any person, such item shall be returned to the original finder whenever a claim has been made by the
finder and the following conditions have been met:
1. The claimant is the person who originally found the lost or abandoned property.
2. Claimant, after sending the property to the chief of police, has served written notice of his intention to make a
claim on that item within ninety (90) days of the surrender of the item.
3. The lost or abandoned property has remained unclaimed by the owner or person having a right to said property
before ninety (90) days after surrender of the same to the chief of police or his subordinate.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 445/640
4. The lost or abandoned property is not stolen or confiscated property, nor other properties coming within the
provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 179.
B. Employees Exempt: In no event shall property or money be returned to a city employee who found the same while
within the scope of his employment with the city. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-4: RETURN TO OWNER:
The person to whom such money or property is delivered, other than the chief of police, shall cause the same to be
delivered to the custody of the chief of police who shall care for and protect all such property coming into his
possession. The chief of police shall restore such property or money to its true owner or the persons entitled to
possession thereof, upon proof of ownership or right of possession satisfactory to him, and upon payment to him of all
costs reasonably or necessarily incurred by him in the care and protection of such property. If the identity of the owner
appears from an examination of the property or if the identity of the owner is otherwise known to the chief of police, he
shall notify the apparent owner by letter, certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid at the owner's last
known address. Such letter shall describe the property and state that the same may be sold or otherwise disposed of
unless claimed within ninety (90) days. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-5: SALE AT AUCTION:
Any unclaimed or unreturned property, other than money, in the possession of the police department, unless otherwise
provided by law, may be sold at auction by the chief of police or his representative to the highest bidder after being
held by the police department for a period of at least ninety (90) days or being held for ninety (90) days from the date of
mailing as provided in section 5-13-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-6: NOTICE:
Notice of any sale under the provision of this chapter shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the city. The first publication shall be at least ten (10) days prior to the time fixed for said
auction. Said notice shall contain a statement of the time andplace fixed by the chief of police for such auction,
together with a general statement of the kind of property offered for sale at such auction. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-7: ACCOUNTING FOR SALE PROCEEDS:
Immediately upon the completion of any such auction sale, the chief of police shall report to the city clerk, the
necessary expenses of such sale actually incurred and a statement of the proceeds of such sale, and shall forthwith
pay to the city clerk, for deposit in the general fund the proceeds remaining after payment of the expenses actually
incurred. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-8: DISPOSAL OF UNSOLD PROPERTY:
If there be no bids incurred for any item offered for sale at such auction, each item shall be disposed of by the chief of
police, in the public interest, as he shall deem fit. The chief of police shall advise the city clerk of the disposition made
of all such properties and shall forthwith pay to the city clerk all monies received by him in disposal of such property.
(Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
5-13-9: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED MONEY:
Any money received by the chief of police under sections 5-13-2 and 5-13-3 of this chapter shall be retained in his
custody for a period of ninety (90) days. All such money which remains unclaimed by its true owner, or the person
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 446/640
entitled to possession thereof, for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of its finding shall be deposited by the chief
of police with the city clerk for deposit in the general fund. (Ord. 262, 6-27-1978)
Chapter 14
TAXICAB OPERATION EMPLOYEES; WORK PERMITS
5-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the meaning
attached to them by this section:
TAXICAB: A motor vehicle or vehicles to accommodate and transport passengers for hire within the city or from points
within the city to points without the city; provided, that motor carriers conducting fixed route operations or ambulances
are not considered as taxicabs.
TAXICAB OPERATION: The operation of a motor vehicle or vehicles to accommodate and transport passengers for
hire within the city, or, from points within the city to points without the city; provided, that motor carriers conducting fixed
route operations or ambulances are not construed as taxicab operations.
TAXICAB OPERATION EMPLOYEE: Those employees of establishments, firms, corporations, businesses,
partnerships, or any other type of business organization, or a lessee thereof, conducting a taxicab operation.
TEMPORARY WORK PERMIT: A work permit which is valid for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days from its date of
issue and is not renewable.
WORK PERMIT: Any card, certificate or permit issued by the city council or by the chief of police, authorizing
employment to the holder as a taxicab operation employee. (Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
5-14-2: POLICY:
A. Generally: The city council finds, and it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that, to protect the public
health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, it is necessary that the city
council ascertain and keep itself informed of the identity, qualifications, prior activities and present location of all
taxicab operation employees in the city, and maintain confidential records of such information; and require
registration with the police department; and require the thumbprinting, fingerprinting and photographing of taxicab
operation employees; and to require the chief of police to investigate the background qualification of each applicant
for a taxicab operation employee work permit under this chapter, before any such work permit is granted; and to
periodically investigate into legal qualifications of each applicant or holder of a work permit under this chapter, to the
end that such work permit shall not be granted to or held by unqualified, disqualified or unsuitable persons.
B. Prohibited Persons: To better define the policy of the city in this chapter, the following persons may be declared to
be unqualified, disqualified or unsuitable persons to be granted or to hold a taxicab operation employee work permit
under the provisions of this chapter:
1. A person who within the past three (3) years has been convicted in the state or elsewhere of:
a. A felony or any crime which, under the laws of the state, is punishable as a felony;
b. Any crime in which defraud or intent to fraud was an element;
c. Larceny in any degree;
d. Buying or receiving stolen property;
e. Unlawful possession, use, selling, dispensing, exchanging, supplying, giving away or distribution of any
"controlled substance", as that term is defined in the uniform controlled substance act, or any "dangerous
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 447/640
drug", as that term is defined in Nevada Revised Statutes title 40, chapter 454, or of marijuana, or of any
narcotic drug;
f. Any sex offense or crime involving moral turpitude;
g. Violation of any law, whether the same is or is not punishable as a felony, regulating or prohibiting the use,
carrying, possession or ownership of any concealed weapon or deadly weapon.
2. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
3. A person who the chief of police determines is not asuitable person to receive a work permit under the provisions
of this chapter, having due consideration for the proper protection of the public interests, health, safety, morals,
good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The chief of police shall make a written statement of
the reasons for disqualification of any person under this subsection in the event such disqualification is appealed
to the city council. (Ord. 612, 11-25-2003)
5-14-3: UNLAWFUL TO BE EMPLOYED AS A TAXICAB OPERATION EMPLOYEE WITHOUT
WORK PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to be employed as a taxicab operation employee unless such person is the holder of a
valid, current work permit issued in accordance with the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 459, 7-
25-1995)
5-14-4: APPLICATION; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. Application Form; Information: Application for a taxicab operation employee work permit shall be submitted to the
chief of police in writing, under oath, setting forth the following information: applicant's name, age, present
residence address; a list of the residences for the past three (3) years prior to the date of such application; a list of
the names and addresses of all employers of the applicant for the past three (3) years prior to the date of such
application; a list of all convictions within the past three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application for those
crimes enumerated in section 5-14-2 of this chapter.
B. Prints And Photographs: At the time of filing such written application, the applicant shall submit to the taking of his or
her thumbprints, fingerprints and photographs for use in processing the application and for filing in the records of
the police department and the criminal justice information center of the Nevada crime commission.
C. Temporary Permit May Be Issued: Whenever any person applies for a work permit in compliance with the terms,
provisions and conditions of this chapter, the chief of police may, in his discretion, issue such applicant a temporary
work permit.
D. Duty Of Chief Of Police In Processing Application: It shall be the duty of the chief of police:
1. To receive and process the applications for work permits provided in this chapter.
2. To take the thumbprints, fingerprints and photographs of all applicants and immediately send a copy of such
prints and photos to the criminal justice information center of theNevada crime commission, or such other law
enforcement agency as the chief of police may determine, with the request that all information as to the previous
record, if any, of such person be immediately transmitted to the chief of police. On application for renewal, or
upon the change of name of any holder of a work permit, the chief of police may submit only the applicant's or
holder's name to the criminal justice information center, or may require the submission of new thumbprints and
fingerprints. If the applicant discloses a felony within the last three (3) years to the potential employer, a letter
must be provided from the employer to the chief of police stating that they are aware of the applicant's criminal
history.
3. To investigate the qualifications of all applicants for work permits under this chapter and to grant or deny such
application within sixty (60) days from the date such application is filed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 448/640
4. The chief of police may deny any application made by any applicant who does not meet the requirements of this
chapter, or who has failed to disclose, misstated or otherwise misled the chief of police in respect to any facts or
statement contained within the application, or who has refused or neglected to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter.
5. The chief of police may revoke any work permit issued under this chapter when it shall appear to the satisfaction
of the chief of police that:
a. The holder of the work permit has, subsequent to the issuance of the work permit, been convicted of any of the
crimes or offenses specified in section 5-14-2 of this chapter.
b. The holder of the work permit failed to disclose, misstated or otherwise misled the chief of police in respect of
any fact or statement contained in his or her application for a work permit.
c. The holder of the work permit refuses or neglects to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
d. The holder of the work permit is no longer a suitable person to hold such work permit after due consideration
by the chief of police of the proper protection of the public interests, health, safety, morals, good order and the
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
E. Fee: Every person applying for a work permit under the provisions of this chapter shall pay, at the time of
application, the fee as set by resolution of the city council as a condition precedent to having issued to him or her
the work permit provided in this chapter.
F. Renewal: Every person who has been issued a work permit pursuant to this chapter must have that work permit
renewed every five (5) years thereafter and/or upon any change at any time of place of employment, and/or upon
any change of name.
G. Expiration Of Permit: All such work permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire five (5) calendar years from
the date of issuance.
H. Time Limit For Renewal Application: A holder of a work permit must apply for renewal of the permit from the chief of
police within ten (10) days following any change of place of employment or change of name.
I. Additional Fee: Every person issued a work permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, seeking a replacement,
modification or reissuance of an original work permit previously issued to him or her because of a change of place
of employment and/or upon any change of name, shall be required to pay an additional fee in accordance with city
council resolution.
J. Renewal Fee: Every person holding a work permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter seeking a renewal of the
original work permit previously issued to him or her shall, after expiration of five (5) calendar years from the date of
issuance, pay to the city the fee as set by resolution of the city council for such renewal work permit and shall, if
requested by the chief of police, submit to thumbprinting and fingerprinting and/or photographing and/or submit
portions of an application as the chief of police shall specify.
K. Search And Investigation For Renewal: Issuance of renewal work permits shall not be automatic but shall be subject
to such search of the police department records, the Nevada criminal justice information records, and other law
enforcement agency records and such background investigation as the chief of police shall determine is necessary
to determine the applicant's qualifications to hold such work permit.
L. Issuance Of Permit: Upon complying with the provisions of this chapter, and meeting all qualifications required, the
chief of police shall issue the applicant a work permit under this chapter, subject to revocation as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 612, 11-25-2003)
5-14-5: APPEALS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 449/640
Any person whose application for a work permit has been denied or revoked by the chief of police may appeal to the
city council for a hearing to show cause why the work permit should be issued or should not be revoked. Such appeal
must be filed with the city clerk on or before the thirtieth day followingsuch denial or revocation. Such appeal shall be
heard by the city council within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. At such hearing, the city council shall receive
such evidence and take such testimony as it deems necessary. After such hearing, the city council shall review the
testimony taken and any other evidence submitted and shall within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing
announce its decision sustaining or reversing the denial or revocation of the work permit. Such city council may, by
unanimous vote, upon evidence of the good moral character and rehabilitation of the applicant, waive any of the
disqualifications stated in section 5-14-2 of this chapter, and condition or restrict any such waiver, having due
consideration for the proper protection of the public interest, health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of
the inhabitants of the city. The filing of such appeal shall constitute consent by the applicant to use all criminal histories,
records and information that has been acquired or compiled in connection with the application and the action taken
thereon. (Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
5-14-6: CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS:
All criminal histories, and records acquired, supplied or compiled by the chief of police, the city council, the police
department or any law enforcement agency or record center pursuant to this chapter are confidential and no part
thereof may be disclosed except in proper administration of this chapter, or to any authorized law enforcement agency
or to the Nevada gaming control board and commission or to the city council or to the city attorney or to law
enforcement officers within the county and to the criminal justice information center of the Nevada crime commission or
to any successor thereof or substitute therefor. Any dissemination of records, criminal history or other information
acquired in the administration of this chapter shall be made in compliance with the policies and procedures of the
Nevada crime commission. (Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
5-14-7: UNLAWFUL TO EMPLOY TAXICAB OPERATION EMPLOYEES WITHOUT WORK
PERMITS:
A. Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a business, firm, corporation, partnership or association
to employ or continue to employ a taxicab operation employee who does not hold a valid, current work permit
issued under provisions of this chapter.
B. Applicability: The regulations and provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses
described herein regardless of whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in the
city and regardless of whether the activities occurred before orafter the effective date hereof.
C. Time For Compliance: All such persons and businesses requiring work permits shall have fifty (50) days from the
effective date hereof to comply with regulatory provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
5-14-8: DISPLAY OF WORK PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab pursuant to the terms of this chapter unless such person has
conspicuously displayed a valid, current work permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for
any person other than the person to whom the taxicab operation employee work permit has been issued to be in
possession of such work permit. It is unlawful for any person to whom a taxicab operation employees work permit has
been issued under the terms of this chapter to permit such work permit to be in the possession of another person.
(Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
5-14-9: UNLAWFUL OPERATION:
It shall be a misdemeanor offense for any person, establishment, firm, corporation, partnership or other business
organization, or lessee thereof, to commence a taxicab operation within the city without first complying with the
regulations of the public service commission of the state. (Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 450/640
5-14-10: PENALTIES:
Any person or taxicab operation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided
in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 459, 7-25-1995)
Chapter 15
IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
5-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the REGULATION OF IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
5-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the meaning indicated:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A "controlled substance" as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes section 453.041.
DISTRIBUTE: The actual, constructive or attempted substance, which by dosage unit appearance (including color,
shape, size and markings), or by representations made, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance
is a controlled substance. In those rare cases when the appearance of the dosage unit is not reasonably sufficient to
establish that the substance is an "imitation controlled substance" (for example in the case of powder or liquid), the
court or authority concerned should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following factors as
related to "representations made" in determining whether the substance is an "imitation controlled substance":
A. Statements made by an owner or by anyone else in control of the substance concerning the nature of the
substance, or its use or effect;
B. Statements made to the recipient that the substance may be resold for inordinate profit;
C. Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for illicit controlled substances;
D. Evasive tactics or actions utilized by theowner or person in control of the substance to avoid detection by law
enforcement authorities;
E. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the object, under state or federal law related to
controlled substances or fraud;
F. The proximity of the substances to controlled substances.
MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, compounding, processing, encapsulating, packaging or repackaging,
labeling or relabeling of an imitation controlled substance. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
5-15-3: MANUFACTURE, SALE OR DISTRIBUTION:
It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, distribute or possess with intent to sell or distribute, an imitation
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 451/640
controlled substance. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a city offense as set forth in section 5-15-7
of this chapter. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
5-15-4: USE:
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, an imitation controlled substance. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a city offense as set forth in section 5-15-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
5-15-5: ADVERTISEMENT OR SOLICITATION:
It is unlawful for any person to place any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication, or to post or distribute in
any public place, any advertisement or solicitation with reasonable knowledge that the purpose of the advertisement or
solicitation is to promote the distribution of imitation controlled substances. Any person who violates this section is
guilty of a city offense as set forth in section 5-15-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
5-15-6: EXEMPTIONS:
No civil or criminal liability shall be imposed by virtue of this chapter on any person registered under the controlled
substances act who manufactures, distributes or possesses an imitation controlled substance for use as a placebo by
a registered practitioner in the course of professional practice or research. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
5-15-7: PENALTIES:
Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a city offense, or whenever in
this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is made or declared to be unlawful or a city
offense, the doing of any such prohibited act or the failure to do any such required act shall constitute a city offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Any day of any violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 327, 3-9-1982)
Chapter 16
CURFEW; MINORS
5-16-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ORDINANCE REGULATING THE PRESENCE AND CONDUCT
OF MINORS ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES. (Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
5-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Elko.
CUSTODIAN: Any person over the age of eighteen (18) who is in loco parentis to a juvenile.
GUARDIAN: Any person other than a parent, who has legal guardianship of a minor.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 452/640
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
PARENT: The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access
and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A "public place" shall include, but not be
limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and
any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or
immediate area of the above. (Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
5-16-3: CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be idle, remain, wander, stroll or play in any public place, either on foot or to cruise
about, without a set destination in any vehicle in, about or upon any place in the city between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
A.M. (midnight) and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Friday and Saturday during the school year, and between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) A.M. (midnight) and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Friday and Saturday during the Elko County school district
summer vacation, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having custody or
control of such minor or unless the minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or
permitted by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or where the
presence of such minor is connected with or required by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation.
(Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
5-16-4: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PUBLIC PLACES:
Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having
charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors under the age of eighteen (18) during
curfew hours for minors. (Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
5-16-5: PARENTS' RESPONSIBILITY AND CIVIL LIABILITY:
A. Violation: It shall be a civil infraction for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any
minor under the age of eighteen (18) to suffer or permit, or by ineffective control to allow, such person to be on the
streets or sidewalks or in any public property or public place within the city during curfew hours for minors.
However, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian, custody or
other adult person having the care, custody or control of the minor, or if the minor is on any emergency errand or
specific business or activity directed by his parent, guardian, custodian or other adult having the care and custody
of the minor or if the parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing person notification to the
police department. The issuance of a citation to a parent creates a rebuttable presumption of ineffective control of
the juvenile.
B. Notice Of Civil Infraction; Form: A notice of civil infraction must be on the form which is prescribed by the police
department and must contain the following information:
1. The location at which the violation occurred;
2. The date and time of the violation;
3. The signature of the person who issues the notice of civil infraction;
4. The section of this code which allegedly is being violated;
5. Information which advises of the manner in which, and the time within which, the notice of civil infraction should
be answered;
6. Any other reasonable information which is prescribed by the police department.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 453/640
C. Duties Of Respondent:
1. A person who responds to a notice of infraction must either:
a. "Admit" the commission of the infraction and pay the appropriate civil fine; or
b. "Deny" liability for the infraction.
2. A person may "admit" pursuant to subsection C1a of this section by paying the amount of the civil fine which is
appropriate for the violation which was committed to the municipal court.
3. A person may "deny" liability pursuant to subsection C1b of this section only by appearing in person before the
municipal court.
D. Commencement Of Civil Action; Procedure: Judicial enforcement of notices of infraction must be by way of civil suit
in the municipal court if a person denies liability. A civil action may be commenced by the filing of a complaint in the
name of the city and the issuance of a summons with respect thereto, and service of such complaint and summons
on the defendant must be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the defendant at his/her
last known address or in any other matter which is authorized by law. The proceedings in municipal court for actions
commenced pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by rules 1 and 3 through 87 of the justice court rules of
procedures, except that there shall be no right of trial by jury.
E. Schedule Of Civil Fines: The civil fines imposed upon a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of a minor violating this chapter for civil infractions shall be as follows:
First civil infraction $ 50.00
Second civil infraction within 1 year of the date of the first
infraction
150.00
Third civil infraction within 1 year of the first infraction 500.00
(Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
5-16-6: SPECIAL FUNCTIONS:
Any minor attending a special function or entertainment of any church, school, club or other organization that requires
such minor to be out at a later hour than that called for in section 5-16-3 of this chapter shall be exempt from the
provisions of section 5-16-3 of this chapter, provided the police officer is able to verify that the minor qualifies under the
provisions of this section for an exemption. The minors who attend the function shall be required to be in their homes
or usual places of abode within one-half (1/2) hour after the function is ended. (Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
5-16-7: PROCEDURES:
A. Violations: Any violation of section 5-16-3 of this chapter may result in the minor being cited to the juvenile court for
a violation of section 5-16-3 of this chapter. In addition, the parents of said juvenile may also be forthwith personally
cited to the municipal court for a violation of section 5-16-5 of this chapter. Any violation of section 5-16-4 of this
chapter shall result in that business being cited to the municipal court.
B. Disposition Of Minor Upon Issuance Of Citation: After issuance of a citation, if such minor fails to immediately return
to his or her home, he or she shall be taken to the police department and the parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent,
guardian or other adult person above cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor
shall be released to the juvenile authorities. (Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 454/640
5-16-8: PENALTIES:
A. Minor: Any minor violating the provisions of this chapter may be processed in accordance with the juvenile court law
and procedure.
B. Other Persons: Any person other than a parent convicted of any criminal provision of this chapter shall be
sentenced as provided for in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Parents found to have committed a civil violation shall be
fined as setforth in subsection 5-16-5E of this chapter.
C. Accounting Of Monies Received: All monies received as a result of the enforcement of this chapter shall be
accounted for in a separate account and such monies shall be used for the purpose of preventing juvenile crime.
(Ord. 449, 10-25-1994)
Chapter 17
ANTILITTER REGULATIONS
5-17-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF ELKO ANTILITTER ORDINANCE. (Ord. 386, 10-11-
1988)
5-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in
the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in
section 9-2-3 of this code.
CITY: The city of Elko, Nevada.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and all other waste material which, if thrown or
deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by
the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 455/640
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-3: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in
public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-4: PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon
private property. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-5: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
Except when authorized by the city at specified times, no person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or
other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk
or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord.
386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-6: MERCHANTS' DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-7: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place
within the city, or upon private property. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-8: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded
as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place.
(Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-9: LITTER IN PARKS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that
the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street
or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 456/640
5-17-10: LITTER IN FOUNTAINS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the city. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-11: LITTER IN OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person
or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-12: OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided,
however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. (Ord.
386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-13: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such
person or not. (Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-14: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined or imprisoned as provided for in section 1-3-1 of this code. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. 386, 10-11-1988)
5-17-15: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 386, 10-11-
1988)
Chapter 18
DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS
5-18-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ORDINANCE REGULATING DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIAL
HARMFUL TO MINORS. (Ord. 388, 2-14-1989)
5-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 457/640
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
HARMFUL TO MINORS: That quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct
or sexual excitement, when it:
A. Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors in sex; and
B. Is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is
suitable sexual material for minors; and
C. Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
KNOWINGLY: A. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants
further inspection or inquiry or both;
B. The character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and
C. The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability
hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Includes any of the following depicted sexual conduct:
A. Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital intercourse,
whether between human beings or between a human being and an animal;
B. Sadomasochistic abuse meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in
undergarments or in a revealing costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restricted on the part of one so clothed;
C. Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals, including any explicit, close up representation of a human
genital organ;
D. Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed areas or buttocks of a human male
or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or
between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification;
E. An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are employed to overcome the will of or achieve the
consent of a person to an act of sexual conduct and the effects or results of the violence or drugs are shown.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal. (Ord. 388, 2-14-1989)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 458/640
5-18-3: SALE OF MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration to a minor:
A. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, videotape, or similar visual representation or image
of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sexual excitement and which is
harmful to minors.
B. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in subsection A of this section, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative
accounts of nudity, sexual excitement or sexual conduct and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors. (Ord.
388, 2-14-1989)
5-18-4: MOTION PICTURES OR OTHER PRESENTATIONS HARMFUL TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor
an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is
exhibited a motion picture show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement and which is harmful to minors. (Ord. 388, 2-14-1989)
5-18-5: SEGREGATION OF MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display, sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate,
distribute, or attempt to distribute any material which is harmful to minors in its content in any place where minors are
or may be present or allowed to be present and where minors are able to view such material, unless each item of such
material is at all times kept in a sealed wrapper.
A. It is also unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display, sell, offer to sell, give away,
circulate, distribute, or attempt to distribute any material whose cover, covers or packaging, standing alone, is
harmful to minors, in any place where minors are or may be present or allowed to be present and where minors are
able to view such material, unless each item of such material is blocked from view by an opaque cover. The
requirement of an opaque cover shall be deemed satisfied concerning such material if those portions of the cover,
covers or packaging containing such material harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to thedistribution or attempt to distribute the exhibition, display, sale,
offer of sale, circulation, or giving away of material harmful to minors where such material is sold, exhibited,
displayed, offered for sale, given away, circulated, distributed, or attempted to be distributed under circumstances
where minors are not present, not allowed to be present, or are not able to view such material or the cover, covers
or packaging of such material. Any business may comply with the requirements of this subsection by physically
segregating such material in a manner so as to physically prohibit the access to and view of the material by minors,
by prominently posting at the entrances to such restricted area, "Adults Only. You Must Be 18 To Enter", and by
enforcing said restrictions. (Ord. 388, 2-14-1989)
5-18-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
The following are exempt from criminal or other action hereunder:
A. Recognized and established schools, religious institutions, museums, medical clinics and physicians, hospitals,
public libraries, governmental agencies or quasi governmental sponsored organizations, and persons acting in their
capacity as employees or agents of such organizations. For the purpose of this section "recognized and
established" shall mean: an organization or agency having a full time faculty and diversified curriculum in the case
of a school; a religious institution affiliated with a national or regional denomination; a licensed physician or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 459/640
psychiatrist or clinic of licensed physicians or psychiatrists; and in all other exempt organizations shall refer only to
income tax exempted organizations which are supported in whole or in part by tax funds or which receive at least
one third of their support from publicly donated funds.
B. Individuals in a parental relationship with the minor. (Ord. 388, 2-14-1989)
Chapter 19
GRAFFITI CODE
5-19-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The city council is enacting this chapter to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program
for the removal of graffiti from public and private property. The city council is authorized to enact this chapter
pursuant to its police powers, as specified in the Elko city charter or the Nevada Revised Statutes.
B. The city council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners, as
well as the entire community. Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti
tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and
become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city.
C. The city council intends, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect
public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The city council does not intend for this
chapter to conflict with any antigraffiti state laws. (Ord. 645, 6-14-2005)
5-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint
or other substances capable of defacing property.
BROAD TIPPED MARKER: Any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that,
at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth (1/4) of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not
water soluble.
ETCHING EQUIPMENT: Any tool, device or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or
manmade surface.
GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, design, painting or other defacement that is written, marked,
etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private
property, real or personal, by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the
owner or occupant of the property or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city
council.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: An aerosol paint container, a broad tipped marker, gummed label, paint stick or graffiti stick,
etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade
surface.
PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK: Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other epoxy, or
other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth
(1/8) of an inch in width.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 460/640
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or
any other legal entity. (Ord. 645, 6-14-2005)
5-19-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Defacement: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any city
owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any noncity owned property. (Ord. 645, 6-
14-2005)
B. Possession Of Graffiti Implements:
1. Minors At Or Near School Facilities: It shall be unlawful for any minor person, upon his person or in a vehicle,
under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds,
facilities, buildings or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property,
or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of broad tipped markers by a minor attending or
traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that
formally requires the possession of broad tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of
this section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a broad tipped marker.
2. Designated Public Places Or Public Transportation: Any person who carries on his person a graffiti implement
with the intent to vandalize, place graffiti on or otherwise deface public or private property, real or personal, of
another:
a. While on or under any overpass or bridge or in any flood channel;
b. At any public facility, community center, park, playground, swimming pool, transportation facility, beach or
recreational area whereon a sign is posted in a location reasonably expected to be viewed by the public which
states that it is a misdemeanor to possess a graffiti implement at that public location without valid authorization;
or
c. In a public transportation vehicle wherein a sign is posted that is easily viewed by passengers which states that
it is a misdemeanor to possess a graffiti implement in the vehicle without valid authorization, is guilty of a
misdemeanor unless he has first received valid authorization from the governmental entity which has
jurisdiction over the public area or other person who is designated to provide such authorization.
d. As used in this subsection:
(1) "Public transportation vehicle" means a bus, train or other vehicle or instrumentality used to transport
persons from a transportation facility to another location.
(2) "Transportation facility" means an airport, marina, bus terminal, train station, bus stop or other facility where
a person may go to obtain transportation.
3. All Other Locations: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a graffiti implement anywhere else not
specified in subsection B1 or B2 of this section within the city with the intent to use the graffiti implement to
deface, vandalize or place graffiti upon property as prohibited by this section or knowing that some other person
intends to use the graffiti implement in the commission of such an offense. In determining intent, an officer
enforcing this code or a court considering charges for violation of this section may consider, among other factors,
the following:
a. Whether the graffiti implement is found upon the person;
b. Whether the person is known to have propensity to engage in acts of graffiti;
c. Whether the person is known to have gang affiliations which are known to engage in unlawful graffiti;
d. Whether the person takes flight upon contact by law enforcement;
e. Whether the person refuses to identify himself;
f. Whether the person attempts to conceal himself/herself or the graffiti implement;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 461/640
g. Whether a nongraffiti intention or use is present in the circumstances surrounding the possession; and/or
h. Whether the graffiti implement was recently purchased. (Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-4: ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS:
A. Furnishing To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell,
exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise
furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad tipped marker or paint stick to any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the person.
B. Signage Required: Every person who operates a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall:
1. Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such products stating:
Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid or
device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up to sixty (60) days and/or a fine of up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000).
2. Place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti
implements stating:
Selling spray paint, paint sticks or broad tipped markers to persons under 18 years of age is against the law
and punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000).
(Ord. 645, 6-14-2005)
C. Display And Storage:
1. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint
containers, paint sticks, or broad tipped markers shall store the containers, sticks or markers in an area
continuously observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail
establishment during the regular course of business.
2. In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or
broad tipped markers in an area as provided above, the establishment shall store the containers, sticks, and
markers in an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance.
(Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-5: PENALTIES:
A. Fines And Imprisonment: Any person violating this chapter by applying graffiti or possessing graffiti implements shall
be punished by a fine of not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the first offense and to perform one
hundred (100) hours of community service; not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second
offense and to perform two hundred (200) hours of community service; and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each subsequent offense and to perform two hundred (200) hours of community service or by imprisonment for a
term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court; and in addition to
any other penalties, an assessment of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes
section 268.4085. The community service assigned pursuant to this section must, if possible, be related to the
abatement of graffiti. Violations of this chapter which do not have a specific penalty provided shall be punishable as
a misdemeanor as provided in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
1. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for
payment of all fines.
2. Upon an application and find of indigence, the court may decline to order fines against the minor, parents or
guardian.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 462/640
B. Restitution: In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the court shall order any violator to make
restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or
manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and
severally liable with the minor to make the restitution. (Ord. 645, 6-14-2005)
C. Community Service: As part of the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult shall perform community
service as described by the court based on the following minimum requirements:
1. At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the period
of assigned community service.
2. The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider
approved by the chief of police.
3. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably
expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves
graffiti removal. (Ord. 702, 2-10-2009)
D. Driver's License Suspension: In the event the state law permits or is amended to permit a municipal or other court
enforcing the code to order suspension of a driver's license as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 206.330(5) or
to otherwise report a conviction of this chapter to the department of motor vehicles which would result in a
suspension of a driver's license of a person so convicted, the municipal or other court finding a violation of this
chapter shall so order as part of the sentence imposed herein as would be consistent with a similar violation of state
law. (Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-6: GRAFFITI AS NUISANCE:
A. Declaration Of Nuisance: The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this chapter is expressly
declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this
code.
B. Duty Of Owner Or Possessor: It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied
and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property, to at all times keep the
property clear of graffiti. (Ord. 645, 6-14-2005)
5-19-7: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PERPETRATOR:
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty four
(24) hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner
prescribed by the chief of police, the director of the department of public works, or any additional city department head,
as authorized by the city council. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment for
the removal of the graffiti. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional
violation of this chapter. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also
be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. (Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-8: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY PROPERTY OWNER OR CITY:
If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to section 5-19-7 of this chapter, graffiti may be removed pursuant
to the following provisions:
A. Voluntary Graffiti Removal Assistance Program: The city has determined that removal of graffiti as soon as
practicable is essential to its policy of prohibiting and preventing defacement of property within the city. In all cases,
removal is sought to be accomplished within twenty four (24) hours. The city hereby establishes a graffiti removal
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 463/640
assistance program which will be set forth in further detail by resolution of the city council and as may be amended
from time to time to reflect changes in methods and funding for graffiti removal. The purpose of such program shall
be to encourage the fast abatement/eradication of the graffiti and lessen the economic and resource burden upon
the owner of the property subjected to graffiti without fault of the owner and/or to the city. Such program shall
contain at least the following:
1. Any agreement for removal assistance between the city and the owner of the defaced property shall be in writing.
2. Prior to a written notice to any private property owner to remove graffiti, the city manager or his designee will
make reasonable efforts to informally contact the owner to explore the possibilities and terms for an agreement
between the city and the owner for graffiti removal or eradication under the graffiti removal assistance program.
3. Prior to entry upon the private property at issue or the use of city resources or equipment by the property owner,
the city shall require the consent and release required by resolution of the city council.
4. Nothing herein or in the agreement between the parties shall relieve the perpetrator of the graffiti from
responsibility for violating this chapter or from any remedies or claims the city or the owner may assert against
the perpetrator for damages or costs.
5. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on public or privately
owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the city is authorized to use public funds for the
removal of the graffiti pursuant to the voluntary removal program, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti but
may not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than where the
graffiti is located, unless the city manager determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be
repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement of the neighborhood or community, or unless the property
owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive areas.
B. Property Owner Responsibility: It is a violation of this code for a property owner to allow graffiti to remain on the
property after the expiration of the ten (10) day notice provided in subsection B1 of this section; however, property
owners shall not be criminally liable for graffiti which is placed upon their property by another. In cases where it is
determined by the city council to be in the best interest of the city to seek removal of any particular graffiti to
discourage further graffiti or defacement within the city, and where the property owner and the city have been
unable to resolve the matter through the voluntary removal program, the city council may direct staff to pursue
abatement/eradication through a court action.
1. Prior to filing a court action, the city manager shall cause a notice to be sent by certified mail to all property
owners of record to the last known address as shown at the Elko County assessor's office that a court action will
be pursued in the event the property owner has not reached an agreement with the city for abatement/eradication
of the graffiti within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the notice.
2. The municipal court or any court of competent jurisdiction shall have authority over violations of property owner
responsibilities under this code and, further, shall have authority to order abatement/eradication of the graffiti at
the cost and expense of the property owner(s).
3. If a court orders a property owner to abate/eradicate graffiti and the property owner fails to comply with such
order, the court may order that the city enter upon the property to complete the required abatement/eradication
actions at the expense of the property owner. In the event the property owner fails to pay any expenses incurred
by the city for abatement/eradication actions as ordered by the court, any court approved expenses at a hearing
held for such purpose shall constitute a lien upon the property and may be perfected and enforced by giving
notice thereof, recording a lien claim and following the process of enforcing the lien as required concerning
mechanic's liens under state law.
C. Exceptions To Property Owner Responsibility For Costs: A property owner's removal expense responsibilities of
subsection B of this section shall not apply to a property owner if the property owner can demonstrate that the
property owner lacks the financial ability to remove the graffiti. To qualify for this exception, a property owner must
demonstrate the lack of financial ability to the court.
D. Right Of Entry Of Private Or Public Property: Unless as set forth by a court order, prior to entering upon private
property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city must
secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and release of the city from liability for property
damage or personal injury.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 464/640
E. Duty Of City: Nothing herein shall require the city to remove graffiti from private property or property owned by
another public entity. The city manager shall have the discretion whether or not to bring the matter before the city
council for direction to proceed to do so in any particular case. (Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-9: EASE OF REMOVAL PROVISIONS:
A. Common Utility Colors And Paint Type: Any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility
operating in the city shall paint its above surface metal fixtures with a uniform paint type and color that meets with
the approval of the city manager.
B. Condition Encroachment Permits: All encroachment permits issued by the city shall, among other things, be
conditioned on:
1. The permittee's application of an antigraffiti material to the encroaching object of a type and nature that is
acceptable to the city manager or the city manager's designee;
2. The permittee's immediate removal of any graffiti;
3. The city's right to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object; or
4. The permittee providing the city with sufficient matching paint and/or antigraffiti material on demand for use in the
painting of the encroaching object containing graffiti.
C. Condition Tentative Maps:
1. Conditions May Be Imposed: In approving tentative or parcel maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other
similar land use entitlements, the city may consider imposing the following conditions, or other similar or related
conditions, at the public hearing required by law for approval of the tentative or parcel map, conditional use
permit, variance or other similar land use entitlement;
2. Owner To Immediately Remove Graffiti: Developer shall, either as part of the general conditions, covenants and
restrictions, or separate covenants recorded against individual lots, prior to resale of any of the parcels, covenant
in a form satisfactory to the city that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed thereon.
(Ord. 645, 6-14-2005; amd. Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-10: TRUST FUND:
The city council hereby creates the city antigraffiti trust fund. Penalties assessed against violators of this chapter shall
be placed in the fund, along with any monetary donations received from persons wishing to contribute to the fund. The
city council shall direct the expenditures of monies in the fund. Such expenditures shall be limited to the payment of the
cost of graffiti removal, the payment, at the discretion of the city manager, of rewards for information leading to the
conviction of violation of this chapter, the costs of administering this chapter, and such other public purposes as may be
approved by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 645, 6-14-2005; amd. Ord. 682, 6-24-2008)
5-19-11: SEVERABILITY:
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this chapter. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
then that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 645, 6-14-2005; amd. Ord.
682, 6-24-2008)
Chapter 20
OPEN GLASS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BOTTLES
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 465/640
5-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote aesthetics, public health and public safety within the central business district
(CBD) by placing restrictions on open glass bottles which contain, previously contained, or are designed or intended to
contain alcoholic beverages. The CBD is as described in subsection 3-2-10B5 of this code. (Ord. 752, 5-22-2012)
5-20-2: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Within the CBD it shall be unlawful for any person to hold, carry or transport any open glass bottle which contains,
previously contained or is designed or intended to contain alcoholic beverages upon any public street, alley, sidewalk
or parking place which is provided for the use of the public, or upon any property owned by the city of Elko, or in or
upon any motor vehicle while moving or stationary in any of the foregoing places.
Possession upon one's person of any open glass bottle which contains, previously contained or is designed or
intended to contain any alcoholic beverage in any such public places, including motor vehicles, shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation thereof.
As used herein, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall mean and include any and all distilled or rectified spirits, potable
alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, aromatic bitters, beer, lager beer, ale, wine and every other liquid or solid containing
alcohol capable of being consumed by a human being.
As used herein, the term "glass bottle" shall mean a glass container that has a neck smaller than the body of the
container, is designed for a screw top, cork, snap cap or other type of closure and has a capacity of not more than five
(5) gallons. (Ord. 752, 5-22-2012)
5-20-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to locations which are subject to an outdoor dining permit, the
transportation of unopened glass bottles which contain or which are designed or intended to contain alcoholic
beverages, or the sale of empty open glass bottles which contain or which are designed or intended to contain
alcoholic beverages as part of a sidewalk display which is subject to a sidewalk display permit. (Ord. 752, 5-22-2012)
Title 6
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE CODE
6-1-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
A. Title: This chapter will be known as the ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE OF THE CITY OF ELKO,
hereinafter "Code", including the adoption of the 2012 International Fire Code with appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G,
H, and I. Certain sections of the International Fire Code and appendices may be added or deleted by resolution.
B. Applicability: All construction of, or the enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, demolishing, or changing the
occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
component, element, or portion of a building or structure within the City must be in compliance with, in addition to,
the other applicable codes or amendments set forth by the City Council, the currently adopted edition of the
International Fire Code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 466/640
C. International Fire Code Amendments: There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain Code known as the International Fire
Code (IFC), recommended by the International Code Council, being particularly the edition noted in subsection A of
this section, thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended, such to become effective thirty (30) days after public notice of the filing in the City Clerk's Office
hereinafter specified is given by one (1) publication in a newspaper in the City. One (1) copy of the latest edition
being adopted shall be approved by the City Council and placed on file in the Office of the City Clerk. From the date
on which such filed edition of said Code shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the City. The said Code is hereby adopted as the rules and regulations for governing conditions hazardous to life
from fire or explosion. In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the IFC conflict with any
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and be controlling. All supplements to the IFC,
issued by the International Code Council between editions and approved by the City Council and filed in triplicate in
the Office of the City Clerk shall become part of this IFC effective thirty (30) days after public notice of such filing is
given by one (1) publication in a newspaper in the City. Certain sections of the International Fire Code and
appendices may be added or deleted by resolution. (Ord. 817, 4-25-2017)
6-1-2: ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
A. The IFC shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the City, which is hereby
established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Chief in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the City Council on the basis of
examination to determine his qualifications.
C. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time
to time be necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the City Council the employment of
technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine
their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the Fire Department,
and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. (Ord. 646, 9-
13-2005)
6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in the international fire code:
CORPORATION COUNCIL: The attorney for the city of Elko.
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL: The fire chief or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
the international fire code, or a duly authorized representative.
JURISDICTION: The city of Elko. (Ord. 733, 5-10-2011)
6-1-4: ROUTES FOR TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES, BLASTING AGENTS, HAZARDOUS
CHEMICALS AND OTHER DANGEROUS ARTICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-1-5: FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The following are hereby designated fire lanes:
A. At the Elko shopping plaza, Highway 40 E., a fifteen foot (15') lane adjoining all storefront sidewalks and all routes or
lanes used for access to the stores and parking areas.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 467/640
B. At the Northeastern Nevada Regional Hospital, all routes or lanes used for access to the hospital and parking areas.
Any road or passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus.
C. Section 503.4 of the international fire code prohibits obstruction of fire apparatus access roads, including, but not
limited to, the parking of vehicles.
D. Fire lane, fire lane parking, fire apparatus access roads, fire protection appliances, fire hydrants, and other fire
protection equipment or appliances on any private property, shall be identified, marked and for the life of the facility
be maintained with signage, red paint street markings and other clearly identified means by the property owner in
compliance with chapter 5 and appendix D of the currently adopted international fire code.
E. Enforcement of these regulations shall fall to the city of Elko fire code official and shall include the authority of the
police department to cooperate and issue citations, and cause the removal of any blockage of fire lanes,
appliances, fire access roadways or designated areas. (Ord. 733, 5-10-2011)
6-1-6: APPEALS:
Whenever the fire code official disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire code official to the city council within thirty
(30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Ord. 733, 5-10-2011)
6-1-7: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The city manager, the chief and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as the committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall
post such lists in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Ord. 237, 11-9-
1976)
6-1-8: PENALTIES:
A. Violation Penalties: Persons who shall violate any provision of this title, or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificated use under provisions of this title, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable of a fine not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment
not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Recovery Of Costs: The city may recover all actual response costs, isolation costs or mitigation costs associated
with all provisions of this title when deemed in the public best interest, to recover extraordinary expenses, or costs
associated with the civil or criminal order of the court for any municipal, district or juvenile court within our district.
C. Abatement Of Violations: In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the fire code official is
authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation,
or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. (Ord. 646, 9-13-
2005)
6-1-9: COPIES OF CODE AVAILABLE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 468/640
One copy of the IFC, with all amendments and supplements thereto after adopted, shall be kept on file in the office of
the city clerk for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 646, 9-13-2005)
6-1-10: TANK STORAGE AND BULK STORAGE COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any lessee, owner, individual, partnership, corporation, firm, business, or other entities of any
type or nature to own, suffer, permit or allow any tank or bulk storage aboveground outside or inside a building; or
underground outside or under a building; or to abandon any tank without complying with the currently adopted
international fire code and any other referenced codes. (Ord. 733, 5-10-2011)
Chapter 2
FIREWORKS
6-2-1: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Fire Department Approval: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, to
offer for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks within the city; provided, that the chief of the fire
department shall have the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for
supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair associations, amusement parks, other organizations, or
for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Every such use or display shall be handled by a
competent operator approved by the chief of the fire department, and shall be of such character and so located,
discharged or fired so as, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department after proper investigation, not to be
hazardous to property or endanger any person.
B. Exceptions: Subject to subsection C of this section, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
following:
1. The use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes of illumination;
2. The sale of or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater;
3. The use of fireworks for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports;
4. The use of fireworks for use by military organizations;
5. The sale or use of items commonly known as "sparklers", "party poppers", "snap caps" or "snappers";
6. The sale or use of fireworks classified as "safe and sane" by the state of California state fire marshal, provided
said fireworks must be sold in packaging which bears the California state fire marshal's seal of registration
indicating said classification; or
7. The sale, storage, shipping or otherwise transporting of fireworks by a licensed Nevada wholesaler within the city
by aproperly certified motor carrier or wholesaler owner.
C. Nonapplicable Exceptions: With the exception of items commonly known as "sparklers", the exceptions contained in
subsection B of this section do not apply to the sale or use of fireworks which are designed to be ignited through the
use of an open flame and/or fuse. (Ord. 587, 6-25-2002)
6-2-2: FIRES CAUSED BY FIREWORKS:
A. Actions For Civil Penalties Or Cost Recovery: Any person who, in violation of section 6-2-1 of this chapter,
knowingly causes a fire that results in a response by the fire department or any other instrumentality of the city,
shall be subject to either an action for civil penalties or a cost recovery action, at the sole discretion of the city.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 469/640
B. Action For Civil Penalties: In the event the city determines to pursue an action for civil penalties in lieu of a cost
recovery action, the city shall comply with the following procedure:
1. Notice Of Civil Infraction; Form: A notice of civil infraction must be issued on a form prescribed by the city police
department and must contain the following:
a. The location where the violation occurred;
b. The date and time of the violation;
c. The signature of the person who issues the notice of civil infraction;
d. The section of the city code which is allegedly being violated;
e. Information which advises of the manner in which, and the time within which, the notice of civil infraction must
be answered; and
f. Any other information which is prescribed by the police department.
2. Notice Of Civil Infraction; Duties Of Respondent:
a. A person who responds to a notice of civil infraction must either:
(1) "Admit" the commission of the infraction and pay the appropriate civil fine; or
(2) "Deny" liability for the infraction.
b. A person may "admit" pursuant to subsection B2a(1) of thissection by paying the civil penalty, in an amount
determined by the city in accordance with this section, to the municipal court.
c. A person may "deny" liability pursuant to subsection B2a(2) of this section only by appearing in person before
the municipal court.
C. Commencement Of Action To Recover Civil Penalties; Procedure: In the event a person denies liability in
accordance with subsection B2a(2) of this section, the city may commence a civil action to recover the civil
penalties described in this section in the municipal court by the filing of a complaint and by issuing an appropriate
summons with respect thereto. Service of the complaint and summons on the defendant shall be made by certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the defendant at his or her last known address or in any other matter
which is authorized by law, and shall thereupon be deemed complete. To the extent not inconsistent with this
chapter, an action to recover civil penalties shall be governed by rules 1 and 3 through 87 of the justice court rules
of procedures, except that there shall be no right of trial by jury.
D. Schedule Of Civil Fines: The amount of any civil penalties imposed upon a person for violating section 6-2-1 of this
chapter shall be in accordance with any appropriate schedule of fees pertaining to costs incurred by the city in
responding to emergencies that is adopted by city by resolution, in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per fire, or, in the event no such schedule of fees has been adopted by the city, the amount of the civil
penalties imposed under this subsection shall be determined as follows:
1. For each fire not resulting in personal injuries or property damage in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), the
civil penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. For each fire that results in personal injuries or property damage in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), the
civil penalty shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
E. Cost Recovery Action: In lieu of an action to recover civil penalties, the city may, at its sole and exclusive discretion,
pursue a cost recovery action against any person determined by the city to have violated section 6-2-1 of this
chapter, subject to the following:
1. The cost recovery action may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 470/640
2. The relief requested in the cost recovery action shall include all costs incurred by the city as a result of the
alleged violation;
3. The city shall be entitled to recover from the defendant all reasonable costs incurred in relation to the city's
response to the fire, together with any damages done to city property; provided, that there shall be a conclusive
presumption that the amount of any such costs or damages;
4. If, in a cost recovery action, the court awards the city any or all of the relief requested in the city's complaint, the
city shall recover from the defendant all reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit. (Ord. 587, 6-25-2002)
6-2-3: PENALTIES FOR CRIMINAL VIOLATION:
A. Punishment: In addition to any civil penalties or any other civil remedies provided in this chapter, any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
B. Separate Offense: Each violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed as a separate offense.
C. Citation To Appear: The chief of the fire department and any city employee designated by the chief of the fire
department for such purpose may issue citations to appear in municipal courts to persons violating this chapter;
said citations shall be issued in a manner and form determined by the city.
D. Additional Enforcement: Subject to the requirements of those portions of chapter 477 of the Nevada administrative
code pertaining to fireworks, or any other applicable statute or regulation, the chief of the fire department and any
city employee designated by the chief of the fire department for such purpose may, upon encountering a violation of
this chapter, seize, confiscate, photograph and destroy fireworks, whether in the possession of a person or
unattended, if the sale, possession or use of the fireworks is made unlawful by this chapter. (Ord. 587, 6-25-2002)
Chapter 3
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
6-3-1: ADOPTION OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion caused from the delivery and handling of flammable liquids, the latest edition of the flammable
and combustible liquids code, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, and the whole thereof, save
and except any portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not less than three (3) copies
have been made and now are filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the limits of the city. The said code is hereby adopted as the rules and regulations for the installation of containers for
storing and handling flammable liquids. In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the flammable and
combustible liquids code conflict with any provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and be
controlling. (Ord. 217, 7-9-1974)
6-3-2: ADOPTION OF REGULATORY STANDARDS FOR TANK VEHICLES FOR FLAMMABLE
AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion caused from the delivery and handling of flammable liquids, the latest edition of the flammable
and combustible liquid tank vehicles, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, and the whole thereof,
save and except any portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which regulations not less than three
(3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions thereof shall be
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 471/640
controlling within the limits of the city. The said regulations are hereby adopted as the rules and regulationsfor the
transportation and handling of flammable liquids. In the event that any of the provisions of the latest edition of the
flammable and combustible liquid tank vehicles regulations conflict with any provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall govern and be controlling. (Ord. 217, 7-9-1974)
6-3-3: LOCATION OF TANKS; APPROVAL BY FIRE CHIEF:
A. Approval, Permit Required: Before any underground or aboveground storage tank is installed, the owner shall
present to the fire chief or his designated agent at the central fire station a drawing showing the location of said
tank. Upon approval by the fire chief or his designated agent, the building inspector shall issue a permit for the
installation of said tank.
B. Inspection: The owner shall leave the installation open until inspection is made by the fire chief and building
inspector or their authorized agents. (Ord. 217, 7-9-1974)
6-3-4: DELIVERIES FROM TANK VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
A. Requirements: Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall make delivery of any flammable or combustible
liquids from a tank vehicle and trailer unless all tanks and trailers are attached to the tractor of the vehicle, and the
vehicle and/or trailer attendant is within ten feet (10') of the connecting hose.
B. Number Limited: It shall be unlawful to unload more than one tank vehicle or trailer at one time at any service
station. (Ord. 306, 4-28-1981)
6-3-5: TANK VEHICLES PROHIBITED INSIDE BUILDINGS; EXCEPTIONS:
No tank vehicle, empty or carrying liquids, used for transportation of flammable or combustible liquids, shall be
admitted inside any building unless such building is used exclusively for the housing of such vehicles, or repairing of
vehicles; and in no case shall gasoline tanks on such vehicles be cleaned in any building or near an open flame. (Ord.
217, 7-9-1974)
6-3-6: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate
or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificateor permits issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by
a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively be deemed guilty of a city offense punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense
and punishable as such hereunder, including the recovery of all actual costs of response, isolation and mitigation of the
incident, regardless of criminal conviction. (Ord. 646, 9-13-2005)
Chapter 4
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
6-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 472/640
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF ELKO HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ORDINANCE. (Ord.
390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DISCHARGE: Any spilling, pouring, leaking, emitting, pumping, emptying, discharging, escaping, injecting, dumping or
disposing of any hazardous materials.
FACILITY: A building or buildings, appurtenant structures and surrounding land area used by a person at a single
location or site.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: A. Any chemical, biological, radiological compound, gas, oil, gasoline lubricant, other
petroleum products, substance, solution or mixture which, because of its quality, quantity, concentration, physical or
infectious characteristic, or any combination thereof, when released into the environment presents or may present
harmful or potentially harmful effects to human health or welfare or the environment. "Hazardous materials" shall
include those hazardous substances identified by the United States environmental protection agency as listed in the
latest published edition of 40 code of federal regulations and by the United States occupational safety and health
administration and covered by 29 code of federal regulations and solutions in concentration greater than one percent
(1%) by volume of any regulated material, unless another concentration is specifically noted. Additionally, oil and oil
based derivatives as listed in 40 code of federal regulations shall be classified as "hazardous materials".
B. Except that radiological compounds or nuclear materials shall be regulated by this chapter subject to the limits
contained in the latest published edition of 10 code of federal regulations and other applicable federal and state
laws.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT: Gasoline, oil and lubricants of any kind or in any form, including, but not limited to, virgin,
used and mixtures of petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil. (Ord.
390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-3: DISCHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to discharge any hazardous
materials in any manner in or upon any public way or other public place, or any river, canal, public water drain, sewer,
storm sewer, flood control channel, receiving basin or any other area in the city, with the following exceptions:
A. The discharge of any hazardous material under a permit authorized by any ordinance of the city;
B. A discharge which is not prohibited by or is authorized pursuant to state or federal law;
C. Material deposited in or conducted into the city sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the
ordinance of the city relating thereto;
D. Discharges which do not cause hazardous materials to leave the premises where such discharge occurred;
provided, such materials are collected in secondary containment;
E. Application of agricultural chemicals in the ordinary course of agricultural operations;
F. Application of hazardous materials in the ordinary course of any treatment of property for insects, weeds or any
other treatment; provided, such application is in the ordinary course of business and the person making the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 473/640
application has obtained any permit or license required by any law other than this chapter;
G. Application or use of hazardous materials only in conjunction with residential use of property;
H. Application or use of hazardous materials only in the manner for which such hazardous materials were intended
according to manufacturer's specifications and recommendation, or application of such materials according to good
industry practices. (Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-4: RESTORATION PROCEDURES:
A. Responsible Person: Any person who discharges, or causes or permits the discharge of, any hazardous material
into the environment shall be responsible for taking cost effective remedial action to return the environment to the
extent practicable to the condition and quality which existed prior to such discharge.
B. Action By City To Abate: In cases where the identity of a person who is responsible for the premises upon which a
violation has occurred is not known at the time violation is reported, the city, pursuant to this chapter, may take
reasonable steps to abate any problem and may take reasonable steps to clean up the area affected to assure
continuing safety to the public and the environment. When the identity of the responsible person is determined, a
bill for the cost of measures taken to correct the violation shall be sent to the person. Any such violation involving a
spill or discharge of any hazardous material shall be deemed a nuisance pursuant to section 5-1-1 of this code. The
expense of removal shall be a lien upon the property upon which the nuisance is located. Such lien shall:
1. Be perfected by filing with the county recorder a statement by the city clerk of the amount of expenses due and
unpaid and describing the property subject to the lien.
2. Be coequal with the latest lien thereon to secure the payment of general taxes.
3. Not be subject to extinguishment by the sale of any property on account of the nonpayment of general taxes.
4. Be prior and superior to all liens, claims, encumbrances and titles, other than the liens of assessments and
general taxes. (Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-5: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS COORDINATOR (HMC):
The city manager shall appoint a person to act as hazardous materials coordinator, hereinafter referred to as the HMC,
to be housed under the direction of the fire chief. The person to be appointed shall have experience in and be qualified
in the area of hazardous materials management. The HMC or his specified representative shall serve as the "local on
scene coordinator" for incidents involving the release of hazardous materials into the environment and shall be
responsible for regulating hazardous material routes within the city. (Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-6: DUTIES OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS COORDINATOR:
The HMC shall review and analyze regular delivery and shipment routes of hazardous materials transported within the
city and may propose regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter or any applicable state or federal law, designating
traffic routes and other specific procedures for transportation of hazardous materials. (Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-7: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ACCESS ROUTE:
A. Defined: As used herein, the phrase "hazardous materials access route" shall mean any street which has been
designated pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of providing vehicular access from the primary hazardous
material route to locations within the city where hazardous materials are used, produced or stored.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 474/640
B. Routes Established: Primary hazardous material routes within the city limits may be established by resolution of the
city council. The initial primary hazardous material routes within the city as of the enactment of this code shall be as
follows:
1. Eastbound and westbound through traffic shall use Interstate 80 highway.
2. Westbound traffic for Bullion Road shall use Interstate exit 303 to Idaho Street, Idaho Street to 13th Street, 12th
Street to Silver Street, Silver Street to 5th Street, 5th Street to Wilson Street, Wilson Street on out to Bullion
Road.
3. Northbound traffic shall use Interstate 80 exit 301, then out to Nevada State Highway S.R. 225 (Mountain City
Highway).
4. Southbound traffic shall use Interstate exit 303 to Idaho Street, Idaho Street to 12th Street, 12th Street to Nevada
State Highway 227 (Lamoille Highway) on out.
C. Route Request: Every person who uses, produces or stores hazardous materials at a location within the city shall
request from the HMC a hazardous materials access route to and from such location, with certain conditions (if
required) for such route.
D. Compliance Required: Every motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a hazardous materials placard,
shall be operated within the city only on the primary hazardous materials route or upon a hazardous material
access route established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
E. Request For Route Prior To Operation: Every operator of a motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a
hazardous material placard, who does not know the primary hazardous material route of the city or the hazardous
material access route to and from the location in the city from whichhe is coming or to which he is destined, shall
request directions concerning said routes from the HMC before operating said vehicle in the city.
F. Form Of Request: The procedure for being assigned a hazardous materials access route is any person who uses,
produces or stores hazardous materials at a location within the city, or otherwise requires a hazardous materials
route within the city, shall be assigned a hazardous materials transportation route after he has submitted a request
for such a route to the HMC on a form provided by the fire department.
G. Review Of Practices: The HMC shall review and analyze hazardous materials handling practices by all persons who
handle hazardous materials to determine their potential impact on public health and the environment, and may
propose regulations designating approved handling practices. (Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-8: VEHICLES DISPLAYING HAZARDOUS MATERIAL PLACARDS:
A. No motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a hazardous materials placard shall be operated on any
street within the city unless such vehicle is coming from or destined for a location within the city.
B. No motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a hazardous materials placard may park within seventy five
feet (75') of a nonpermitted business or within one hundred fifty feet (150') of an educational/institutional occupancy
on any or all public owned right of ways or properties, or privately owned properties.
C. No person, agent, owner, manager or operator shall remove, cover up, alter or deface any legally required
hazardous materials placard, warning or signage identified for the purpose of access to routes, access to areas of
the city or for parking or storage purposes. (Ord. 646, 9-13-2005)
6-4-9: EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 475/640
The following types of vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter for only those periods of time necessary
to complete their stated purpose:
A. Placarded vehicles making residential deliveries of home heating fuel.
B. Placarded vehicles making residential deliveries of medical supplies.
C. Placarded vehicles making commercial deliveries of products, supplies or commodities to legal business
orcommercial locations within the city. (Ord. 646, 9-13-2005)
6-4-10: CLOSURE OF FACILITIES:
A. Notification To City: Upon closure or termination of handling of hazardous materials at a registered facility, the
person who owns or operates said facility shall notify the city in writing of such closure.
B. Federal And State Law Applicable: Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to supersede any requirement of
state or federal law related to procedures for closure of facilities. The hazardous materials coordinator shall work in
coordination with state and federal authorities to assure the safe closure of facilities. (Ord. 390, 7-11-1989)
6-4-11: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 390, 7-11-
1989)
Chapter 5
FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE FEES
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to allow for the establishment of fees for certain fire department services.
(Ord. 569, 6-26-2001)
6-5-2: FALSE ALARM RESTITUTION FEES AND PENALTIES1:
The purpose and intent of this section is to reduce the number of false alarm fire signals transmitted to the fire
department and thereby safeguard the life and limb, health, property and public welfare of the citizens of the city. It is
further the purpose and intent of this section to establish fees for restitution for false alarms.
A. Definitions: For the intent and purpose of this section, the terms below shall be defined as follows:
COMMERCIAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM FALSE ALARM (NONMALICIOUS): An alarm that comes from a fire alarm
system in a commercial structure, that is a report of the need to respond to a nonexisting emergency incident.
COMMERCIAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM FALSE ALARM RESTITUTION FEE: A fee assessed for false fire alarms
from commercial structures.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 476/640
FALSE ALARM: Any signal, transmission, voice message, telephone call or other method of notifying the fire
department of the need to respond to a nonexisting emergency incident.
FALSE ALARM RESTITUTION: An amount recommended by the fire chief or his representative and fixed by the
city council to cover the cost to the city of Elko for emergency response to false alarms transmitted by an individual.
This amount does not limit any additional fines and/or penalties that may be imposed by the courts.
RESIDENTIAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM FALSE ALARM (NONMALICIOUS): An alarm that comes from a fire alarm
system in a residential structure that is a report of the need to respond to a nonexisting emergency incident.
RESIDENTIAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM FALSE ALARM RESTITUTION FEE: A fee assessed for false fire alarms
from residential structures.
B. Individual Liability For Restitution: The owner of every premises shall be liable for restitution to the fire department
for false alarms transmitted from such premises by automatic alarm and individuals shall be liable for restitution to
the fire department for alarms manually transmitted by whatever means.
C. Fire Chief Duties: The fire chief or his representative shall keep a record of all false alarms and shall bill the owner,
manager or representative of properties from which false alarms originate.
D. Restitution; Fee Schedule: The fee for false alarm restitution shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 569,
6-26-2001)
6-5-3: OTHER FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES:
The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a fee for other specialized fire department services provided to
certain members of the general public:
A. Document Fees: The fee for reproduction of documents produced by the fire department shall be set by resolution of
the city council.
B. Specialized Inspection Services: The fire department provides special inspection services to certain members of the
public. The fees for these inspection services shall be set by resolution of the city council.
C. Special Services: The fire department provides special services to certain members of the public. The fees for these
services shall be set by resolution of the city council.
D. Special Rescue Services: The fire department provides special response services to certain members of the public.
The fees for these services shall be set by resolution of the city council.
E. Special Response Services: The fire department provides special response services to certain members of the
public. The fees for these services shall be set by resolution of the city council.
F. Training Services: The fire department provides training services to certain members of the public. The fees for
these services shall be set by resolution of the city council.
G. Permit Fees: Permits required by the IFC shall be obtained from the fire code official. Permit fees for these services
shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 646, 9-13-2005)
6-5-4: PERMITS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 477/640
A. Types Of Permits: There shall be two (2) types of permits as follows:
1. Operational Permit: An operational permit allows the applicant to conduct an operation or a business for which a
permit is required for either:
a. A prescribed period; or
b. Until renewed or revoked.
2. Construction Permit: A construction permit allows the applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for
which a permit is required.
B. Permits Required: Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the fire code official. Issued permits shall be
kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code
official.
C. Application: Applications for a permit required by this code shall be made to the fire code official on designated
forms and detail as prescribed by the fire code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans
and permit fees as prescribed by the fire code official.
D. Required Operational Permits: The fire code official is authorized to require, issue and enforce operational permits
for the operations set forth in the international fire code.
E. Required Construction Permits: A permit shall be issued for construction as required by the international fire code
and as follows:
1. Permit To Store Hazardous Material: A permit is required to store hazardous materials in excess of the amount
set forth in the international fire code. The required permit shall be issued by the state fire marshal's office and be
renewed annually.
2. High Piled Combustible Storage Permit: A permit is required for indoor floor and/or rack storage that meet the
definition of high piled combustible storage as listed in the international fire code, chapter 23.
3. Construction Documents: Construction documents shall be provided for work requiring a construction permit in
conformance with the following:
a. A minimum of three (3) sets of wet stamped plans shall be provided with related manufacturer specifications
and calculations as required by the fire code official. Additional sets may be required at the request of the fire
code official or the city of Elko building department.
b. Fire alarm construction documents shall bear a NICET level II or greater stamp and shall be wet signed in
accordance with NAC 477 and the 2007 NFPA 72.
c. Constructions documents shall meet the requirements of the adopted international fire code, chapter 1.
d. Construction documents shall be provided for high piled combustible storage applications. Construction
drawings shall meet the requirements of the adopted international fire code, chapter 23. (Ord. 734, 5-10-2011)
Chapter 6
ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCIES; SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR
SAFETY
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the intent and purpose of this chapter, the terms below shall be defined as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 478/640
ASSEMBLY BUILDING: A building or portion of a building used for the gathering together of fifty (50) or more persons
for such purposes as deliberation, education, instruction, worship, entertainment, amusement, drinking or dining, or
awaiting transportation.
ASSEMBLY GROUP OCCUPANCY: Any event at which fifty (50) or more persons are gathered inside any assembly
building for which an organized performance, show or event shall take place.
OCCUPANT LOAD: The maximum number of patrons, guests, employees or participants allowed by the uniform fire
code and/or uniform building code for the type of building, use or event. (Ord. 602, 6-10-2003)
6-6-2: ANNOUNCEMENTS:
A. Requirements: In any assembly group occupancy held in a building or portion of a building having an assembly
room with an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more, or in any assembly group occupancy in which actual
occupant load is estimated to be at least ninety percent (90%) of the maximum occupant load, an audible
announcement shall be made not more than ten (10) minutes prior to the start of each program notifying each and
every occupant of the location of all exits to be used in the event of a fire or any other type of emergency. All such
exits shall be clearly marked and lighted where appropriate. This announcement shall also include how occupants
will be notified in the event of a fire or any other type of emergency and what to do in the event of a fire or any other
type of emergency. In situations where lights are dimmed for a performance, house lights shall be turned on during
the announcement.
B. Exemptions: The following buildings or structures are exempted from the requirements of this section:
1. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, used for worship or religious gatherings.
2. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, used for activities or events sanctioned by the Elko County school
district. (Ord. 602, 6-10-2003)
6-6-3: INDOOR PYROTECHNICS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No event shall be held within an assembly occupancy that utilizes, ignites, explodes, discharges or otherwise
incorporates into the show or performance any ignition devices, pyrotechnics, open flame or incendiary products
without written permission, by permit, from the fire department. Such permit shall require the following:
A. Completion of a written safety plan, including separation distance, combustible fuels/material rating verification and
emergency evacuation procedures.
B. A requirement that fire department personnel be on hand during the display.
C. Any fees set pursuant to chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 602, 6-10-2003)
6-6-4: RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Specified: It is the owner's, manager's or the facility caretaker's responsibility to adhere to all provisions set forth in
this chapter.
B. Exceeding Limit Prohibited: No owner, manager or facility caretaker shall knowingly, willingly or intentionally exceed
the legal occupancy load of the assembly building or lock, block, disguise or otherwise alter in any way, any exit,
hallway, corridor, exit doors or door assemblies when the building is occupied or open to the public.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 479/640
C. Display Required: The legal determined occupant load of each assembly occupancy shall be clearly displayed
pursuant to the uniform fire code. (Ord. 602, 6-10-2003)
Title 7
TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
BICYCLES
7-1-1: BICYCLES TO BE REGISTERED:
Every person who owns and/or operates a bicycle within the limits of the city shall cause the ownership thereof to be
registered with the office of the chief of police in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-2: APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
The owner of every bicycle shall, on or before January 10 of each calendar year, file with the chief of police an
application for registration, setting forth the owner's name, address, residence and age; name and address of the
owner's parent or guardian, if the owner is a minor; make of bicycle; serial number; the former owner's name or
dealer's name from whom purchased, describing all extra equipment; and such other information as shall be required.
(Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-3: LICENSE:
The application shall be immediately acted upon by the chief of police and the bicycle shall be inspected as to its
mechanical and safety condition. If the bicycle shall be approved by the chief of police, then upon the payment to the
chief of police of the sum as set by resolution of the city council, he shall assign a registration number to each bicycle
so registered and shall issue a metallic license plate which will contain the registration number, the year for which it
was issued and such other identification, which shall be permanently attached to the bicycle; and shall deliver to the
owner a registration receipt which shall set forth upon theface thereof the name and address of the owner of the
registered bicycle, the maker and manufacturer's serial number. The receipt or certification of registration shall be
signed in ink by the registered owner and a duplicate of such receipt of registration may be obtained from the chief of
police by filing an affidavit of the loss or destruction of the receipt and upon payment of a fee as set by resolution of the
city council. The chief of police shall remit to the city clerk prior to the first day of each month all money collected
because of the registration and licensing. (Ord. 290, 8-26-1980)
7-1-4: ALTERING LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter any registration tag, plate or registration receipt issued in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-5: SALE TO BE REPORTED:
In the event that a licensed bicycle is sold or transferred, the license tag, plate or other means of identification shall
pass to the new owner in the sale, and the sale of the bicycle shall be reported to the chief of police by the new owner
or transferee thereof, within five (5) days after the sale or transfer of the bicycle, and the chief of police shall make a
record of the sale or transfer, together with the name of any new owner or transferee of the bicycle. (Ord. 140, 3-14-
1961)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 480/640
7-1-6: BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
No person shall ride any bicycle on the sidewalks in the business district of the city. Bicycles may, however, be pushed
upon the sidewalks. This prohibition shall not be applicable to police officers operating a bicycle while engaged in their
assigned duties. In all other parts of the city, bicycles may be ridden upon the sidewalks, provided the riders follow all
regulations as to the use. (Ord. 444, 5-10-1994)
7-1-7: PARKING OF BICYCLES:
No person shall park any bicycle between the curbs on any street in the business section. When bicycles are parked
on any sidewalk, they shall be parked so as to leave a space of at least five feet (5') for the free passing of pedestrians
and shall be parked in such a manner that they will not obstruct any entrance to any building open to the public. (Ord.
140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-8: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY:
Pedestrians shall at all times have the right of way upon the sidewalks and if necessary the riders of bicycles shall
dismount and vacate the sidewalk in order to let the pedestrians pass. Such riders shall have their bicycles under
control at all times. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-9: BICYCLES TO OBEY TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a bicycle on the public streets, alleys or sidewalks shall at all times obey all stop lights and stop
signs, and all other traffic signals and regulations, and shall be governed by the laws of the state relating to the
operation on the public streets, alleys and sidewalks of vehicles so far as such laws apply to vehicles other than motor
vehicles. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-10: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
All persons owning or operating a bicycle shall be subject to the following rules and regulations:
A. Riding On Bicycles: A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular
seat attached thereto, nor carry any other persons upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat thereon.
B. Number Of Persons Carried: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which
it is designed and equipped.
C. Speed: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
D. Riding On Right: Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right hand side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction.
E. Emerging From Alley Or Driveway: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 481/640
F. Clinging To Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the bicycle or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
G. Riding In A Group: Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall ride not more than two (2) abreast, and upon a
sidewalk shall ride in a single file.
H. Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider
from keeping both hands upon the handlebar.
I. Riding On Sidewalks: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk when to do so interferes in any way with the
convenience or safety of pedestrians.
J. Authority To Prohibit Riding On Sidewalk: The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey
the same.
K. Courtesy To Pedestrians: Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right
of way to any pedestrian, and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing or before meeting such
pedestrian.
L. Lamps And Reflectors On Bicycle: Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front,
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') to the front, and with a red
reflector on the rear, which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) to three hundred feet (300') to the rear,
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of three hundred feet ( 300') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
M. Brakes On Bicycles: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake, which will enable the operator to make the
braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-11: IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLE:
In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of law for the operation of
bicycles by any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any police officer of the city, if the violation shall have
occurred in his presence, shall immediately upon such violation take into his possession and impound the bicycle of
the offender, and shall immediately and in any event within twenty four (24) hours, conduct a hearing as to the matter
of such violation, and if he shall find such violation to have occurred, he shall make a notation thereof upon his official
blotter and shall give an impounding receipt to the owner or operator of the bicycle showing the terms of the
impounding, and shall impound the bicycle for the following periods: for the first violation, ten (10) days; for the second
violation,twenty (20) days; for the third violation, thirty (30) days. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7-1-12: COMPLAINTS:
In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any person under the age of eighteen (18) years,
which shall not have occurred in the presence of any police officer, but which shall be made the subject of a complaint
to the officers in writing by any person, any of the police officers may, if the complaint is deemed responsible and
justified, impound the bicycle of the claimed offender, and shall within twenty four (24) hours conduct a hearing into the
subject of the violation after giving due notice to the claimed offender, and if he shall find the offense to have occurred,
he shall issue an impounding receipt stating the terms of the impounding and shall make a notation thereof on his
official blotter and shall impound the bicycle of the offender for the following periods: for the first violation, ten (10)
days; for the second violation, twenty (20) days; and for the third violation, thirty (30) days. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 482/640
7-1-13: DISPOSAL, SALE OF IMPOUNDED BICYCLES:
A. Authorized; Requirements: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep all lost or stolen bicycles that come into
the possession of the police department or any of its members, and he shall make all reasonable effort to discover
the owners thereof and restore the bicycles to such owners. He shall not be obliged to keep the bicycles longer
than a period of ninety (90) days, and if the owner of such bicycle shall not be found within the period of ninety (90)
days, the chief of police shall advertise in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city at least once each
week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the sale of such bicycles, and may on the date specified in such
advertisement, offer to the public at public auction all such bicycles which have been in his possession for ninety
(90) days or more prior to such date, and may sell the same for the highest and best price obtainable. Should such
bicycles not be sold at the sale, he shall so make record of same and then shall dispose of the bicycles in a manner
which shall best serve the public interest.
B. Return To Owner During Notice Period: The chief of police shall have the right to return any bicycle to the owner
thereof during the two (2) weeks period of the public notice of sale and prior to the time set for the public auction.
C. Report Of Sales: The chief of police shall make full report to the city clerk of the bicycles sold and amount of money
received by him for same at any such sale, and the moniesreceived at such sale shall be placed in the treasury of
the general fund of the city. (Ord. 140, 3-14-1961)
Chapter 2
ELKO TRAFFIC CODE
7-2-1: TITLE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION:
This chapter may be cited as the ELKO TRAFFIC CODE. In the event of a conflict between any State law incorporated
in the City Code and any applicable specific City Code set forth herein, the City Code shall be controlling. In the event
any of the State laws hereafter amends any of the codes adopted herein by reference and such amendment may be
made applicable to the traffic laws of the City, such amendments are adopted by the City to the extent permissible by
law. If amendments are made by the State and the foregoing is not sufficient to establish the City Code is thereby so
amended, the City Council may adopt such amendments as deemed desirable by resolution. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-2: LOCAL DEFINITIONS:
The following terms whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS DISTRICT: All areas in the City zoned nonresidential, commercial or industrial.
CITY ENGINEER: The engineer or person designated by the City Council to be the Elko Traffic Engineer. (Ord. 833, 8-
14-2018)
7-2-3: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
A. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such police employees as are assigned
by the Police Chief to enforce all traffic laws of this City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to traffic in this
City.
B. Direct Traffic: Officers of the Police Department or such police employees as are assigned by the Police Chief are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 483/640
C. Employees Of Fire Department: Members of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an emergency, may direct,
or assist, the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-4: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United
States government, a state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by State Statute. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-5: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The City Engineer shall place and maintain or cause to be placed or maintained, traffic control signs, signals and
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this City and approved by the City Council to make
effective the provisions of this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may
deem necessary, with approval of the City Council, to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this City or under
State law or to guide or warn traffic. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-6: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES PRESUMPTION:
A. Presumption Of Proper Placement: Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately
conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the
official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
B. Compliance: Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to
conform to the legal requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of
this chapter unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-7: CITY ENGINEER TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND
TRAFFIC LANES:
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to:
A. Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at
intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other
places as he may deem necessary.
B. Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection
of pedestrians.
C. Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to refuse to keep
such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to
making a lawful turning movement. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-8: SPEED REGULATIONS:
A. General Provisions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 484/640
1. Whenever a speeding violation is alleged under the incorporated State law as provided in this chapter, the
applicable provisions of this section are incorporated also as if fully set forth. No person shall drive a vehicle on a
street, alley or highway at a rate of speed greater than those specified in this chapter and which is reasonable or
proper, having due regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so
controlled as may be necessary to avoid endangering any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the
highway and in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
2. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection A1 of this section,
the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds, and
no person shall drive a vehicle on a street, alley or highway at a speed in excess of such maximum limits.
3. The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection A1 of this section, drive at an
appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or
winding highway, street or alley, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by
reason of weather or highway, street or alley conditions.
B. Maximum Limits: No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than:
1. Fifteen (15) miles per hour in an area designated as a school zone except: a) on a day on which school is not in
session; b) during the period from a half hour after school is no longer in operation to a half hour before school is
next in operation; c) if the zone is designated by an operational speed limit beacon, during the hours when the
pupils of the school are in class and the yellow lights of the speed limit beacon are not flashing in the manner
which indicates that the speed limit is in effect; or d) if the zone is not designated by an operational speed limit
beacon, during the times when the sign designating the school zone indicates that the speed limit is not in effect.
The foregoing speed limits and restrictions also shall apply when passing any school grounds which are not
separated from the street or highway by a fence, gate or any other physical barrier, while such grounds are in use
by children.
2. Twenty five (25) miles per hour on all streets, alleys and highways unless a different speed limit is posted
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this Code. All speed zones established for which signs have been posted
for a rate of speed other than twenty five (25) miles per hour as of the effective date hereof are hereby ratified
and approved subject to change pursuant to subsection C of this section.
C. Establishment Of Speed Zones: Whenever the City Engineer shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any maximum speed hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe
under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any highway, street, alley or other
thoroughfare open to the public, the City Engineer may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum
limit thereat, which shall be effective upon approval of the City Council and appropriate signs giving notice thereof
are erected. Such maximum speed limit may be declared to be effective at all times or at such times as are
indicated upon the said signs; and differing limits may be established for different times of day, different types of
vehicles, varying weather conditions and other factors bearing on safe speeds, which shall be effective when
posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs.
D. Minimum Speed Regulation:
1. Whenever the City Engineer determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds
on any part of a highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the City Engineer
may determine and declare upon approval of the City Council, a minimum speed limit below which no person
shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
E. Exceeding Speed Limit Unlawful: The speed of any vehicle in excess of any of the limits specified herein or
established as authorized in this chapter is unlawful.
F. Determination Of Speed: Any relevant evidence of speed is admissible, including, without being limited to, the
following:
1. Estimation by visual observation of a moving vehicle.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 485/640
2. The speedometer reading of a following vehicle at a speed not greater than the speed of the vehicle being
followed.
3. Readings from radar equipment designed for such purpose when the calibration of the equipment has been
checked.
4. Speed may be determined by a speedometer in the vehicle. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-9: CARELESS AND INATTENTIVE DRIVING:
A. Careless Driving: Every person operating, driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall operate, drive or propel such
vehicle in a careful manner and with due regard to the safety and convenience of pedestrians and other vehicles
and persons not so operating, driving or propelling the vehicle shall be deemed guilty of careless driving.
B. Inattentive Driving: It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the City in an inattentive manner.
For purposes of this section, "inattentive manner" means the operation of a motor vehicle in a manner which
evidences a lack of the degree of attentiveness required to safely operate the vehicle under the prevailing
conditions, including, but not limited to, the nature and condition of the roadway, presence of other traffic, presence
of pedestrians and weather conditions. It shall further include, without limitations, any driver whose vehicle,
because of his driving error or negligent attention, collides with another vehicle, person or fixed object. (Ord. 833, 8-
14-2018)
7-2-10: DESIGNATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY AND STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS:
The City Engineer is hereby authorized, on the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, and upon approval of the
City Council, to designate through streets, alleys or highways and erect stop signs or yield signs at specified entrances
thereto, or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection and erect stop signs or yield
signs at one or more entrances to such intersections. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-11: AUTHORITY REGARDING TURNING MOVEMENTS AND SIGNS:
A. Authority To Place And Obedience To Turning Markers:
1. The City Engineer, upon approval by the City Council, is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or
adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections.
2. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
B. Authority To Place Restricted Turn Signs: The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections
upon approval by the City Council. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be
removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-12: PERMITS FOR PROMOTIONAL USE OF CITY STREETS:
Upon proper application to the City, a permit may be granted by the City Council for promotional use of a portion of a
City street to display or exhibit prizes or educational materials not to be offered for sale. The permit is discretionary with
the City Council who shall consider traffic interruptions and pedestrian safety before passing on such permit. Each
application is to be considered on its own merits with no application to issue for displays of vehicles or materials held
for sale.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 486/640
A. Application; Information Required: Each application to the City for promotional use of a portion of a City street, alley
or highway is to contain the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Exact description of the portion of which City street, alley or highway is to be used.
3. Type of promotional materials to be placed in City street, alley or highway.
4. Proposed promotional purpose.
5. Proposed period of time that the portion of the City street, alley or highways are to be used.
B. Fees: Each applicant will pay to the City the sum as set by resolution of the City Council, before such permit for
promotional use of the City streets, alleys or highways will be considered, except that such fees may be waived for
nonprofit organizations.
C. Permits: Upon approval of the City Council, the Police Chief will issue a permit for promotional use of a specified
portion of a particular City street, alley or highway. Such permit shall set forth:
1. Name and address of permittee (nontransferable).
2. Exact description of that portion of which City street, alley or highway is to be used for promotional purposes.
3. Limitations on types of materials or promotional schemes to be used on the street, alley or highway.
4. Limitation of time that permit is to be valid, not to exceed ninety (90) days.
5. Any other conditions of the permit that the City Council deems necessary to preserve the health, safety and
welfare of persons or places of business.
D. Termination: All permits are discretionary with the City Council and may be terminated by the City Council for any
reason detrimental to the orderly affairs of the City or the health and safety of its inhabitants. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-13: PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES:
A. Permit Required: A permit from the City Clerk is required for all parades, processions or assemblages which will
occupy, march or proceed along or over any street, alley or highway within the City, except those parades,
processions and assemblages of forces of the United States armed services, military forces of the State and forces
of the County and City Police and Fire Departments.
B. Application; Issuance Conditions: Upon proper application to the City Clerk, a permit may be granted by the City
Clerk with the concurrence of the City staff for a parade, procession or assemblage upon certain alleys, streets or
highways within the City. Before granting a permit, the City staff shall consider traffic interruptions and pedestrian
safety before passing on such permit. Any permit may be terminated or revoked for any reason detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare of the City or its inhabitants.
C. Information Included In Application: Applications shall include:
1. Name and address of applicants.
2. Exact description of those portions of City streets, alleys or highways to be utilized.
3. Proposed period of time that portions of City streets, alleys or highways are to be utilized.
4. Proposed purpose of such parade, procession or assemblage.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 487/640
D. Fees: Each applicant shall pay to the City the sum as set by resolution of the City Council, before such permit will be
considered, except such fee may be waived for nonprofit organizations by the Police Chief with the concurrence of
the City Manager or City Engineer.
E. Permit: The City Clerk shall issue all permits which terms and conditions shall contain:
1. Name and address of permittee (nontransferable).
2. Exact description of that portion of the City streets, alleys or highways which are to be utilized.
3. Limitations and conditions regarding the use of said streets, alleys or highways.
4. Specific time that permit is valid, not to exceed twenty four (24) hours.
5. Any other conditions the Police Chief and the City Manager or City Engineer deem necessary to preserve the
health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants.
F. Regulation And Enforcement: All parades, processions and assemblages for which a permit is issued shall be
regulated by the Police Department through the Police Chief.
G. Appeal: Any person whose application for a parade permit has been denied or revoked by the Police Chief may
appeal to the City Council for a hearing to show cause why the parade permit should be issued or should not be
revoked. Such appeal must be filed with the City Clerk on or before the thirtieth day following such denial or
revocation. Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council at the earliest next regular meeting that will allow for
proper notice under the State Open Meeting Law. At such hearing, the City Council shall receive such evidence and
take such testimony as it deems necessary. After such hearing, the City Council shall review the testimony taken
and any other evidence submitted and shall announce its decision sustaining or reversing the denial or revocation
of the parade permit. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-14: NEW PAVING OR PAVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle over or across any newly laid paving or pavement
around which there has been placed a barrier, or at or near which there is a person or a sign warning persons against
riding or driving or operating vehicles over such paving or pavements, or a sign stating that the street, alley or highway
is closed. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the City actually engaged in the paving or
repair of such pavement. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-15: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING:
A. Police Officers Authorized To Remove Vehicles:
1. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway, street or alley in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or person in charge of the
vehicle to move it to a position off the paved or improved or main traveled part of such highway, street or alley.
2. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any highway, street, alley, bridge or causeway, or in
any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of
such vehicle in any manner provided by law.
3. Any police officer may remove any vehicle or part of a vehicle found on the highway, street or alley, or cause it to
be removed, to the nearest garage or other place of safekeeping if:
a. The vehicle has been involved in an accident and is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or
impractical and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or
other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or are not in the immediate
vicinity of the disabled vehicle; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 488/640
b. The person driving or in actual physical control of the vehicle is arrested for any alleged offense for which the
officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a proper Magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
c. Whenever any police officer provides for the removal of any vehicle pursuant to this section and has probable
cause to believe that the vehicle or its contents constitute any evidence which tends to show that a criminal
offense has been committed, or tends to show that a particular person has committed a criminal offense, the
police officer shall take such steps as he/she deems reasonably necessary in consideration of evidence
concerns or other matters.
B. Prohibited In Specified Places:
1. In addition to any other prohibitions under State law adopted by reference hereafter, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, in any of the following places:
a. At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit stopping, standing or parking; and
b. The City Engineer may place official traffic control devices prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles on any highway, street or alley where in his opinion such stopping, standing or parking is
dangerous to those using the highway, street or alley or where the stopping, standing or parking vehicles would
unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park
any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such devices.
c. The City may permit angle parking on any highway except that angle parking shall not be permitted on any
highway, street or alley unless the City Engineer has determined that such highway, street or alley is of
sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with free movement of traffic.
d. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered
owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, such violation occurred. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-16: AUTHORITY TO CLEAR FIRE LANES ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to keep all fire lanes on public or private property, including,
but not limited to, those set forth in section 6-1-5 of this Code, clear of any and all vehicles and other obstructions and
impediments which may prevent, hinder or in any other manner deter Fire Department personnel or equipment from
immediate use of such fire lane. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-17: PENALTIES:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3 of this Code. Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-18: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE:
It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by
this chapter. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-19: TOWING CARS AWAY:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 489/640
A. Authority: The Police Department, and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to remove
and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any vehicle illegally parked in any
place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, obstructs or
may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle, is in a fire lane or parked in any location prohibited by
subsection 7-2-15B of this chapter.
B. Storage; Return To Owner: Vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and shall be
restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of a fee as set by resolution of the City Council,
within twenty four (24) hours after the time such car was removed, plus a fee as set by resolution of the City Council
for each additional twenty four (24) hours or fraction thereof, plus all costs incurred for towing and storing such
vehicle. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-20: MANDATORY MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE:
The provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes section 485.187 are adopted by reference. (Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7-2-21: PARKING OF TRUCK-TRACTORS AND TRAILERS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
TRAILER: As defined by Nevada Revised Statutes section 482.125. The definition at the time of the adoption
hereof is every vehicle without motive power designed to carry property or passengers wholly on its own structure
and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: As defined by Nevada Revised Statutes section 482.130. The definition at the time of the
adoption hereof is every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
B. Parking:
1. It is unlawful for any truck-tractor or trailer with an individual gross vehicle weight rating in excess of twenty six
thousand one (26,001) pounds to be parked or left unattended upon any highway, street, alley, City public parking
area, and/or public property under the jurisdiction of the City, unless the parking of any such truck-tractor or trailer
falls within any of the exceptions set forth in this chapter.
2. It is unlawful for any trailer with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of twenty six thousand one (26,001)
pounds to be detached from a truck-tractor and left parked or unattended upon any highway, street, alley, City
public parking area, and/or public property under the jurisdiction of the City.
3. The driver or registered owner of any truck-tractor or trailer shall be liable for any violations of the provisions of
this section or of this chapter. Upon conviction of a first offense, a person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). Any person convicted of a second offense within three (3) years shall be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The general penalty provision of
section 1-3-1 of this Code shall apply to any sentence of imprisonment imposed by the Judge. (Ord. 833, 8-14-
2018)
7-2-22: EXCEPTIONS FOR PARKING OF TRUCK-TRACTORS OR TRAILERS:
"Truck-tractors" or "trailers", as defined in this chapter, may be parked on highways, streets or alleys within the
jurisdiction of the City under any of the following conditions:
A. Generally: Any such vehicles involved in the expeditious loading or unloading of materials, goods or products; all
truck-tractors or trailers owned or operated by the City, any public utility, or any contractor while engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of City streets, street improvements or street utilities within the City.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 490/640
B. Special Parking Permit: The City Manager or designee may at their discretion, upon application in writing, filed with
the City Clerk, issue a special parking permit stating the conditions for and authorizing the applicant to park a
designated number of truck-tractors or trailers on certain streets or alleys within the jurisdiction of the City as long
as the applicant meets the conditions set forth in the permit and the applicant has a fixed place of business located
within the City, which is the applicant's principal place of business.
C. Permit Process: The process, rules and regulations for obtaining such a special parking permit are as follows:
1. An application fee for the permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The application form shall
also be approved by resolution of the City Council.
2. Every public street parking permit issued shall be personal to the permittee and applicable only to the specific
use and to the specific property for which it is issued. Permits for public street parking are nontransferable and do
not run with the land.
3. Parking of a truck-tractor or trailer by a property owner shall be allowed only along their own property frontage.
4. Permits shall be subject to periodic review by the City for compliance.
5. The procedure and time periods for filing and obtaining a public street parking permit are as follows:
a. The application for the permit must:
(1) Specifically describe the type and number of truck-tractors and/or trailers which may be parked on the
public street or alley.
(2) Indicate the public street or alley to be used and provide the exact area the vehicles may be parked.
(3) State the days of the week and the hours of the day when the vehicles may be parked on designated
streets or alleys.
(4) State that the public street or alley parking shall be confined to the area depicted on the map.
(5) Certify that there will be no other use of the public parking space or other activity conducted from the area
of the public street or alley designated for the parking.
(6) Acknowledge that the public parking permit does not guarantee the applicant that the public parking area
will be available at all times.
(7) Acknowledge that no signs or other indications of commercial activity will be permitted in the public street.
(8) Certify that the public street parking space shall not generate vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility
problems, block driveways or other safety issues.
(9) Certify that the character of the public street parking area shall be maintained in appearance and
cleanliness.
(10) Certify that no vehicles parked shall produce excess noise, odor, dust or smoke.
b. Procedure and time limitations for obtaining a permit include:
(1) The City Manager or duly authorized representative shall make a determination on the application within ten
(10) days of receiving the completed application and all required information.
(2) Any denial of an application by the City Manager shall include, in writing, the reason for such denial.
(3) The decision to grant or deny a public street parking permit may be appealed by the applicant or any
interested party to the City Council. A written appeal from the applicant or interested party shall be filed with
the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the decision of the City Manager to deny or grant the permit.
In the event of any such appeal, the notice requirements and procedures set forth in section 3-2-25 of this
Code shall be followed. The City Council shall hear and consider facts and evidence from any persons or
material presented and shall consider any relevant written communications from any persons at the appeal.
(Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 491/640
7-2-23: ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS BY REFERENCE:
The following State laws are adopted hereby by reference.
A. Chapter 484A - Traffic Laws Generally:
NRS
Section General Provisions
484A.005 Purposes of chapters 484A to 484E, inclusive, of NRS.
484A.010 Definitions.
484A.015 "Alley" defined.
484A.020 "Authorized emergency vehicle" defined.
484A.025 "Bicycle" defined.
484A.030 "Bus" defined.
484A.035 "Bus stand" defined.
484A.040 "Center" and "centerline" defined.
484A.045 "City" defined.
484A.050 "Combination of vehicles" defined.
484A.055 "Commercial vehicle" defined.
484A.060 "Controlled-access highway" defined.
484A.065 "Crosswalk" defined.
484A.070 "Divided highway" defined.
484A.075 "Driveaway-towaway operation" defined.
484A.080 "Driver" defined.
484A.085 "Explosives" defined.
484A.090 "Funeral procession" defined.
484A.095 "Highway" defined.
484A.100 "House trailer" defined.
484A.105 "Intersection" defined.
484A.110 "Laned highway" defined.
484A.115 "Local authority" defined.
484A.120 "Manufactured home" defined.
484A.125 "Moped" defined.
484A.130 "Motor vehicle" defined.
484A.135 "Motorcycle" defined.
484A.140 "Nonresident" defined.
484A.145 "Official traffic-control device" defined.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 492/640
484A.147 "Original equipment manufacturer" defined. [Effective January 1, 2012, through December 31,
2017.]
484A.150 "Owner" defined.
484A.155 "Park" and "parking" defined.
484A.160 "Passenger car" defined.
484A.165 "Pedestrian" defined.
484A.170 "Person with a disability which limits or impairs the ability to walk" defined.
484A.175 "Pole trailer" defined.
484A.180 "Police officer" defined.
484A.185 "Premises to which the public has access" defined.
484A.190 "Private way" and "driveway" defined.
484A.195 "Public authority" defined.
484A.196 "Qualified alternative fuel" defined. [Effective January 1, 2012, through December 31, 2017.]
484A.197 "Qualified alternative fuel vehicle" defined. [Effective January 1, 2012, through December 31,
2017.]
484A.198 "Qualified vehicle modifier of alternative fuel vehicles" defined. [Effective January 1, 2012, through
December 31, 2017.]
484A.200 "Railroad" defined.
484A.205 "Regulatory agency" defined.
484A.210 "Right-of-way" defined.
484A.215 "Road" defined.
484A.220 "Roadway" defined.
484A.225 "Rural area" defined.
484A.230 "School bus" defined.
484A.235 "Semitrailer" defined.
484A.240 "Sidewalk" defined.
484A.245 "Special mobile equipment" defined.
484A.250 "Stand" and "standing" defined.
484A.255 "Stop" defined.
484A.260 "Stop" and "stopping" defined.
484A.265 "Street" defined.
484A.270 "Taxicab" defined.
484A.275 "Through highway" defined.
484A.280 "Tow car" defined.
484A.285 "Traffic" defined.
484A.290 "Traffic-control signal" defined.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 493/640
484A.295 "Trailer" defined.
484A.300 "Traveled portion of highway" defined.
484A.305 "Truck" defined.
484A.310 "Truck-tractor" defined.
484A.315 "Urban area" defined.
484A.320 "Vehicle" defined.
NRS
Section Powers Of State And Local Authorities
484A.400
Provisions uniform throughout State; local authority prohibited from enacting certain ordinances;
trial for same offense prohibited.
484A.410
City may adopt penalties for certain violations of driving under influence of alcohol or prohibited
substance.
484A.420
Powers of local authority.
484A.430
Adoption of manual and specifications for devices for control of traffic by Department of
Transportation.
NRS
Section Administrative Regulations
484A.440
Local device for control of traffic.
484A.450
Designation of through highways and intersections requiring stop or yield; vehicle entering
intersection.
484A.460
Authority of Department of Transportation to designate carpool lanes; duties of Department of
Transportation; regulations.
484A.463
Authority of Department of Transportation to adopt regulations to allow certain low emission and
energy-efficient vehicles to be operated in lane designated for high-occupancy vehicles. [Effective
January 1, 2018.]
484A.467
County or City authorized to adopt ordinance to allow low emission and energy-efficient vehicles to
travel in designated lane in planned community.
484A.468
Parking program for qualified alternative fuel vehicles: Requirements for establishment by local
authorities; fee authorized; authorization for participating qualified vehicle to stop, stand or park
without payment; exceptions. [Effective January 1, 2012, through December 31, 2017.]
484A.470
Authority of department to adopt regulations concerning special mobile equipment.
484A.480
Designation of authorized emergency vehicles; equipment; limitations on use of warning devices.
484A.490
Permit for authorized emergency vehicle issued to other vehicles; certain vehicles not considered
emergency vehicles.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 494/640
NRS
Section
Citations And Arrests For Violations Of Traffic Laws
484A.600
Use by governmental entity or agent of photographic, video or digital equipment to gather evidence
for issuance of traffic citation.
484A.610
Issuance of forms for traffic citations; records.
484A.620
Copy of citation deemed lawful complaint.
484A.630
Citation: Contents; 5-day notice to appear in court; written promise to appear.
484A.640
Matching of certain information before officer issues citation or makes arrest; when officer may
arrest driver for prior offense.
484A.650
Officer to demand proof of insurance; citation for operation of vehicle without insurance or for
failure to present proof of insurance.
484A.660
Issuance of citation at scene of accident.
484A.670
Effect of violation of written promise to appear; when appearance by counsel in lieu of personal
appearance is authorized.
484A.680
Disposition and records of traffic citations.
484A.690
Audit of records of traffic citations.
484A.700
When warrant for failure to obey citation for parking violation may be issued.
NRS Section Arrests
484A.710 Arrest without warrant for certain offenses.
484A.720 When person must be taken immediately before Magistrate.
484A.730 When peace officer has option to give citation or take person before Magistrate.
484A.740 Arrest of nonresident.
484A.750 Appearance before Magistrate having jurisdiction.
484A.760 Release of defendant when Magistrate not available.
484A.770 Procedure prescribed for arrest without warrant not exclusive.
NRS Section Miscellaneous Provisions
484A.800 Sponsor of special event to provide for control of vehicular traffic.
NRS
Section General Violations
484A.900 Penalty for violation of traffic law when no penalty provided in statute; authority of court to order
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 495/640
repeat offender to pay for and attend school for driver training.
B. Chapter 484B - Rules Of The Road:
NRS Section Definitions
484B.003 Definitions.
484B.007 "Administrative roadblock" defined.
484B.010 "Business district" defined.
484B.017 "Electric bicycle" defined.
484B.020 "Flammable liquid" defined.
484B.023 "Freight curb loading zone" defined.
484B.027 "House coach" defined.
484B.030 "Parking meter" defined.
484B.033 "Passenger curb loading zone" defined.
484B.037 "Person with a disability of moderate duration" defined.
484B.040 "Person with a permanent disability" defined.
484B.043 "Person with a temporary disability" defined.
484B.047 "Railroad sign" and "railroad signal" defined.
484B.050 "Railroad train" defined.
484B.053 "Residence district" defined.
484B.057 "Safety zone" defined.
484B.060 "School crossing zone" defined.
484B.063 "School zone" defined.
484B.067 "Taxicab stand" defined.
484B.070 "Temporary roadblock" defined.
484B.073 "Two-directional highway" defined.
484B.077 "U-turn" defined.
NRS
Section General Rules And Applicability
484B.100
Obedience to police officer.
484B.103
Rights and duties of person riding animal or driving vehicle drawn by animal.
484B.107
Applicability of chapters 484A to 484E, inclusive, of NRS to person, motor vehicle or other
equipment engaged in work upon highway.
484B.110 Driving through safety zone prohibited.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 496/640
484B.113
Limitations on backing.
484B.117
Driving upon sidewalk.
484B.120
Driving on defiles, canyons or mountain highways.
484B.123
Coasting prohibited in certain circumstances.
484B.127
Following too closely.
484B.130
Double penalty for certain traffic violations committed in work zones; exception in certain temporary
traffic control zones.
484B.135
Double penalty for certain traffic violations committed in pedestrian safety zones; exceptions in
certain pedestrian safety zones.
NRS
Section Restrictions On Persons In Vehicles
484B.150
Drinking alcoholic beverage while driving motor vehicle unlawful; open container of alcoholic
beverage; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.153
Boarding or alighting from vehicle; opening door of vehicle.
484B.157
Child less than 6 years of age and weighing 60 pounds or less to be secured in child restraint
system while being transported in motor vehicle; requirements for system; penalties; programs of
training; waiver or reduction of penalty under certain circumstances; application of section.
484B.160
Person riding upon bed of flatbed truck or within bed of pickup truck.
484B.163
Obstruction of or interference with driver's view; interference with driver's control over driving
mechanism; vision of driver through required glass equipment; additional penalty for violation
committed in work zone.
484B.165
Using handheld wireless communications device to type or enter text, send or read data, engage in
nonvoice communication or engage in voice communications without use of hands-free device
unlawful; exceptions; penalty.
484B.167
Riding in house trailer.
NRS
Section Direction Of Travel; Overtaking And Passing
484B.200
Driving on right half of highway required; exceptions; additional penalty for violation committed in
work zone.
484B.203
Duties of drivers passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions; additional penalty for violation
committed in work zone.
484B.207
Overtaking vehicle on left side: Duties of drivers of overtaking and overtaken vehicle; additional
penalty for violation committed in work zone.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 497/640
484B.210
When overtaking on right side allowed; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.213
Limitations on overtaking on left side; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.217
Zones in which overtaking on left side or making left-hand turn prohibited; exceptions; additional
penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.220
One-way highway; rotary traffic island.
484B.223
Driving on highway having multiple marked lanes for traffic; additional penalty for violation
committed in work zone.
484B.227
Driving on divided highway: Prohibited turns; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
NRS
Section Right-Of-Way
484B.250
Vehicle approaching or entering intersection.
484B.253
Vehicle turning left.
484B.257
Vehicle entering intersection marked stop or yield.
484B.260
Vehicle entering highway from private way.
484B.263
Vehicle entering or exiting controlled-access highway: Duty to yield right-of-way.
484B.267
Operation of vehicle on approach of authorized emergency vehicle or official vehicle of regulatory
agency.
484B.270
Vehicles, bicycles and electric bicycles: Driver's duty of due care; additional penalty if driver is
proximate cause of collision with person riding bicycle.
NRS
Section Pedestrians
484B.280
Duties of driver of motor vehicle to pedestrian; additional penalty if driver is proximate cause of
collision with pedestrian.
484B.283
Right-of-way in crosswalk; impeding ability of driver to yield prohibited; overtaking vehicle at
crosswalk; obedience to signals and other devices for control of traffic; additional penalty if driver is
proximate cause of collision with pedestrian.
484B.287
When pedestrian must yield right-of-way to vehicle; when crossing at crosswalk is required; crossing
diagonally.
484B.290
Right-of-way of person who is blind; penalty.
484B.293
Direction of movement on crosswalk.
484B.297 Walking along and upon highways; solicitation of ride, business or contribution from driver or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 498/640
occupant of vehicle prohibited in certain circumstances; intoxicated pedestrian prohibited within
traveled portion of highway; applicability to riders of animals; penalty.
NRS
Section Traffic Signs, Signals And Markings
484B.300
Obedience to devices for control of traffic; placement of devices; additional penalty for violation
committed in work zone.
484B.303
Disobedience of directions of device for control of traffic unlawful; additional penalty for violation
committed in work zone.
484B.307
Traffic controlled by official traffic-control devices exhibiting different colored lights: Rights and duties
of vehicular traffic and pedestrians depending upon particular signal displayed; signals placed over
individual lanes; certain restrictions upon local authorities.
484B.310
Flashing signals.
484B.313
Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or street banners; limitation on placement of
commercial advertising; removal as public nuisance; exceptions; use of advertising revenues to
repay bonds.
484B.317
Interference with official device for control of traffic or sign or signal for railroad prohibited; additional
penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.320
Devices and mechanisms capable of interfering with or altering signal of traffic-control signal:
General prohibition against operating and selling; seizure by police; presence in or on vehicle as
prima facie evidence of violation; penalty; exceptions for providers of mass transit and response
agencies.
484B.323
Carpool lanes: Use of carpool lanes in conformance with signs; penalty.
484B.327
Unlawful to remove barriers and signs stating highway is closed to traffic; driving on such highway
unlawful; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.330
Obedience to signal of authorized flagger; prosecution of violations; penalties.
NRS
Section
School Crossing Guards, School
Zones And School Buses
484B.350
Stop required in obedience to direction or traffic-control signal of school crossing guard; penalty;
additional penalty if driver is proximate cause of collision with pedestrian or person riding bicycle.
484B.353
Overtaking and passing school bus: Duties of driver; exceptions; penalties.
484B.357
Report by driver of school bus of failure of driver of vehicle to stop; submission of report to school
district and department; provision of notice to owner of vehicle.
484B.360
Maximum speed of school bus.
484B.363
School zone or school crossing zone: Speed limit; designation; signs; determination of hours in
which speed limit is in effect; additional penalty if driver is proximate cause of collision with
pedestrian or person riding bicycle.
484B.367
School zone or school crossing zone: Requirements for signs; placement of portable signs.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 499/640
NRS Section
Turning And Starting; Signals
On Stopping And Turning
484B.400 Required position and method of turning at intersections.
484B.403 When U-turns are authorized and prohibited; additional penalty for violation committed in work
zone.
484B.407 Turning on curve or crest of grade prohibited in certain circumstances.
484B.410 Starting parked vehicle.
484B.413 Requirements for turning on highway; signal for stopping or decreasing speed.
484B.417 Signal by hand and arm or signal lamp or device authorized.
484B.420 Methods of giving signals by hand and arm.
NRS
Section Stopping, Standing And Parking
484B.440
Stopping, standing or parking outside of business or residence district.
484B.443
Police officer authorized to remove certain vehicles; protocol for selection and use of towing
services; duties and liability of tow car operator.
484B.447
Preservation of criminal evidence when vehicle is removed from highway.
484B.450
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places.
484B.453
Prohibited parking in front of theaters, hotels and other buildings.
484B.457
Parallel and angle parking; stopping, standing and parking on highways under jurisdiction of
Department of Transportation.
484B.460
Parking at angle designated by devices permitting angle parking.
484B.463
Special license plate or plates and special or temporary parking placards and stickers: Use;
alternative use of special plate or plates issued to veteran with a disability; limitations. [Both versions
in 2015 NRS Volume.]
484B.467
Parking space designated for persons who are handicapped: Signs; required plates, stickers or
placards for parking; prohibited acts; penalty. [Both versions in 2015 NRS Volume.]
484B.470
Local law enforcement agency authorized to appoint volunteers to enforce certain laws concerning
parking for persons who are handicapped.
484B.473
Parked vehicle at nighttime: Reflectors; lights.
484B.477
Stopping, standing or parking in alley.
484B.480
All-night parking.
484B.483 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 500/640
484B.487
Parking adjacent to school.
484B.490
Parking on narrow highway.
484B.493
Standing or parking on one-way street.
484B.497
Standing or parking on one-way roadway.
484B.500
Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested place.
484B.503
Stopping, standing or parking in zone for loading passengers at curb.
484B.507
Stopping, standing or parking in zone for loading freight at curb.
484B.510
Stopping, standing or parking in restricted parking zone.
484B.513
Stopping, standing and parking of bus or taxicab.
484B.517
Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
484B.520
Regulation of stopping, standing or parking by local authority.
484B.523
Stopping, standing or parking in metered parking zone; unlawful tampering with meter. [Effective
January 1, 2018.]
484B.527
Local authority authorized to file notice of nonpayment with department if registered owner of motor
vehicle fails to pay certain penalties, fines or other charges; contents of notice; regulations.
484B.530
Unattended motor vehicle: Stopping engine, locking ignition and removing key.
484B.533
Unattended motor vehicle: Standing on grade.
NRS Section
Special Stops
Signal By Peace Officer
484B.550 Stop required upon signal of peace officer; manner in which signal must be given; penalties.
NRS Section Railroad Grade Crossings
484B.553 Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train.
484B.557 Stop required at certain railroad grade crossings.
484B.560 Certain vehicles required to stop at all railroad grade crossings; exceptions.
484B.563 Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 501/640
NRS
Section Roadblocks
484B.570
Administrative roadblock: Establishment; minimum requirements.
484B.573
Temporary roadblock: Establishment; minimum requirements.
484B.574
Flooding or water on roadway: Liability for expense if person travels through temporary roadblock or
is convicted of reckless driving; limitations on liability and expenses; immunity from liability.
484B.577
Authority of police officers not limited by provisions relating to roadblocks.
484B.580
Failure to stop at roadblock; penalties.
NRS
Section Controlled-Access Highway
484B.587
Obedience to signs relating to controlled-access highway; restrictions on driving on controlledaccess
highway; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.590
Heavy-vehicle lanes: Authority of Department of Transportation to erect advisory signs on
controlled-access facilities.
484B.593
Restrictions on use of controlled-access highway; penalty.
NRS
Section Restrictions On Speed
484B.600
Basic rule; additional penalties for violation committed in work zone or if driver is proximate cause of
collision with pedestrian or person riding bicycle.
484B.603
Duty of driver to decrease speed under certain circumstances; additional penalty for violation
committed in work zone.
484B.607
Duties of driver when approaching authorized emergency vehicle which is stopped and using
flashing lights or tow car which is stopped and using flashing amber warning lights; penalty.
484B.610
Speed limit in unincorporated town; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.613
Speed limit: Establishment for vehicles on highways constructed and maintained by Department of
Transportation; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
484B.617
Certain violations of speed limit in rural areas: Fines; department not to record violation on driver's
record; violation not deemed moving traffic violation.
484B.620
Speed zones and signs.
484B.621
Establishment of State Route 159 Safety Speed Zone; considerations when establishing maximum
speed; adequate signage or other forms of notice required to be evaluated and installed to support
maximum speed established.
484B.623 Slow driving; establishment of minimum speed limit.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 502/640
484B.627
Duties of driver driving motor vehicle at speed so slow as to impede forward movement of traffic;
prohibition against stopping vehicle on roadway so as to impede or block normal and reasonable
movement of traffic; exception.
484B.630
Circumstances in which driver of slow-moving vehicle has duty to turn off roadway; penalty.
484B.633
Special limitations on speed.
484B.637
"Low-speed vehicle" defined; highways upon which low-speed vehicles may be operated; exception.
NRS
Section
Aggressive Driving; Reckless
Driving; Vehicular Manslaughter
484B.650
Acts constituting aggressive driving; penalties; additional penalty for violation committed in work
zone.
484B.653
Reckless driving and organization of unauthorized speed contests prohibited; penalties; court to
suspend driver's license of certain offenders; additional penalties for violation committed in work
zone or if driver is proximate cause of collision with pedestrian or person riding bicycle.
484B.657
Vehicular manslaughter; penalty; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone.
NRS
Section Emergency Vehicles And Processions
484B.700
Privileges granted to driver of authorized emergency vehicle, official vehicle of regulatory agency or
vehicle escorting funeral procession; application of privileges; limitation of privileges.
484B.703
Driving through funeral or other procession.
484B.707
Driving in procession.
484B.710
Following fire apparatus prohibited.
NRS
Section Actions And Devices Related To Safety
484B.740
Fusee: Limitation on color.
484B.743
Reflective material required for person directing or controlling traffic near school.
484B.747
Operator of tow car to place warning signs when rendering assistance to disabled vehicle on certain
roadways.
484B.748
Use of flashing amber warning lights on tow car at scene of traffic hazard.
484B.750 Placement of red flares, red lanterns, warning lights or reflectors by tow car operator near warning
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 503/640
signs when rendering assistance to disabled vehicle on highway in certain circumstances.
484B.753
When operator of tow car authorized to tow vehicle with person inside. [Effective until the date on
which the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or his or her authorized
representative, rescinds that portion of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 208 (49 CFR
section 571.208) which requires the installation of automatic restraints in new private passenger
motor vehicles, unless the Secretary's decision to rescind is not based on the enactment or
continued operation of section 1 of chapter 29, Statutes of Nevada 2009.]
484B.753
When operator of tow car authorized to tow vehicle with person inside. [Effective on the date on
which the Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or his or her authorized
representative, rescinds that portion of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 208 (49 CFR
section 571.208) which requires the installation of automatic restraints in new private passenger
motor vehicles, unless the Secretary's decision to rescind is not based on the enactment or
continued operation of section 1 of chapter 29, Statutes of Nevada 2009.]
484B.757
Use of flashing amber warning lights by private patrol officer.
NRS
Section
Operation Of Bicycles,
Electric Bicycles And Vehicles For Play
484B.760
Penalty for violation of provisions; responsibility of parent of child or guardian of ward; applicability of
provisions to bicycles and electric bicycles.
484B.763
Application of traffic laws to person riding bicycle or electric bicycle.
484B.767
Certain persons operating bicycle or electric bicycle while on duty not required to comply with laws
in certain circumstances.
484B.768
Required action of operator of bicycle or electric bicycle when turning from direct course; when
signal not required.
484B.769
Signals required to be given by operator of bicycle or electric bicycle on roadway.
484B.770
Where bicycles or electric bicycles may be ridden; limitation on number of persons carried on
bicycle or electric bicycle.
484B.773
Attaching to vehicle upon roadway prohibited.
484B.777
Operating bicycle or electric bicycle on roadway.
484B.780
Carrying articles on bicycle or electric bicycle.
484B.783
Lamps, reflectors and brakes required on bicycles and electric bicycles.
NRS
Section Miscellaneous Rules
484B.900
Rental agency not liable for traffic violation by user of rented vehicle.
484B.903
Putting glass or other injurious substance on highway prohibited.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 504/640
484B.907
Violation of curfew by drivers who are 16 or 17 years of age; exception for scheduled events;
violation does not constitute primary offense.
484B.910
Motor must be shut off when supply tank being filled with fuel.
484B.913
Crossing fire hose.
484B.917
Police officer to remove and destroy lights and sirens unlawfully installed or operated.
484B.920
Permits required for certain parades and processions, sound trucks and oversized or overweight
vehicles or equipment; duties of Department of Transportation; authority of cities and counties to
provide recommendations and notice; regulations; penalty.
C. Chapter 484C - Driving Under The Influence Of Alcohol Or A Prohibited Substance:
NRS
Section General Provisions
484C.010
Definitions.
484C.020
"Concentration of alcohol of 0.08 or more in his or her blood or breath" defined. [Effective until the
date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate
a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to
receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.020
"Concentration of alcohol of 0.10 or more in his or her blood or breath" defined. [Effective on the
date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate
a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to
receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.030
"Concentration of alcohol of 0.18 or more in his or her blood or breath" defined.
484C.040
"Concentration of alcohol of less than 0.18 in his or her blood or breath" defined.
484C.050
"Evaluation center" defined.
484C.060
"License to drive a motor vehicle" defined.
484C.070
"Nonresident's driving privilege" defined.
484C.080
"Prohibited substance" defined.
484C.090
"Revocation of driver's license" defined.
484C.100
"Treatment provider" defined.
484C.105
"Under the influence" defined.
484C.109
Person deemed not to be in actual physical control of vehicle in certain circumstances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 505/640
NRS
Section Prohibited Acts
484C.110
Unlawful acts; affirmative defense; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone. [Effective
until the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to
operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition
to receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.110
Unlawful acts; affirmative defense; additional penalty for violation committed in work zone. [Effective
on the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to
operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition
to receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.120
Unlawful acts relating to operation of commercial motor vehicle; affirmative defense; additional
penalty for violation committed in work zone. [Effective until the date of the repeal of the Federal law
requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol
concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the
construction of highways in this State.]
484C.120
Unlawful acts relating to operation of commercial motor vehicle; affirmative defense; additional
penalty for violation committed in work zone. [Effective on the date of the repeal of the Federal law
requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol
concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the
construction of highways in this State.]
484C.130
Vehicular homicide; affirmative defense. [Effective until the date of the repeal of the Federal law
requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol
concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the
construction of highways in this State.]
484C.130
Vehicular homicide; affirmative defense. [Effective on the date of the repeal of the Federal law
requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol
concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the
construction of highways in this State.]
NRS
Section
Preliminary And Evidentiary
Testing Of Drivers And Others
484C.150
Implied consent to preliminary test of person's breath; effect of failure to submit to test; use of
results of test.
484C.160
Implied consent to evidentiary test; exemption from blood test; choice of test; when blood test may
be required; when other tests may be used; reasonable force authorized to obtain test in certain
circumstances; notification of parent or guardian of minor directed to submit to test.
484C.170
Analysis of blood of deceased victim of accident involving motor vehicle to determine presence and
concentration of alcohol.
484C.180
Arrested person to be given opportunity to choose qualified person to administer test; substitution of
test prohibited.
484C.190
Presumption that solution or gas used to calibrate or verify calibration of device for testing breath is
properly prepared.
484C.200
Requirements for evidentiary test of breath to determine concentration of alcohol in breath; use of
reasonable force to obtain sample or conduct test.
484C.210
Revocation of license, permit or privilege to drive when test shows concentration of alcohol of 0.08
or more in blood or breath; periods of ineligibility to run consecutively. [Effective until the date of the
repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 506/640
vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving
Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.210
Revocation of license, permit or privilege to drive when test shows concentration of alcohol of 0.10
or more in blood or breath; periods of ineligibility to run consecutively. [Effective on the date of the
repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor
vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving
Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.220
Seizure of license or permit; order of revocation; administrative and judicial review; temporary
license; sufficiency of notice. [Effective until the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each
state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration
of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the construction of
highways in this State.]
484C.220
Seizure of license or permit; order of revocation; administrative and judicial review; temporary
license; sufficiency of notice. [Effective on the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each
state to make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration
of 0.08 percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the construction of
highways in this State.]
484C.230
Hearing by department; additional temporary license; judicial review; cancellation of temporary
license. [Effective until the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it
unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent
or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.230
Hearing by department; additional temporary license; judicial review; cancellation of temporary
license. [Effective on the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to make it
unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent
or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this State.]
484C.240
Admissibility of evidence of refusal to submit to evidentiary test; availability of results of test;
admissibility of evidence from test.
484C.250
Admissibility of results of blood test in hearing or criminal action; immunity from liability for person
administering blood test in certain circumstances.
NRS
Section
Evaluation And Treatment Of
Offenders For Alcohol Or Drug Abuse
484C.300
Evaluation of certain offenders before sentencing; persons qualified to conduct evaluation; results of
evaluation to be forwarded to Director of Department of Corrections.
484C.310
Standards for approval of evaluation center.
484C.320
Application by first-time offender to undergo program of treatment; sentencing of offender and
conditional suspension of sentence; notice to department.
484C.330
Application by second-time offender to undergo program of treatment; sentencing of offender and
conditional suspension of sentence; notice to department.
484C.340
Application by third-time offender to undergo program of treatment; sentencing of offender and
conditional suspension of proceedings; requirements to participate in program of treatment; certain
previous convictions preclude offender from participating in program of treatment.
484C.350
Evaluation of first-time offender with a concentration of alcohol of 0.18 in his or her blood or breath
and of second-time offenders required; required evaluation of first-time offender under 21 years of
age; requirements of evaluation; out-of-State evaluation; offender to pay cost of evaluation.
484C.360 Placement of offender under clinical supervision of treatment facility; payment of charges for
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 507/640
treatment; liability of facility limited.
484C.365
Placement of offender under clinical supervision of treatment provider in another jurisdiction
authorized.
484C.370
Evaluation or treatment by private company authorized.
NRS
Section Penalties
Criminal Penalties
484C.400
Penalties for first, second and third offenses; segregation of offender; intermittent confinement;
consecutive sentences; aggravating factor.
484C.410
Penalties when offender previously convicted of certain felonious conduct or homicide; segregation
of offender; intermittent confinement; consecutive sentences; aggravating factor.
484C.420
Probation prohibited; suspension of sentence and plea bargaining restricted; mandatory orders
when person is nonresident.
484C.430
Penalty if death or substantial bodily harm results; exception; segregation of offender; plea
bargaining restricted; suspension of sentence and probation prohibited; affirmative defense;
aggravating factor. [Effective until the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to
make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08
percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this
State.]
484C.430
Penalty if death or substantial bodily harm results; exception; segregation of offender; plea
bargaining restricted; suspension of sentence and probation prohibited; affirmative defense;
aggravating factor. [Effective on the date of the repeal of the Federal law requiring each state to
make it unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08
percent or greater as a condition to receiving Federal funding for the construction of highways in this
State.]
484C.440
Penalties for vehicular homicide; segregation of offender; plea bargaining restricted; suspension of
sentence and probation prohibited; aggravating factor.
Device To Prevent Person Who
Has Consumed Alcohol From Starting Vehicle
484C.450
"Device" defined.
484C.460
When court is authorized or required to order installation of device; exceptions; installation and
inspection.
484C.470
Penalties for tampering with or driving without device; probation and suspension of sentence
prohibited; plea bargaining restricted.
484C.480
Regulations.
Other Penalties
484C.500
Civil penalty; cancellation of reinstated license upon conviction for violation of NRS 484C.110 or
484C.120; notice.
484C.510
Fee for chemical analysis.
484C.515
Fee for specialty court programs. [Effective through June 30, 2019.]
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 508/640
484C.520
Mandatory suspension of registration of each motor vehicle registered to person convicted of
second or subsequent violation or convicted of vehicular homicide; duration of suspension; court to
forward copy of order to department; contents of order; limited exceptions.
484C.530
Offender to attend meeting of panel of victims and provide proof of attendance to court.
NRS
Section Committee On Testing For Intoxication
484C.600
Creation; appointment and qualifications of members; meetings; quorum; appeal from decision of
committee.
484C.610
Certification of breath-testing devices; creation and maintenance of list of such devices;
presumption of accuracy and reliability of device; other evidence of concentration of alcohol in
breath not precluded.
484C.620
Adoption of regulations to prescribe standards and procedures to calibrate breath-testing devices;
issuance of certificates by Director of Department of Public Safety.
484C.630
Adoption of regulations for certification of persons to operate device to test concentration in breath;
judicial notice; presumption of proper operation; evidence of test performed by others not precluded.
484C.640
Adoption of regulations for calibration of devices to test blood or urine and certification of persons
who calibrate or operate devices or who examine operators; adoption of regulations concerning
operation of devices to test blood or urine.
D. Chapter 484D - Equipment, Inspections And Size, Weight And Load Of Vehicles:
NRS Section General Provisions
484D.010 Definitions.
484D.015 "Farm tractor" defined.
484D.020 "Implement of husbandry" defined.
484D.025 "Interstate highway" defined.
484D.030 "Mobile home" defined.
484D.035 "Recreational vehicle" defined.
484D.040 "Security agreement" defined.
484D.045 "Security interest" defined.
484D.050 "Tandem axle" defined.
484D.055 "Towable tools or equipment" defined.
NRS
Section
Equipment Of Vehicles
Lamps And Other Equipment For Lighting
484D.100 When lighted lamps are required.
484D.105 Distance of visibility and mounted height of lamps.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 509/640
484D.110 Headlamps on motor vehicles and special mobile equipment.
484D.115 Tail lamps.
484D.120 Reflectors.
484D.125 Stop lamps.
484D.130 Turn signals.
484D.135 Requirements for pole trailer.
484D.140 Additional equipment for lighting required on certain vehicles.
484D.145 Colors of certain lamps, lights and reflectors.
484D.150 Mounting of reflectors, clearance lamps and side marker lamps.
484D.155 Visibility requirements for reflectors, clearance lamps, identification lamps and marker lamps.
484D.160 Obstructed lights.
484D.165 Lamps on parked vehicle.
484D.170 Lamps and reflectors on farm tractors, farm equipment and implements of husbandry.
484D.175 Lamps and reflectors on other vehicles.
484D.180 Spot lamps, auxiliary lamps and lamps for fog.
484D.185 Flashing amber warning light: Limitations on operation and display; permit to mount on certain
vehicles; fee.
484D.190 Display of flashing amber warning light and signs by certain vehicles used to sell food or
beverage.
484D.195 Display of flashing amber warning light by vehicle of public utility.
484D.200 Use and display of blue tail lamps by certain vehicles of Department of Transportation;
conditions.
484D.205 Additional equipment for lighting.
484D.210 Equipment for lighting road with multiple beams.
484D.215 Use of equipment for lighting road with multiple beams.
484D.220 Number and intensity of lamps on front of vehicle.
NRS
Section Prohibited Acts
484D.230 Vehicles in unsafe condition or lacking certain equipment prohibited on highway; prohibited acts
related to equipment.
NRS Section Brakes
484D.250 Equipment required.
484D.255 Requirements for performance.
484D.260 Maintenance.
484D.265 Equipment for towing vehicle.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 510/640
484D.270 Arrangement of system; device for control.
484D.275 Reservoirs.
484D.280 Warning signals and devices for certain buses, trucks and truck-tractors.
484D.285 Conditions upon use of compression brakes; penalty.
NRS
Section Odometers
484D.300
Definitions.
484D.305
Unlawful devices.
484D.310
Unlawful change of mileage.
484D.315
Operation of, or causing or allowing to be operated, with intent to defraud, motor vehicle that has
disconnected, nonfunctional or altered odometer.
484D.320
Conspiracy.
484D.325
Lawful service, repair or replacement; notice to be attached to vehicle when odometer adjusted to
read zero.
484D.330
Department to enforce provisions of Federal law relating to disclosure of odometer reading of motor
vehicle and certain other information.
484D.335
Criminal penalties.
484D.340
Civil penalties.
484D.345
Injunctive relief.
NRS
Section Other Equipment
484D.400
Horns and other warning devices.
484D.405
Unlawful to operate out-of-State or foreign privately owned motor vehicle equipped with red light or
siren; exception; penalty.
484D.410
Standards and regulations for noise emission; compliance.
484D.415
Mufflers: Prevention of emissions.
484D.420
Mudguards.
484D.425
Mirrors on trucks.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 511/640
484D.430
Mirrors on all motor vehicles.
484D.435
Windshield and windows must be unobstructed.
484D.440
Restrictions on tinting of windshield or side or rear window.
484D.445
Windshield wipers.
484D.450
Safety glazing material in motor vehicles and campers.
484D.455
Replacement of glazing materials.
484D.460
Certain vehicles to carry pot torches, lanterns or reflectors; display of devices when vehicle is
disabled.
484D.465
Display of warning devices by vehicle of public utility parked at site of work.
484D.470
Tow cars required to be equipped with broom, shovel and fire extinguisher; duties of driver; failure to
perform duties.
484D.475
Equipment for tow car: Flashing amber warning lamp; flares, lanterns, lights or reflectors.
484D.480
Equipment for tow car: Rear and stop lamps; portable electric extension cord.
484D.485
Event recording device: Disclosure by manufacturer of new motor vehicle in owner's manual;
downloading or retrieval of data; subscription services; penalty.
484D.490
Television-type receiving equipment.
484D.493
Dynamic display: Management system required; exceptions.
484D.495
Safety belts and shoulder harness assembly; requirements for child and other passenger; penalty;
exemptions. [Effective until the date the Federal government rescinds the requirement for the
installation of automatic restraints in new private passenger motor vehicles, if that action is based
upon the enactment or continued operation of certain amendatory and transitory provisions
contained in chapter 480, Statutes of Nevada 1987.]
484D.495
Safety belts and shoulder harness assembly. [Effective on the date the Federal government
rescinds the requirement for the installation of automatic restraints in new private passenger motor
vehicles, if that action is based upon the enactment or continued operation of certain amendatory
and transitory provisions contained in chapter 480, Statutes of Nevada 1987.]
484D.500
Use of safety belts within taxicabs.
484D.505
Pneumatic tires: Standards; sale or use of nonconforming tire prohibited.
484D.510
Use of certain cleated or studded tires prohibited; exceptions.
484D.515
Traction devices, tire chains or snow tires: Use required where highway marked or posted.
484D.520
Traction devices, tire chains or snow tires: Requirements under certain circumstances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 512/640
484D.525
Installation and mounting of traction devices, tire chains or snow tires.
484D.530
Mechanical device to provide traction.
484D.535
Device for control of pollution: Use required; disconnection or alteration prohibited; exceptions.
484D.540
Device for control of pollution: Penalty; proof of conformity may be required.
484D.545
Emblem for slow-moving vehicle displayed on certain vehicles; standards.
NRS
Section Inspection Of Vehicles
484D.560 Inspection by peace officer or inspector; citation or notice of violation; centers for inspection;
standards for tires and brakes.
484D.570 Operation of vehicle without required equipment or in unsafe condition prohibited; exceptions.
484D.580 Penalty for failure or refusal to stop and submit to inspection or test.
NRS
Section
Size, Weight And Load
General Restrictions And Exemptions; Permits
484D.600
Prohibited acts concerning size or weight of vehicle; special permit; emergencies; exceptions.
484D.605
Height of vehicle: Maximum heights with load; exception; unlawful acts.
484D.610
Height of vehicle: Maximum ground clearance; exceptions.
484D.615
Length of vehicle: Restrictions; special permit; exceptions.
484D.620
Length of vehicle: Penalty.
484D.625
Authorized movement of vehicle on public highway in excess of limits on size and weight; permit;
fee.
484D.630
Operation of motor vehicle exceeding its declared gross weight unlawful.
484D.635
Maximum weight of vehicle on any axle or per tire.
484D.640
Limitations on weight for vehicle used by licensed hauler of garbage and refuse.
484D.645
Limitations on weight for vehicle used by regional Transportation Commission or its contractor to
provide public mass transportation; exception for certain vehicles used as part of demonstration
project; definitions.
484D.650
Measurement of distance between axles.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 513/640
484D.655
Factors to be considered by Department of Transportation before reduction of maximum weight
limits.
484D.660
Applicability of limits on weight to Federal highways; reduction of limits by Department of
Transportation or Governing Body of City or County.
484D.665
Certain larger vehicles prohibited from traveling on State Route 159; duty of Department of
Transportation to erect certain markers; exceptions.
484D.670
Exemption for traction engine and tractor; circular metal band required.
484D.675
Enforcement by law enforcement agencies; weighing; requiring removal of excess load; penalty.
484D.680
Fines for violations of limits on weight.
484D.685
Maximum width of vehicle; permit for increased size or weight.
484D.690
Maximum width of bus.
484D.695
Maximum width of recreational vehicle.
484D.700
Maximum width of trailer, semitrailer, special mobile equipment or equipment for construction or
maintenance of highway.
484D.705
Width of load of loosely piled agricultural products; restrictions for implement of husbandry moved
over highway.
484D.710
Applicability of limits on width to Federal highways.
484D.715
Permit for movement of oversized manufactured or mobile home or similar structure: Requirements;
conditions; regulations.
484D.720
Permit for movement of oversized manufactured or mobile home or similar structure: Additional
requirements and conditions; designation of highways; regulations.
484D.725
Permit to operate or move vehicles with oversized loads.
484D.730
Contents of application for permit.
484D.735
Continuous and multiple trip-limited time permits: Maximum weight per axle; fee for investigation;
revocation; new application; Department of Transportation to consider recommendation of City or
County.
484D.740
Carrying and inspection of permit.
NRS
Section Unlawful Acts; Penalties
484D.745
Penalties for operation of oversized or overweight vehicle without permit or in violation of permit.
484D.800
Regional Advisory Committee: Creation; matters subject to recommendation; membership; terms of
members; vacancies; members serve without compensation.
484D.810 Duties of Regional Advisory Committee; duties of Department of Transportation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 514/640
NRS Section
Miscellaneous Provisions
484D.850 Load on vehicle.
484D.855 Regulations: Loading and securing loads; safety chains and cables for combinations of
vehicles.
484D.860 Display of red lights or flag on load.
E. Chapter 484E - Accidents And Reports Of Accidents:
NRS
Section
484E.010
Duty to stop at scene of accident involving death or personal injury; penalty.
484E.020
Duty to stop at scene of accident involving damage to vehicle or property.
484E.030
Duty to give information and render aid.
484E.040
Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property.
484E.050
Immediate notice to police officer of accident involving unattended vehicle or other property.
484E.060
Seizure and impoundment of vehicle for failure to surrender license plates and certificate of
registration upon suspension of registration.
484E.070
Written report of accident to department by driver or owner; exceptions; confidentiality; use as
evidence at trial.
484E.080
Failure to report; false report; penalties.
484E.090
State Registrar of Vital Statistics to report death to department.
484E.100
Garage or repair shop to maintain record of repairs made to vehicle involved in accident.
484E.110
Police to report to department; report not confidential.
484E.120
Forms for report of accident.
484E.130
Department to tabulate and analyze reports.
(Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 515/640
Chapter 3
ELKO ABANDONED VEHICLE CODE
7-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the ELKO ABANDONED VEHICLE CODE. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-2: DEFINITION:
"Department" means the Nevada state department of motor vehicles. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
Every person who abandons a vehicle is responsible for the cost of removal and disposition of such vehicle. An
abandoned vehicle is presumed to have been abandoned by the registered owner thereof. The registered owner may
not rebut this presumption by showing that he transferred his interest in the abandoned vehicle unless he complied
with the provisions set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes sections 482.399 through 482.420, inclusive. (Ord. 252, 7-12-
1977)
7-3-4: AUTHORITY FOR REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
Any police officer of the city, who has reason to believe that a vehicle has been abandoned within the city, may remove
such vehicle from any public property or, at the request of the owner or person in possession or control of any private
property, from such private property. Any person who removes an abandoned vehicle pursuant to this section shall take
suchvehicle to the nearest garage or other place designated by the chief of police for storage. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-5: APPRAISAL REQUIREMENT:
The chief of police shall have the vehicle appraised within five (5) days of its removal by a person designated by the
chief of police. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-6: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
The chief of police shall, within forty eight (48) hours after the appraisal:
A. Notify the director of the department of the removal of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain:
1. A description of the vehicle.
2. The appraised value of the vehicle.
3. A statement as to whether the vehicle will be junked, dismantled or otherwise disposed of.
B. Notify the registered owner and any person having a security interest in the vehicle by registered or certified mail
that the vehicle has been removed and will be junked or dismantled or otherwise disposed of unless the registered
owner or the person having a security interest in the vehicle responds and pays the costs of removal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 516/640
C. Failure to reclaim within fifteen (15) days after official notification, a vehicle appraised at two hundred dollars
($200.00) or less, constitutes a waiver of interest in the vehicle by any person having an interest in the vehicle.
D. If all recorded interests in the vehicle appraised at two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less is waived, either as
provided in this section or by written disclaimer by any person having an interest in the vehicle, the department shall
issue a certificate of dismantling to the automobile wrecker to whom the vehicle may have been delivered or a
certificate of ownership to the garage owner if he elects to retain the vehicle and the vehicle is equipped as required
as in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 484. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-7: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES APPRAISED AT VALUE EXCEEDING TWO HUNDRED
DOLLARS:
If the vehicle is appraised at a value of more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the chief of police shall dispose of it
as provided in section 7-3-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 252,7-12-1977)
7-3-8: LIEN ON STORED VEHICLE:
Whenever a vehicle has been removed to a garage or other place as provided by section 7-3-4 of this chapter, the
owner of the garage shall have a lien on the vehicle for the cost of towing and storing for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days. If the vehicle is appraised at a value of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less and is not reclaimed within the
period prescribed in section 7-3-6 of this chapter, the owner of the garage may satisfy his lien by retaining the vehicle
and obtaining a certificate of ownership thereto as provided in section 7-3-6 of this chapter. If the vehicle is appraised
at a value of more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and is not reclaimed within ninety (90) days, the owner of the
garage may satisfy his lien, in accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 108.267 through
108.360, inclusive. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-9: UNLAWFUL ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
No person may abandon a vehicle upon any public highway or road. No person may abandon a vehicle upon public or
private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of such
property. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-10: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF UNREGISTERED VEHICLES UNFIT FOR USE;
EXCEPTIONS:
A. Unless he first obtains a license pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 487.050, no person may for any
reason keep more than two (2) unregistered vehicles on real property owned by him or under his possession or
control if such vehicles are no longer intended for or in condition for lawful use on the highway.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
1. Premises used by licensed dealers, manufacturers or rebuilders.
2. Vehicles to be stored or used as a source for parts in conjunction with the operation or maintenance of a fleet of
vehicles for the carriage of persons or property.
3. Premises used as a farm, ranch, mine or motor vehicle repair shop.
4. Any person engaged in the restoration of one or more vehicles entitled to registration as a horseless carriage
orotherwise having classic or historic significance. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
7-3-11: PENALTIES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 517/640
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 252, 7-12-1977)
Chapter 4
MOTORCYCLES AND MOPEDS
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms whenever used in this chapter shall have the meaning indicated:
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way maintained by a public authority when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
MOPED: A vehicle which looks and handles essentially like a bicycle and can be propelled either by peddling or by a
small engine and: 1) is designed to travel with not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but is not a
tractor; and 2) is capable of a maximum speed of not more than thirty (30) miles per hour on a flat surface with not
more than one percent (1%) grade in any direction when the motor is engaged.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle equipped with a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to travel on
not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, including a power cycle, but excluding a tractor and a
moped. (Ord. 247, 5-24-1977)
7-4-2: DRIVER'S LICENSE; EXCEPTION:
Except for a nonresident who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and is authorized by the state of his residency to
drive a motorcycle, a person shall not drive a motorcycle upon a highway unless such person holds a valid motorcycle
driver's license issued pursuant to the laws of the state which authorize such person to drive or operate said
motorcycle. (Ord. 247, 5-24-1977)
7-4-3: OPERATION:
A motorcycle or moped shall not be driven upon a highway while carrying more than one person unless such
motorcycle or mopedis designed to carry more than one person. A passenger shall ride either behind the driver and
astride the permanent or regular seat which was designed for two (2) persons, or astride another seat firmly attached
at the rear of the driver or in a sidecar attached. Every such motorcycle or moped designed for transporting a
passenger shall be equipped with footrests adjusted to fit such passenger. (Ord. 247, 5-24-1977)
7-4-4: OPERATIONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No driver of a two (2) or three (3) wheel vehicle shall carry any other person on, upon or within such vehicle on any
street or highway in the city, except as hereinafter provided; provided, however, that if any two (2) or three (3) wheel
motor vehicle shall have either a double seating device with double foot rests or a sidecar attachment providing a
separate seat space with such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated
entirely within the body of said sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of fifteen
(15) years or has had an operator's license for at least six (6) months to carry a passenger. A demonstration ride by a
licensed dealer or his employee is excepted from the provisions hereof. No motorcycle or moped shall be ridden upon
any sidewalk of the city. Handlebars on motorcycles and mopeds shall not exceed twelve inches (12") in height,
measured from the crown or point of attachment. No person shall operate any motorcycle or moped equipped with
handlebars that are more than fifteen inches (15") in height above that portion of the seat occupied by the driver and
depressed by the weight of the driver. No rider of a motorcycle or moped shall hold to any moving vehicle for the
purpose of being propelled. No driver of a motorcycle or moped shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic
traveling in the same direction, authorized emergency vehicles excepted. (Ord. 247, 5-24-1977)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 518/640
7-4-5: SPEED:
No person shall operate any motorcycle or moped at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted; provided,
however, at no time may an operator under the age of fifteen (15) years or who has had an operator's license for less
than six (6) months operate a motorcycle or moped at a speed greater than thirty five (35) miles per hour. (Ord. 247, 5-
24-1977)
7-4-6: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
The following equipment shall be required on all motorcycles and all mopeds except on actual trail rides conducted
outside of public roads and highways:
A. Rear View Mirrors: All motorcycles and mopeds covered under this chapter shall be equipped with two (2) mirrors,
containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches (3") in diameter, mounted one on each side of the
vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the highway for a distance of two hundred feet
(200') to the rear of his vehicle.
B. Windshield: All motorcycles and mopeds covered under this chapter shall be equipped with a windshield of sufficient
quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield the
operator shall wear glasses, goggles, or face shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects.
C. Brakes: All motorcycles and mopeds covered under this chapter shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control
the movement of same to stop and hold such vehicles, including two (2) separate means of applying brakes; one
means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means shall be effective to apply the brakes
to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle, which shall
display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than
one hundred feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon application of the rear
service brakes.
D. Speedometer: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with a properly operating speedometer
capable of registering at least a maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle.
E. Fenders: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with a fender over each wheel. All fenders shall
be of the type provided by the manufacturer, but can be made of other material.
F. Lights: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall carry at least one lighted headlamp capable of showing a white
light visible at least five hundred feet (500') in the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one taillamp
mounted on the rear which when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least five hundred feet (500') to
the rear, and such lights required by this subsection shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during
the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time when,
due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly
discernible at a distance of at least one thousand feet (1,000') ahead. Every such headlamp on a vehicle covered
under this subsection shall be located at a height of not more than fifty four inches (54") or less than twenty four
inches (24") from the ground as measured from the center of the lamp to the level ground upon which such
vehiclestands without a load.
G. Muffler: Every motorcycle and moped operated or driven on public highways of the city shall be equipped with a
muffler or silencer which will reduce the sound of the explosion of the engine to the greatest possible degree;
provided, that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or permit to be driven or operated any motor
vehicle at any time with the muffler cut out or not in operation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 519/640
H. Headgear: No person under the age of seventeen (17) years shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered under
this chapter unless such person is equipped with and wearing on the head a safety helmet of the type and design
manufactured for the use of the operators of such vehicles. A swell foundation approved type safety helmet or the
equivalent is acceptable. All safety helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chinstraps and be of the type as not
to distort the view of the driver. The chinstrap shall be fastened in place.
I. Shoes: No person shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered under this chapter unless such person is wearing
protective foot covering. Sandals, thongs and open toed shoes are not considered protective foot covering.
J. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to operators or passengers of three (3) wheeled vehicles which have an
enclosed passenger compartment.
K. Reflectors: Every motorcycle and moped shall carry on the rear at least one reflector, which shall be mounted at a
height not less than twenty inches (20") or more than sixty inches (60") from the ground as measured from the
center of the reflector to the level ground upon which such motorcycle or moped stands without a load. Each such
reflector shall be of a size and character and so mounted as to be visible at night from all distances within three
hundred feet (300') when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps.
L. Turn Signals: Every motorcycle manufactured after January 1, 1973, which is sold or offered for sale and which is
intended to be operated upon the highways of this state, shall be equipped with electric turn signal lamps. Such
lamps shall be located on the front and rear and shall indicate an intention to turn by flashing lights in the direction
toward which the turn is to be made. The lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a white or amber light, or a shade of light
between white and amber. The lamp showing to the rear shall be mounted on the same level and as widely spaced
laterally as practicable, and, when signaling shall emit a red or amber light, or any shade of light between red and
amber. (Ord. 247, 5-24-1977)
7-4-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in title 1,
chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 261, 6-27-1978)
Chapter 5
RECKLESS DRIVING; DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE1
(Rep. by Ord. 833, 8-14-2018)
Chapter 6
USE OF RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES
7-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the use of recreational motor vehicles on publicly
owned land. "Public land" is all land owned in fee by a political subdivision of the state within the city limits and under
the jurisdiction of the city, excluding therefrom public streets and alleys. This chapter is not intended to allow what state
law prohibits nor to prohibit what state law expressly allows. It is intended to prevent a public nuisance. (Ord. 486, 6-
10-1997)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 520/640
7-6-2: DEFINITION:
"Recreational motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled
vehicle used for recreational purposes, including a trail bike or other all terrain vehicle, or motor vehicle licensed for
highway operation which is being used for off road recreational purposes. (Ord. 486, 6-10-1997)
7-6-3: OPERATION:
No person shall:
A. Operate a recreational motor vehicle on public streets or alleys carelessly or recklessly in disregard of the rights or
the safety of others or in any manner which endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property.
B. Operate a recreational motor vehicle on public land within three hundred feet (300') of any inhabited residential,
commercial or industrial structure, except in those areas designated in section 7-6-4 of this chapter.
C. Alter, mutilate or remove any notice or sign relating to recreational motor vehicles on property in which he has no
legal interest. (Ord. 486, 6-10-1997)
7-6-4: EXCEPTIONS:
Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions, a recreational motor vehicle may be operated on public lands under the
jurisdiction of the city if any of the following exceptions apply:
A. Recreational motor vehicles may be operated by governmental entities for official use.
B. Recreational motor vehicles may be operated on public land owned by the city in any area officially designated by
the city council for use of recreational motor vehicles. If any area is so designated, it shall be depicted on a city map
to be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. A copy of the map, together with any applicable rules and regulations
governing the use of recreational motor vehicles, shall be provided to any person requesting the information. (Ord.
486, 6-10-1997)
7-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of
title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 486, 6-10-1997)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
SALE, EXCHANGE OR LEASE OF CITY REAL PROPERTY
8-1-1: REQUIREMENT AND PROCESS FOR USING APPRAISERS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 521/640
A. The city shall comply with the requirements set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 268.059, and any amendments
thereto approved by resolution of the city council, regarding the sale or lease of real property.
B. The city shall maintain a list of all appraisers qualified to conduct general appraisals in Elko County based on the
records maintained by Nevada real estate division of the department of business and industry, or any other state
division or department which shall hereafter take over the records, pertaining to the qualifications of appraisers,
which list shall be updated annually on or about January 1. The city manager or designee shall determine the
qualifications of the foregoing appraisers qualified to conduct business in the city of Elko, and shall compile a list of
appraisers to present to the governing body. The foregoing list of appraisers shall be: 1) reviewed and updated
annually on or about January 1, 2) organized at random, and 3) rotated from time to time. The governing body's
review and approval of such list shall be sufficient for verification of qualifications pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes 268.059, and any amendments thereto.
C. An appraiser chosen pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 268.059(1), or any amendments thereto approved by
resolution of the city council, must provide a disclosure statement which includes, without limitation, all sources of
income of the appraiser that may constitute a conflict of interest and any relationship of the appraiser with the
property owner or the owner of an adjoining property.
D. An appraiser shall not perform an appraisal on any real property offered for sale or lease by the governing body if
the appraiser or a person related to the appraiser within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity has an interest
in the real property or an adjoining property. (Ord. 800, 1-26-2016)
8-1-2: NOTICE FOR SALE OR LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY:
The city shall comply with the requirements set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 268.061, and any amendments
thereto approved by resolution of the city council, regarding notice for sale or lease of real property. (Ord. 800, 1-26-
2016)
8-1-3: RESOLUTION REQUIRED FOR AND METHOD OF SALE OR LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY:
The city shall comply with the requirements set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 268.062, and any amendments
thereto approved by resolution of the city council, regarding a resolution declaring intention to sell or lease property at
auction. (Ord. 800, 1-26-2016)
8-1-4: EXCEPTIONS TO PUBLIC AUCTION SALES:
The city shall comply with the requirements set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 268.063, and any amendments
thereto approved by resolution of the city council, regarding sale, lease or disposal of real property for redevelopment
or economic development purposes. (Ord. 800, 1-26-2016)
8-1-5: ADDITIONAL POWER OF THE CITY:
The city may:
A. Have and use a common seal, which it may alter at pleasure.
B. Purchase, receive, hold and use personal and real property wherever situated.
C. Except as otherwise provided in sections 8-1-1, 8-1-2 and 8-1-3 of this chapter, sell, convey and dispose of such
personal and real property for the common benefit.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 522/640
D. Determine what are public uses with respect to powers of eminent domain.
E. Acquire, own and operate a public transit system both within and without the city.
F. Receive bequests, devises, gifts and donations of all kinds of property wherever situated in fee simple, in trust or
otherwise, for charitable or other purposes and do anything necessary to carry out the purposes of such bequests,
devises, gifts and donations with full power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of such property in
accordance with the terms of such bequest, devise, gift or donation. (Ord. 800, 1-26-2016)
8-1-6: POWERS REGARDING EMINENT DOMAIN:
A. The city council may reconvey all the right, title and interest of the city in and to any land donated, dedicated,
acquired in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 37, or purchased under the threat of an eminent
domain proceeding, for a public park, public square, public landing, agricultural fairground, aviation field, automobile
parking ground or facility for the accommodation of the traveling public, or land held in trust for the public for any
other public use or uses, or any part thereof, to the person:
1. By whom the land was donated or dedicated or to his heirs, assigns or successors, upon such terms as may be
prescribed by a resolution of the governing body; or
2. From whom the land was acquired in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 37, or purchased under
the threat of an eminent domain proceeding, or to his heirs, assigns or successors, for an amount equal to the
amount paid for the land by the governing body.
B. If the governing body determines that maintenance of the property is unnecessarily burdensome to the city or that
reconveyance would be in the best interest of the city and its residents, the governing body may formally adopt a
resolution stating that determination. Upon the adoption of the resolution, the presiding officer of the governing body
shall issue a written offer of reconveyance to the person from whom the land was received or acquired or his
successor in interest.
C. If the person from whom the real property was received or acquired, or his successor in interest:
1. Accepts the offer of reconveyance within forty five (45) days after the date of the offer, the governing body shall
execute a deed or reconveyance.
2. Refused to accept the offer of reconveyance or states in writing that he is unable to accept the reconveyance, the
governing body may sell or lease the real property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 800, 1-
26-2016)
Chapter 2
UTILITY OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC
EASEMENTS, SMART DIG REQUIREMENTS, AND CITY
EXCAVATION PERMITS
8-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as: CONDITIONS OF UTILITY OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC RIGHTSOF-
WAY OR PUBLIC EASEMENTS, SMART DIG REQUIREMENTS AND CITY EXCAVATION PERMITS. (Ord. 835,
3-12-2019)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS, TERMS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 523/640
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number.
COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE: The technology, products and network connections that allow for the
transmission of communications over large distances.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: Plans, profiles, cross-sections and other required details for the construction of public
improvements, prepared in conjunction with the project and in compliance with standards of design and construction
approved by the City.
EMERGENCY: Sudden unexpected occurrence that involves clear and imminent danger and requires immediate
action to prevent or mitigate loss of life or damage to health, property or essential public services.
EXCAVATE OR EXCAVATION: Any work or action in which earth, rock, pavement, or other materials in the ground or
underwater in a public right-of-way is moved, removed, or otherwise displaced in any of the following ways: grading,
trenching, digging, ditching, or any other means.
EXCAVATION PERMIT: A permit required and issued by the City for any excavation within a public right-of-way, to
include a street cut.
EXCAVATOR: Any person who engages in excavation.
LONGITUDINAL ACCESS: Access to or the use of any part of a right-of-way that extends generally parallel to the
right-of-way.
OPERATOR: Any person who owns, operates or maintains underground telecommunication facilities.
PERMITTEE: An excavator who is authorized to perform work pursuant to an excavation permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
PERSON: A natural person, any form of business or social organization and any other legal entity including, but not
limited to, a corporation, partnership, association, trust or unincorporated organization, or any government,
governmental agency or political subdivision of a government.
PUBLIC EASEMENT: A right to use any area or alignment that has been conveyed to the City for one or more public
purposes.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: An area or alignment that has been dedicated to the City for one or more public purposes.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Any excavation project undertaken by a public entity.
SMART DIG: The requirements of this chapter pertaining to the placement of telecommunication facilities in
excavations within rights-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION: The transmission of signs, signals, messages, words, writing, images, sound or information
of any nature by wire, radio, optical, or electromagnetic systems. Telecommunication occurs when the exchange of
information between communication participants includes the use of technology.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Any cable, line, fiber, wire, conduit, inner duct, access manhole, hand hole, tower,
hut, pedestal, pole, box, splice panel, transmitting equipment, receiving equipment, power equipment or other
equipment, system or device that is used to transmit, receive, produce or distribute a signal for telecommunications
purposes via wireless, wireline, electronic or optical means, and any other outside plant materials provided by the City.
USA: Underground Service Alert (USA), a non-profit mutual benefit organization operating free call centers for
excavators who are digging, blasting, trenching, drilling, grading, excavating, or otherwise moving any earth for the
purpose of providing information about the locations of underground facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Any underground or submerged conductor, pipe, structure, conduit, or equipment used or
installed for use in providing electric, communications, gas, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, reuse water or any other
underground works. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 524/640
8-2-3: CITY EXCAVATION PERMITS:
A. Permit Required: Prior to cutting or excavating within any public rights-of-way or public easements within the City
limits, an excavation permit must be issued by the City.
B. State Permits Applicable: Prior to the cutting or excavation of any State highway or route within the City limits, all
State permits must be obtained and a copy of each such permit must be filed with the City.
C. Traffic Control And Construction Plans; Depth Of Facilities: An applicant for an excavation permit shall submit with
the application a traffic control plan and detailed construction plans, which plans must be approved by the City prior
to issuance of the excavation permit. Two (2) copies of the traffic control plan and two (2) copies of the construction
plans shall be submitted with the application. The minimum depth of any excavation in a City-owned right-of-way
shall be twenty four inches (24") below the surface of the ground or, in cases of excavations below asphalt paving
or sidewalks, a minimum of twenty four inches (24") below the bottom of the pavement or sidewalk.
D. Notification Prior To Excavation: The permittee must notify USA at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the start of any
excavation.
E. Presence Of Form And Permit: A copy of the USA Dig Alert Location Request Form and a copy of the City
excavation permit shall be present on the job site at all times work is in progress.
F. Cut Unavoidable: An applicant for an excavation permit requesting permission to perform a street cut shall
demonstrate that the cut is unavoidable and that the permittee has fully evaluated other alignments which would
avoid a street cut.
G. Work Without Excavation Permit: If a person performs an excavation without a permit, except in an emergency as
defined in this chapter, the permittee shall thereafter pay double the regular permit fee for that excavation project.
H. Expiration Date: An excavation permit shall expire on a date determined by the City, which date shall be no more
than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. If a temporary patch is required due to a street cut, the permittee
shall pay an additional fee as established by resolution of the City Council.
I. Revocation Of Permit: The City may revoke an excavation permit at any time for the failure of the permittee to comply
with this chapter. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-3-1: SMART DIG REQUIREMENTS:
A. Smart dig requirements apply to excavations at least one hundred feet (100') in length.
B. Operators and excavators are not required to comply with smart dig requirements if an excavation is made due to an
emergency as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-3-2: MANDATORY INSTALLATION OF CONDUIT:
A. Installation Of Conduit In Rights-Of-Way For Public Works Projects: Whenever a person undertakes a public works
project within a public right-of-way involving the planning, construction, reconstruction, or repaving of the public
right-of-way, the project shall include, to the maximum extent practical and feasible, installation of underground
communication infrastructure by the person performing the work.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 525/640
1. The City may grant a telecommunications provider a license for longitudinal access or wireless access to a rightof-
way for the installation, operation, and maintenance of a telecommunications facility.
2. Before granting a telecommunications provider a license for longitudinal access or wireless access to a right-ofway,
the City must first enter into a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory agreement with the
telecommunications provider. Such an agreement must be approved by the Elko City Council, which approval
may be granted, conditioned or withheld in its discretion.
B. Installation Of Conduit In Rights-Of-Way For Private Excavations:
1. To the maximum extent practicable and feasible, the City shall condition all permits for private excavations within
public rights-of-way on the execution of an agreement providing for the installation of underground
communications infrastructure on behalf of the City by the permittee, which agreement shall, without limitation,
contain the following terms and conditions:
a. Upon satisfactory completion of the installation, the City shall pay to the permittee the incremental additional
cost of installing the communications infrastructure, which cost shall not include any amounts that would
otherwise have been paid by the permittee had the communications infrastructure not been installed;
b. The City shall bear all reasonable and properly documented design and construction costs associated solely
with and required for the installation of the communications infrastructure.
2. The communications infrastructure shall automatically be owned by the City upon installation without any further
action on the part of either the permittee or the City.
3. The City may, at its sole option and expense, require the permittee conducting the excavation to extend the
excavation, where practical, to permit the connection of the communications infrastructure to existing
communications infrastructure owned by the City. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-4: ASPHALT PAVEMENT REPAIR:
The permittee shall receive City approval for the construction of temporary and permanent asphalt pavement repairs
required as a result of the excavation. All asphalt repairs shall be performed by a properly licensed contractor. The
permittee shall be responsible for properly compacted placement of all backfill and base required to establish a smooth
road surface, shall perform appropriate compaction tests and shall provide the test results to the City. If repairs are
made by the City, the permittee shall reimburse the City for expenses incurred to construct temporary and permanent
pavement patches at rates established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-5: EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS:
When an emergency requires any excavation, the permittee making the excavation shall notify the City Police
Department. The permittee shall provide the Police Department with the location of the excavation, the start time and a
description of the project. The permittee must obtain a City excavation permit on the next business day. The permittee
shall be responsible for properly compacted placement of all backfill and base required to establish a smooth road
surface, shall perform appropriate compaction tests and shall provide the test results to the City. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-6: NEW CITY STREET CUTS:
Except in an emergency, if a permittee wishes to excavate within a street or paved alley that is five (5) years old or
less, the permittee must receive City Council approval prior to excavation. In granting approval for a new excavation
permit pursuant to this section, the City Council may place any conditions on the permit it determines are reasonably
necessary to protect the City streets. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-7: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 526/640
All pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances which shall be laid and used shall be
installed, constructed and maintained in accordance with any applicable standard details and specifications, as
adopted and amended by the codes and ordinances of the City, all applicable State Statutes, regulations and orders,
(to include all applicable regulations and orders of the Nevada Public Utilities Commission), and in a good and
workmanlike manner, and the pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances shall be
maintained in compliance with all applicable standards adopted by the City. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-8: NONINTERFERENCE WITH EXISTING UTILITIES:
All pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances laid or placed by any person shall be
located in the public roads in the City so as not to obstruct or interfere with any pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or
other structures already installed. The City shall, upon request, provide to the permittee available information pertaining
to whether or not there is any such interference or obstruction; provided, due to the passage of time, the City may no
longer have records documenting the locations of certain underground facilities within the City rights-of-way and,
accordingly, nothing herein shall be interpreted as creating a legal obligation on the part of the City to provide accurate
information as to the locations of existing pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances. It
shall be the permittee's responsibility to see that no interference or damage occurs prior to and/or during excavation.
(Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-9: RELOCATION OF UTILITIES:
Any person who lays or places any pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances shall
relocate, without expense to the City, any such pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and
appurtenances when made necessary by any lawful change in any public street, road or highway by the City. (Ord.
835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-10: REPAIR OF PUBLIC ROADS AND CITY STREET CUTS:
If any portion of a sidewalk, curb, gutter, alley, public road or right-of-way shall be damaged by reason of defects in any
of the pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances installed, utilized, maintained or
constructed, or by reason of any cause whatsoever, including the subsidence of any cut in the public road, or the
existence of any pipes, sewers, drains, lines, valves or other structures and appurtenances constructed or maintained
under this chapter, the person who initially constructed such improvements shall, at his own cost and expense, within
ten (10) days, repair any such damage and restore such sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, alley, public road or right-of-way,
or portion thereof, to as good a condition as it existed before such excavation, disturbance, work, or other cause of
damage occurred. Any subsurface or surface installations damaged by a utility street cut or excavation of any kind in a
City right-of-way shall be repaired at the permittee's expense. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-11: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Before an excavation permit shall be issued under this chapter, any permittee, with the exception of all public utilities
under the jurisdiction of the Nevada Public Utilities Commission and having a current franchise with the City, shall file
with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance showing a minimum combined single limit liability insurance policy of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), such policy to include, but not be limited to, collapse and underground
damage. The foregoing policy shall name the City as an additional insured. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-12: BONDING:
Any person obtaining a permit under this chapter shall, before renewing or in any manner changing the surface of the
sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, highway, avenue or alley, provide the City a bond or other security guaranteeing that the
obligor of the bond will pay to the City the amount of the bond should the permittee fail, neglect or refuse to complete
the work, including the excavating or filling in of the sidewalk, curb, gutter, public street, highway, avenue or alley and
all public utilities in proper condition to the satisfaction of the City after the work provided for in the permit has been
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 527/640
finished; provided, however, that instead of special bonds to cover particular work, any person intending to make
excavations in sidewalks, curbs, gutters, public streets, alleys, or any public places in the City may make and maintain
with the City a general bond in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), which general bond shall be
conditioned and used for the same purpose as the special bond hereinbefore described in this section, covering all
work to be done instead of any particular piece of work. So long as such general bond is maintained at the sum of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the permittee shall not be required to provide the aforementioned special
bond, but shall be required to comply with all other provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, public
utilities under the jurisdiction of the Nevada Public Utilities Commission and having a current franchise with the City
shall be considered bonded for purposes of this section. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-13: PERMIT FEES:
A. Payment Required: All applicants for a City excavation permit shall pay to the Building Department permit fees as
set by resolution of the City Council.
B. Estimated Permit Fees; When Paid: All estimated excavation permit fees shall be paid at the time of filing the initial
application.
C. Final Fees: Final permit fees shall be paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the approval of the work by the City.
(Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-14: CONTRACTOR AND BUSINESS LICENSES:
All permittees shall be licensed State contractors and possess a current City business license and shall provide copies
of the foregoing licenses to the City prior to the commencement of work. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-15: INSPECTION:
The permittee shall schedule all City inspections twenty four (24) hours in advance. Failure of the permittee to obtain
inspections of the work to the extent reasonably necessary to enable the City to determine compliance with this Code,
to include model codes adopted therein, shall result in the revocation of the permit. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-16: WATER DRAINAGE:
The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining surface water drainage at all times during performance of the work,
to include redirecting water drainage where appropriate, except as otherwise directed by the City. The permittee shall,
upon request by the City, submit to the City an appropriate plan for water drainage control, in which event the work may
not commence or continue until or unless the water drainage control plan has been approved by the City. The
requirements set forth in a water drainage control plan shall, upon approval by the City, become requirements of the
excavation permit. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
8-2-17: ABANDONED UTILITY FACILITIES:
A permittee with utilities in a City right-of-way that the permittee has abandoned or intends to abandon may be required
by the City, in the City's discretion, to remove the utilities at the permittee's expense or, in the alternative, to reimburse
the City for the cost removal of the utilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the permittee is a public utility under the
jurisdiction of the Nevada Public Utilities Commission and has a current franchise with the City, in the event of an
inconsistency between the requirements of this section and the terms of a franchise agreement, the terms of the
franchise agreement shall prevail. (Ord. 835, 3-12-2019)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 528/640
Chapter 3
PARK COMMISSION
8-3-1: APPOINTMENT OF PARK COMMISSION:
The city council shall have the right, power and authority, by resolution, to appoint a park commission consisting of five
(5) persons, who shall be residents of the city and whose duty it shall be to adopt rules and regulations for the
protection of trees, bushes and shrubs situated within the city. (Ord. 47, 8-15-1929)
8-3-2: REMUNERATION:
The park commission shall serve without pay but shall be allowed the reasonable expenses incurred by it or the
members thereof in connection with their duties as such. (Ord. 47, 8-15-1929)
8-3-3: INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT, DUTIES:
The park commission is hereby authorized to appoint and employ an inspector, whose salary shall be fixed and paid by
the city council. Such inspector shall be expert in the matter of diagnosing ailments and diseases of trees, bushes and
shrubs, providing the proper remedies therefor. He shall act under the direction of the park commission, but subject at
all times to the direction and approval of the city council. Such inspector shall have the right, at all reasonable times
and hours, to enter upon any premises for the purpose of the performance of his duties. (Ord. 47, 8-15-1929)
8-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
It shall be the duty of every owner and every occupant of premises upon which are growing any trees, bushes or
shrubs, to comply with all rules and regulations promulgated by the park commission, and particularly to obey all orders
of the park commission with reference to the spraying or other treatment of trees, bushes and shrubs. (Ord. 47, 8-15-
1929)
8-3-5: NOTICE OF RULES:
The park commission shall give such notice as to it may be deemed reasonable, either by publication or by posting, or
by general newspaper publicity, as to it may seem proper, to convey to the public information as to the rules thus
promulgated. (Ord. 47, 8-15-1929)
Chapter 4
FRANCHISE
8-4-1: FRANCHISE:
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO THE WESTERN PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY, OVER CERTAIN
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
WHEREAS, THE WESTERN PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY is about to start the construction of spur lines through
the streets and highways in the city of Elko; and
WHEREAS, an emergency exists as no franchise has been obtained; and
WHEREAS, irreparable damage will be occasioned by delay, by consent of the majority of the whole city council, at a
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 529/640
regular or meeting of said city council of the city of Elko, convened on the 3rd day of June, 1924.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ELKO:
That the right, permission, privilege and franchise to construct, maintain and operate by steam or other lawful motive
power, a single or double track railroad of standard gouge, be and the same is hereby granted to the WESTERN
PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY, a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the state of
California, and to its successors and assigns upon, along and across all streets, ways and public places along the
following route:
Beginning at a point on the easterly line of Third Street, distant north 31 degrees 35 minutes west approximately 140
feet from a concrete monument located in said Third Street; then crossing said Third Street south 44 degrees 03
minutes west approximately 70 feet; thence on a curve to the left approximately 10 feet to the westerly line of said
Third Street; thence continuing on said curve approximately 258 feet; thence south 33 degrees 19 minutes west
approximately 300 feet, crossing Second Street and Commercial Street to the northerly line of Block AA, thence
continuing south 33 degrees 19 minutes west approximately 150 feet to a point on the easterly side of First Street
distant thereon approximately 69 feet from the southwest corner of Block AA, thence south 33 degrees 19 minutes
west approximately 36 feet to the westerly line of said First Street; thence south 33 degrees 19 minutes west
approximately 128 feet to the northerly line of Main Street; thence south 33degrees 19 minutes west approximately 193
feet to the northerly right of way line of the main line of The Western Pacific Railroad Company.
The franchise and authority hereby granted is granted subject to the following conditions:
The franchise and authority hereinbefore granted is granted subject to such reasonable police regulations as hereafter
may be imposed by the city council of the city of Elko, or by the proper governing body of said city of Elko, or its
successors.
The said WESTERN PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY shall, when required by the city council of the city of Elko,
construct and maintain on off streets crossing the line of railroad herein above described, good and sufficient crossings
for the free and convenient passage of pedestrians, teams and vehicles, the said crossings to be of the same width as
the traveled portion of such streets, and the space between the rails and tracks and for two feet (2') outside of the
outside rails at such crossings shall be planked or grade in such a manner that vehicles can readily cross the aforesaid
track or tracks.
The said WESTERN PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY shall, when required by the city council of the city of Elko,
construct under its tracks sufficient culverts or waterways to allow the proper drainage of such streets as intersect the
line of railroad hereinabove described.
This franchise shall become effective thirty (30) days after its passage and shall continue for a period of fifty (50) years
thereafter. (Ord. 31, 6-3-1924)
Chapter 5
SOUTHWEST GAS CORPORATION FRANCHISE
(Rep. by Ord. 793, 6-9-2015)
Chapter 6
BULLION ROAD SEWER
8-6-1: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DESIGNATED:
The city council does hereby declare its determination to make certain public improvements by constructing a sewer
main along Bullion Road (also known as a westerly extension of Wilson Avenue) and Morse Lane, and portions thereof
within the city; to levy a special assessment and to defray so much of the entire cost and expense of making such
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 530/640
improvements along said streets and portions thereof hereinafter particularly described as may be allowed by law
according to a frontage basis against the assessable lands, abutting upon the street and portions thereof containing
said improvements, which lands are also specifically benefited by said improvements.
The city council has directed the city engineer to make estimates of the expense of the improvements provided for in
this chapter, together with appropriate plats and diagrams of the work and of the locality to be improved, and to file
such estimates, plats and diagrams with the city clerk for public examination. On July 11, said estimates, plats and
diagrams were filed with the city clerk by the city engineer, and said estimates, plats and diagrams are now on file in
the office of the city clerk and available for public examination.
The estimated total cost of said improvements is fourteen thousand four hundred seventy two dollars ($14,472.00) for
the labor, equipment, engineering and materials. The cost and expense of this improvement shall include the cost of
surveys, plans, assessments, costs of construction and the fees and compensation properly charged in the work of
making this special assessment and shall be included as part of such assessment.
The city council hereby determines and proposes to make said improvements as they are more particularly shown and
referred to and described in said estimates, plats, diagrams and plans.
The street and portions thereof within which the city council proposes to install said improvements are those set forth in
the form of the notice of determination contained in this chapter.
The city council is of the opinion, and hereby finds, that the improvements provided for in this chapter are local
improvements, the benefits of which are special to the lands abutting upon or adjacent to or otherwise benefited by
suchimprovements, rather than general or public.
In the opinion of the city council, four and one-fourth percent (41/4%), or six hundred fifteen dollars seventy seven cents
($615.77) amount of the expenses of this improvement is justly apportionable to lands belonging to the city abutting on
such improvement and to any interior squares or spaces formed by the intersection of streets where the abutting
property is taxable, and such proportionate share of the city shall be paid from the general fund or from the proper
street or district street fund, or partly from each, as the council shall determine to be just, and the balance of the
expense of this improvement shall be assessed upon the taxable lots and premises abutting upon such improvement
or the streets in which such improvement is placed in proportion to their number of feet frontage.
In no case shall the amount of any special assessment upon any lot or premises for this improvement exceed the value
of such lot or premises as shown upon the latest tax list or assessment roll for state and county taxation. Any cost
exceeding the value of such lot or premises which would otherwise be chargeable upon said lot or premises, shall be
paid from the general fund of the city.
The assessments in connection with this improvement shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Elko city
charter.
The city council will meet at the city office, Elko, Nevada, on September 12, 1967, at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M., to hear and consider any suggestions and objections that may be made by the parties in interest to the proposed
improvements, or any matters relating thereto.
Unless the owners of more than one-half (1/2) of the frontage to be assessed shall file written objections thereto at or
prior to such meeting, such improvement or work shall be ordered.
The city clerk shall keep plats, diagrams and plans of the work and location to be improved, together with the estimates
of the expense thereof, on file in her office for public inspection and examination and shall give notice of the filing of
such estimates, plats, diagrams and plans with the city clerk for examination of the proposed improvements and
location of the improvements, and of the time the city council will meet and consider any suggestions and objections
that may be made by any parties in interest to said proposed improvements. The said notice shall be given by
publication in the "Elko Independent", a newspaper published in the city of Elko, for at least two (2) weeks and in
addition by posting said notice in at least three (3) public places in the city, one of which shall be in or near the post
office of the city, and in addition by posting notices in three (3) public placesnear the site of said proposed work. The
city clerk is authorized and directed to sign said notice and it shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF DETERMINATION AND INTENTION OF THE CITY OF ELKO TO CONSTRUCT A CERTAIN
SEWER MAIN WITHIN BULLION ROAD AND MORSE LANE STREETS, AND PORTIONS THEREOF, AND TO
DEFRAY BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT SO MUCH OF THE ENTIRE COST AND EXPENSE THEREOF AS MAY BE
ALLOWED BY LAW ACCORDING TO A FRONTAGE BASIS.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 531/640
Notice is hereby given that on August 8th, 1967, the Board of Supervisors of the City of Elko adopted and approved
an Ordinance declaring the Boards's determination to make certain public improvements by constructing sewer mains
within the Bullion Road and Morse Lane Streets and portions thereof within the City and to defray, by special
assessment, so much of the entire cost and expense of making such improvements as may be allowed by law,
according to a frontage basis against the assessable lands and premises abutting upon the streets and portions
thereof containing said improvements.
In no case shall the amount of any special assessment upon any lot or premises exceed the full value of said lot or
premises as shown upon the latest tax list or assessment roll for State and County taxation, and any added cost which
shall exceed the full value of any lot or premises shall be paid from the general funds of the City.
The properties to be improved by the sewer main are those adjoining and abutting upon the following described
streets and portions thereof:
Beginning at the end of the existing 8" sewer main which is located in Bullion Road (or a westerly extension of
Wilson Avenue) and running southwesterly in or under Bullion Road to the center of the intersection of Bullion Road
and Morse Lane, as Morse Lane is shown upon the RECORD OF SURVEY filed in the Office of the Elko County
Recorder under File No. 16823 on September 25, 1964, and from the center of such intersection thence southerly in or
under Morse Lane a distance of approximately 1,186.88 feet to the center of the Cul-de-Sac which is at the end of
Morse Lane, this being the end of the proposed sewer main.
The estimated cost of this improvement is $14,472.00 for thelabor, equipment, engineering and materials necessary,
plus any cost of surveys, plans, assessments, fees and compensation properly chargeable to this work of improvement
and related incidental expenses to be included. The City shall pay from its general fund, or other proper funds, four and
one-fourth percent (41/4%), or $615.77 amount of the estimate as its apportionable share of the expense of such
improvement for lands belonging to the City abutting on such improvement and for any interior squares or spaces
formed by the intersection of streets involved. The balance of the expense of this improvement shall be assessed upon
the taxable lots and premises abutting upon such improvement or the streets on which such improvement is placed in
proportion to the number of feet frontage and in accordance with the Elko City Charter.
Said Ordinance adopted and approved August 8th, 1967, and the plats and diagrams and plans of the work and
locality to be improved, together with the estimates of the expense thereof, are on file for public inspection and
examination in the Office of the City Clerk, Elko, Nevada. All persons interested are hereby referred to the same for
further information.
The sewer main will be constructed of eight (8) inch sewer main pipe.
Said Board of Supervisors will meet at the City Hall, Elko, Nevada, on the 12th day of September, 1967, at the hour
of 7:00 P.M., to hear and consider any suggestions and objections which may be made by parties in interest to the
proposed improvements, or any matters relating thereto. Unless the owners of more than one-half of the frontage to be
assessed shall file written objections thereto, at or prior to such meeting, such improvements or work shall be ordered.
DATED this 8th day of August, 1967.
ALICE GEYER, City Clerk
(SEAL)
(Ord. 174, 8-8-1967)
Chapter 7
STREET VACATION PROCEDURES
8-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the STREET VACATION PROCEDURE. (Ord. 259, 4-11-1978)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 532/640
8-7-2: STREET DEFINED:
When used in this chapter, "street" includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, viaduct, public easement,
public rights of way and other ways. (Ord. 259, 4-11-1978)
8-7-3: PROCEDURE:
A. Proposal By City; Petition By Owner: If it is determined by a majority vote of the city council that it is in the best
interest of the city and that no person will be materially injured thereby, the city council, by motion, may propose the
realignment, change, vacation, adjustment or abandonment of any street or any portion thereof. In addition, any
abutting owner desiring the vacation of any street or easement or portion thereof shall file a petition in writing with
the city council and the city council shall consider said petition as set forth above.
B. Referral To Planning Commission: Except for a petition for the vacation or abandonment of an easement for a public
utility owned or controlled by the city, the petition or motion shall be referred to the planning commission, which
shall report its findings and recommendations thereon to the city council. The petitioner shall, prior to the
consideration of the petition by the planning commission, pay a filing fee to the city in an amount established by
resolution of the city council and included in the appendix to this code.
C. Notice: Whenever any street, easement or portion thereof is proposed to be vacated or abandoned, the city council
shall notify by certified mail each owner of property abutting the proposed vacation or abandonment and cause a
notice to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city setting forth the extent of the
proposed vacation or abandonment and setting a date for public hearing, whichdate may be not less than ten (10)
days and not more than forty (40) days subsequent to the date the notice is first published.
D. Order Of City Council: Except as provided in subsection E of this section, if, upon public hearing, the city council is
satisfied that the public will not be materially injured by the proposed vacation or abandonment, and that it is in the
best interest of the city, it shall order the street vacated or abandoned. The city council may make the order
conditional, and the order shall become effective only upon the fulfillment of the conditions prescribed.
E. Subdivision Plan Applicability: Vacation or abandonment of a street or an easement may be approved in conjunction
with the approval of a tentative map pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.349 and the city subdivision
ordinance, and only after compliance with requirements for notification of public hearing set forth in subsection C of
this section. In such cases, recordation of the final subdivision map may substitute for recordation of the order of
vacation or abandonment.
F. Utility Easement: If a utility has an easement in or over the property being vacated or abandoned, the city council
shall provide in its order for the continuation of that easement.
G. Recording; Partial Vacation Or Abandonment: The order must be recorded in the office of the county recorder, if all
of the conditions of the order have been fulfilled, and upon the recordation, title to the street or portion thereof,
vacated or abandoned shall revert to the abutting property owners in the approximate proportion that the property
was dedicated by the abutting property owners or their predecessors in interest. In the event of a partial vacation or
abandonment of a street, where the vacated or abandoned portion is separated from the property from which it was
acquired by the unvacated portion of it, the city council may sell the vacated portion upon such terms and
conditions as it deems desirable and in the best interest of the city. If the city council so sells the vacated portion, it
shall afford the right of refusal to each abutting property owner as to that part of the vacated portion which abuts his
property, but no action may be taken by the city council to force the owner to purchase that portion and that portion
may not be sold to any person other than the owner if the sale would result in a complete of access to a street from
the abutting property.
H. Payment Of Consideration: If the street was acquired by dedication from the abutting property owners or their
predecessors in interest, no payment is required for title to the proportionate part of the street reverted to each
abutting property owner. If the street was not acquired by dedication, the governing body may make its order
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 533/640
conditional upon paymentby the abutting property owners for their proportionate part of the street such
consideration as the city council determines to be reasonable. If the city council determines that the vacation has a
public benefit, it may apply the benefit as an offset against any determination of reasonable consideration which did
not take into account the public benefit.
I. Light And Air Easement: Any easement for light and air adjacent to any vacated or abandoned street or portion
thereof is vacated or abandoned upon the vacation or abandonment of the street or the portion thereof.
J. Reservation Of Easement: In any vacation or abandonment of any street or portion of it, the city council may reserve
and except therefrom any easements, rights or interest therein which the city council may deem desirable for the
use of the city or of any public utility.
K. Authority Of City To Purchase, Sell Or Exchange: The city council shall have the power and authority to buy, sell or
exchange property when deemed necessary or proper to realign, change, vacate or otherwise adjust any street or
any portion thereof. Any such purchase, sale or exchange shall be negotiated by the city through its city manager.
L. Certain Provisions Not Applicable: The provisions of chapter 1 of this title shall not apply to any purchase, sale,
exchange or other proceedings and actions taken under this street vacation procedure chapter. (Ord. 546, 9-12-
2000)
8-7-4: RATIFICATION OF PREVIOUS VACATIONS:
All vacations of streets, as defined in this chapter, heretofore made by the city are hereby ratified and confirmed,
subject to the terms and conditions contained in the order or resolution of vacation. (Ord. 259, 4-11-1978)
Chapter 8
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM FRANCHISE FEES
8-8-1: FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; FEES:
A. NV Energy shall, during the term of the franchise agreement, or any renewal or extension thereof, pay to the City for
the privilege of operating an electrical transmission and distribution system under the franchise therein granted, a
sum equivalent to five percent (5%) of the annual gross receipts or operating revenues taken in or received by NV
Energy from all sales of electricity within the City; provided, in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes
354.59889(2), the cumulative amount of any increases in fees imposed by the City during any period of twenty four
(24) months shall not exceed one percent (1%) of the gross revenue of NV Energy from customers located within
the jurisdiction of the City. Accordingly, effective October 1, 2017, franchisee will pay to the City an additional one
percent (1%) over the current two percent (2%) fee paid to the City, totaling the equivalent of three percent (3%) of
the annual gross receipts or operating revenues taken in or received by the franchisee from all sales of electricity
within the City; effective October 1, 2019, franchisee will pay to the City the equivalent of four percent (4%) of the
annual gross receipts or operating revenues taken in or received by the franchisee from all sales of electricity within
the City; effective October 1, 2021, franchisee will pay to the City the equivalent of five percent (5%) of the annual
gross receipts or operating revenues taken in or received by the franchisee from all sales of electricity within the
City.
B. The fee increase set forth in subsection A of this section shall not become effective until at least ninety (90) days
after the City has provided to NV Energy any information that is necessary to identify each customer that is affected
by the fee imposed or increased by the City, including the address of each customer, in the manner and to the
extent provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 354.59885(3). (Ord. 821, 7-25-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 534/640
Chapter 9
ELKO HEAT COMPANY FRANCHISE
(Rep. by Ord. 773, 4-9-2013)
Chapter 10
ALLTEL NEVADA, INC. FRANCHISE
(Rep. by Ord. 824, 9-26-2017)
Chapter 11
PARK LANDS AND FACILITIES
8-11-1: PURPOSE:
It is to be the policy of the city to extend the use of the city park lands and public parking facilities to its citizens in every
reasonable way. It has been recognized that these parks and public parking facilities can enhance the quality of life for
all residents of the city when utilized appropriately. To secure the highest quality and availability, the city must commit
enormous resources into the maintenance and upkeep of its parks and public parking facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in any activity on park property owned by the city that results
in damage to the surface and/or turf area or creates a safety hazard, as determined by the park superintendent, or
designee. Examples of uses that are deemed inappropriate include, but are not limited to, golfing, ice blocking and
skateboarding in areas other than those that have been previously designated for that specific use. (Ord. 621, 6-23-
2004)
8-11-2: PUBLIC EVENTS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
PARK PROPERTY: Park property owned by the city, including, but not limited to, all sports complexes, playing
fields (excluding Ruby View Golf Course), HARP, Main City Park, Angel Park, Mountain View Park,
Riverview/Southside Park, 5th Street Park, Greenbelt Park, and other facilities and all park equipment owned by the
city, which shall have fees established by the city council for the use of such city owned park property.
PRIVATE EVENT: Any event, function, sporting event or other gathering, to which the general public is not invited,
and held on park property owned by the city.
PUBLIC EVENT: Any event, function, sporting event or other gathering sponsored by an organization, to which the
general public is invited, and held on park property owned by the city. Any event held on city park property to which
the general public is invited to attend, either through the sale of tickets or other means of entry, will be considered a
"public event" so long as there are no restrictions on the allowed attendees.
B. Approvals Required:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 535/640
1. Public Events:
a. A public event (excluding those events that have prior contractual agreements with the city for the use of public
property) may be held only upon submission of a complete application, along with associated fees paid as set
forth by resolution of the city council, and approved by the recreation coordinator or authorized designee.
b. Every organizer/sponsor of a public event on the city park property must use the park reservation form
provided by the parks and recreation department for a public event.
c. If a public event includes vendors or fees for admission, the event sponsor/organizer must include the public
event application provided by the city clerk's office, which includes:
(1) The name of and contact information for the person or persons acting as the official representative of the
organizer or sponsor of the public event.
(2) Approval signature of the state department of taxation.
(3) Vendor business permit pursuant to section 4-1-16 of this code.
(4) Proof of one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) liability insurance policy with the city named as additional
insured.
d. The event organizer/sponsor will be responsible for any and all repairs needed as a result of the event.
2. Private Events:
a. A private event may be held only upon submission of a complete application, along with associated fees paid
as set forth by resolution of the city council, and approved by the recreation coordinator or authorized
designee.
b. Every organizer/sponsor of a private event in the city must use the park reservation form provided by the parks
and recreation department for a private event.
C. Glass Containers: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or physically possess any container for liquids made of
glass, or a mixture of glass, to be used for personal consumption. The police department may confiscate any
container in violation of this chapter.
D. Penalty: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punished as set forth in section 1-
3-1 of this code. (Ord. 712, 4-27-2010)
8-11-3: CAMPING:
A. Tents And Sleeping Bags: Tents and sleeping bags will be allowed only within park lands upon approval by the city
council, not to exceed two (2) nights, in an approved area set by the parks department.
B. RV/Camper: One RV/camper which is associated with a "special event" will be allowed per event and only in a
designated area set by the parks department. At no time will septage dumping be allowed within the parks. (Ord.
565, 6-14-2001)
8-11-4: VEHICLES:
The only vehicles allowed on landscaped and turf areas at any one time are:
A. Park maintenance and improvement vehicles.
B. Emergency vehicles.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 536/640
C. Approved "special events" that are vehicle oriented (can be reviewed for denial by the city council).
D. Temporary loading and unloading for "special events", to be removed immediately upon completion of task (less
than 10,000 GVWR). (Res. 36-99, 8-10-1999)
8-11-5: CARNIVALS:
No carnivals will be allowed within the public park area or associated rights of way. (Res. 36-99, 8-10-1999)
8-11-6: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No alcoholic beverages are allowed within the public park area, except in designated areas. (Res. 36-99, 8-10-1999)
8-11-7: FEES AND CHARGES FOR PARK AND PARK EQUIPMENT USE:
A. Park Reservations: Fees for the following park uses shall be set by resolution of the city council for those events that
are established as a "public event" or "private event" pursuant to section 8-11-2 of this chapter:
1. A standard daily reservation fee shall be required for any designated space within the parks for all groups of
people.
a. This fee includes the reservation of the space and four (4) tables permanently located in that area.
b. Events that occur over multiple days must pay a reservation fee to reserve the area for each day of the event
including setup and takedown.
c. Events that use multiple areas of the parks will be required to reserve each area and pay a separate fee for
each area that will be used for the event.
2. Groups of two hundred (200) or more people will be required to submit a park reservation application a minimum
of thirty (30) days prior to the event and meet with parks department staff for event approval and coordination.
3. Groups of two hundred (200) or more people will be required to pay a security deposit. The deposit will be
returned following the event if the following conditions are met to the satisfaction of the parks superintendent or
approved designee:
a. All trash in the area has been cleared and placed in the available receptacles. If additional receptacles will be
necessary, they are to be provided by the organizer of the event.
b. There is no damage to turf, trees, barbecue grills, shelters, irrigation systems, or other amenities.
B. Equipment Rental: Fees for the following equipment uses shall be set by resolution of the city council and pertain to
all "public events" and "private events" and events, either private or public, held outside the park property as set
forth in section 8-11-2 of this chapter:
1. Picnic table;
2. Trash can;
3. Barricade;
4. Seventy five (75) person capacity bleacher;
5. Stages (4);
6. Serving table;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 537/640
7. In addition to the rental fee, a delivery charge may be charged for each vehicle used to deliver the equipment to
nonpark property.
C. Mobile Bleachers: Fees for the three hundred (300) person capacity mobile bleachers shall be set by resolution of
the city council with all uses, including all public and private events (no matter where the use is located) being
subject to the charges established. (Ord. 712, 4-27-2010)
8-11-8: ELKO CITY PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD:
A. Parks And Recreation Advisory Board Creation: There is hereby created the city of Elko parks and recreation
advisory board. The board membership and terms of office shall be determined by resolution of the city council.
B. Parks And Recreation Advisory Board Authority: The parks and recreation advisory board is established to serve as
a central point of communication for the parks and recreation interests of the city of Elko and to assist the parks and
recreation director, city manager and the city council in formulating plans and policies that pertain to park and
swimming pool facilities, recreation programs, and the care of trees on public property.
C. Parks And Recreation Advisory Board Duties: The parks and recreation advisory board shall meet and adopt rules
and procedures for the purpose of fulfilling the duties imposed by this chapter:
1. Hold forums and meetings pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes to promote the exchange of information.
2. Obtain public input.
3. Assist in the development of a parks, recreation, trails and open space master plan and make recommendations
that will ensure compliance with the intent of the master plan.
4. Recommend park development standards and amendments for approval by the city council.
5. Prepare and adopt a public tree master plan and complete the requirements to obtain and maintain the Tree City
USA award from the National Arbor Day Foundation. (Ord. 685, 1-22-2008)
Chapter 12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or control with another person.
CITY: The city of Elko.
CITY PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the city, or other than "public streets" and "utility
easements", as those terms are defined in this section, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which
are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as provided in this chapter.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility
facility within the public way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 538/640
authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the city, but under the
jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other that the city.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of
the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms,
partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals, and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction
and control of the city which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all "public streets" and "utility easements", as those terms are defined in this
section, now or hereafter owned by the city, but only to the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities.
STATE: The state of Nevada.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other
pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Nevada public utilities commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls,
operates ormanages plants, equipment or property within the city, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires,
conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value
received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed
transmission medium.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground,
excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public
utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains,
conduits, ducts, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways
of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. (Ord. 543, 7-11-
2000)
8-12-2: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-3: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 539/640
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-4: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS ANDPROVIDERS:
A. Registration Required: All telecommunications carries and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications
service for a fee directly to the public, either within the city, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications
facilities within the city, shall register with the city pursuant to this chapter on forms to be provided by the city clerk,
which shall include the following:
1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the
registration statement.
3. A description of the registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the city.
4. A description of the telecommunications services that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently
offering or providing, to persons, firms, business or institutions within the city.
5. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under
this city.
6. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit,
operating license or other approval required by the federal communications commission to provide
telecommunications services or facilities within the city.
7. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit,
operating license or other approval required by the state to provide telecommunications services or facilities
within the city.
8. Such other information as the city clerk may reasonably require.
B. Registration Fee: Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be submitted
with a registration fee, which amount shall be set by resolution of the city council.
C. Purpose Of Registration: The purpose of registration under this chapter is to:
1. Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers
who offer or provide telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications
facilities withinthe city;
2. Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter;
3. Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges
that may be due the city;
4. Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-5: TELECOMMUNICATION LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate,
maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the city for the
sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons and areas outside the city shall first obtain a license
granting the use of such public ways from the city.
A. License Application: Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this chapter shall file an
application with the city which shall include the following information:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 540/640
1. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
2. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee over its
telecommunications facilities.
3. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such
telecommunications services.
4. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in
sufficient detail to identify:
a. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
b. The location, if any, for interconnections with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications
carriers.
c. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to
temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.
5. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating
itstelecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
6. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways,
information in sufficient detail to identify:
a. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's
telecommunications facilities.
b. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's
telecommunications facilities.
7. If applicant is proposing any underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the
public ways:
a. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
b. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications
facilities.
8. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
9. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the federal highway administration manual on uniform traffic
control devices.
10. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the
applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
11. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise
regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
12. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to
construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
13. All fees, deposits or changes required pursuant to this chapter.
14. Such other and further information as may be required by the city manager.
B. Determination By City: Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under
subsection A of this section, the city council shall issue a writtendetermination granting or denying the application in
whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include
the reasons for denial.
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 541/640
2. The legal ability of the applicant.
3. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
4. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license
if granted.
5. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the
license is granted.
6. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
7. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
8. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted.
9. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
10. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
11. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.
(Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-6: LICENSE AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the city have executed a written agreement
setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the city will
be granted. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-7: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT OF LICENSE:
No license under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public
ways of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-8: LICENSE RIGHTS GRANTED:
No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a
license only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no
license shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-9: TERM OF GRANT OF LICENSE:
The term of the agreement shall be specified in the license agreement. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-10: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this chapter shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined
portions thereof. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-11: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 542/640
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess
capacity exists and is available within such utility facility.
B. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole
attachments to existing utility poles only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground
within a public way of the city, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its
telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or
relocated underground within a public way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall
relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to
reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts,
conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.
F. The specific location and routing of new telecommunications facilities within a public street, easement and/or right of
way shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-12: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS FOR LICENSEE:
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in section 8-12-31
of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a licensee from agreeing to
alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-13: COMPENSATION TO CITY:
Each license granted under this chapter is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the city and a licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. Said compensation shall be set by
the city and shall be substantially the same for any licensee providing similar services. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-14: SERVICE TO THE CITY:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the city upon
submitting an franchise application for approval pursuant to section 8-12-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-15: AMENDMENT OF GRANT OF LICENSE:
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the city which are not included in a license previously
granted under this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 543/640
B. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate itstelecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted license, the city shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-16: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Renewal Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days before expiration of the current license, file an application
with the city for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
1. The information required pursuant to section 8-12-5 of this chapter.
2. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the city and the grantee.
B. Renewal Determinations: Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application, the city council shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following
standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal ability of the applicant.
3. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
4. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the license agreement.
5. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
6. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community
interest.
C. Obligation To Cure As Condition Of Renewal: No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in
the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a
plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-17: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of anytelecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways
of the city and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the city.
A. Franchise Application: Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this section shall file an
application with the city which shall include the following information:
1. The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
2. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant
over its existing or proposed facilities.
3. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchise to offer or provide such
telecommunications services.
4. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in
sufficient detail to identify:
a. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
b. The location, if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications
carriers.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 544/640
c. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to
temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.
5. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its
telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
6. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways,
information in sufficient detail to identify:
a. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's
telecommunications facilities;
b. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's
telecommunications facilities.
7. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the
public ways:
a. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
b. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications
facilities.
8. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
9. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with federal highway administration manual on uniform traffic
control devices.
10. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the
applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
11. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise
regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
12. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to
construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
13. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming
service, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
14. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant
intends to use or lease.
15. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other
public, educational and governmental institutions.
16. A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
17. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build out to the entire franchise
area.
18. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to section 8-12-30 of this chapter.
19. Such other and further information as may be requested by the city manager.
B. Determination By City: Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under this chapter,
thecity council shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal ability of the applicant.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 545/640
3. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the
franchise is granted.
4. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the
franchise is granted.
5. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the
franchise is granted.
6. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
7. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
8. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
9. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
10. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
11. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.
(Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-18: FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the city have executed a written agreement setting
forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the city will be
granted. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-19: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use
the public ways of the city for delivery oftelecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-20: TERM OF GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
The term of grant of franchise shall be specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-21: FRANCHISE RIGHTS GRANTED:
No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be valid for
a franchise only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no
franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-22: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the city to
be served by the franchise grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-23: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 546/640
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess
capacity exists and is available within such utility facility.
B. A franchise with permission to install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles
only, and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground
within a public way of the city, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its
telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or
relocated underground within a public way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall
relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grantterm. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to
reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts,
conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
F. The specific location and routing of new telecommunications facilities within a public street, easement and/or right of
way shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-24: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS; FRANCHISEE:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in section 8-12-
31 of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a franchisee from agreeing
to alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 543,
7-11-2000)
8-12-25: COMPENSATION TO CITY:
Each franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the city and franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. Said compensation shall be set by
the city and shall be substantially the same for any franchisee offering similar services. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-26: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall
request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services;
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a franchise from making any reasonable classifications
among differently situated customers. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-27: SERVICE TO THE CITY:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the city at its most favorable rate for
similarlysituated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 547/640
8-12-28: AMENDMENT OF GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
A. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its
franchise territory or to locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the city which are not included in a
franchise previously granted under this chapter.
B. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted franchise, the city shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-29: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
A. Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not more than two hundred forty
(240) days nor less than one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application
with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
1. The information required pursuant to subsection 8-12-17A of this chapter.
2. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee.
B. Renewal Determinations: Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under this
section, the city council shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in
part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include
the reasons for nonrenewal.
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal ability of the applicant.
3. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
4. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.
5. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
6. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continuedgrant to use the public ways will serve the community
interest.
C. Obligation To Cure As Condition Of Renewal: No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations of defaults
in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured or
a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city. (Ord. 543, 7-11-
2000)
8-12-30: FEES AND COMPENSATION:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect cost and expenses of
the city related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter.
A. Application And Review Fee:
1. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to this chapter shall pay a fee as established by resolution of the
city council.
2. The application and review fee shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to this
chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 548/640
3. An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty
(60) days of its application and review fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this
chapter less all ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the application.
B. Other City Costs: All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor,
reimburse the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise
or any license or franchise agreement.
C. Reserved Compensation For Public Ways: The city reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise grantee.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights.
D. Compensation For City Property: If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and
occupy city property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed
by the city.
E. Construction Permit Fee: Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay any required permit fees.
F. Regulatory Fees And Compensation: The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and additional
to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications
carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of
telecommunications services. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-31: CONDITIONS OF GRANT:
A. Location Of Facilities: All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement:
1. A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever
excess capacity exists and is available within such utility facility.
2. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole
attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
3. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground
within a public way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its
telecommunications facilities underground.
4. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or
relocated underground within a public way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall
relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
5. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to
reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
6. The specific location and routing of new telecommunicationsfacilities within a public street, easement and/or right
of way shall be approved by the city engineer.
B. Construction Permits: All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in section 8-12-32 of this chapter. However, nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 549/640
license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards
for responsible construction practices.
C. Interference With Public Ways: No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications
facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the city, by the general public or by other
persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee
temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city engineer.
D. Damage To Property: No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any
action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any city property, public ways of the city, other
ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
E. Notice Of Work: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor
any persons acting on the grantee's behalf, shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of
the city or other ways without ten (10) working days' advance notice to the city.
F. Repair And Emergency Work: In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such
repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the city
as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice
is not practicable.
G. Maintenance Of Facilities: Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition
and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
H. Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, a license or
franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the city council shall have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration if reasonably necessary for:
1. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public
way.
2. The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public way.
I. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, any grantee,
telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications
system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such
facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized
and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
2. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the city.
3. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without prior grant of a telecommunications license or
franchise.
4. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required construction permit.
5. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's
telecommunications license or franchise.
J. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 550/640
K. Damage To Grantee's Facilities: Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious acts by
the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public
ways of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction,
excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the city.
L. Restoration Of Public Ways, Other Ways And City Property:
1. When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting public
ways, other ways or city property, it shall, at its own expense,promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and
restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless
otherwise directed by the city.
2. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, grantee shall
temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's sole
expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the
weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.
3. A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flag persons, lights, flares and
other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to
any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways of property.
M. Facilities Maps: Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the
location of all telecommunications facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps
annually.
N. Duty To Provide Information: Within ten (10) days of a written request from the city manager, each license or
franchise grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:
1. Grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
2. All taxes, fees and/or charges due to the city in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
3. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the
public ways shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals.
O. Leased Capacity: A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide
capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
1. Grantee shall furnish the city with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
2. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this chapter.
P. Grantee Insurance: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a
condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both of grantee and the
city, andits elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsureds:
1. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00)
for each person and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 551/640
3. Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
4. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products
completed hazard with limits of not less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
5. The liability insurance policies required by this subsection shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term
of the telecommunications license or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is
operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications
facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsements:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor the intention not to renew be
stated until 90 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, or a written notice addressed to the city manager
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
6. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to
said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this subsection.
Q. General Indemnification: Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee's
express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all damages,losses and expense, including reasonable attorney fees and costs
of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or
wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its
telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a grant agreement made
or entered into pursuant to this chapter.
R. Performance And Construction Surety: Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective,
and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or other
instruments in form and substance acceptable to the city as may be required by this chapter or by an applicable
license or franchise agreement.
S. Construction And Completion Bond: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance
bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the city equal to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the
estimated cost of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the city shall be
deposited before construction is commenced.
1. The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as
determined by the city engineer, including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the
construction.
2. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:
a. Timely completion of construction;
b. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;
c. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;
d. Restoration of the public ways and other property effected by the construction;
e. The submission of "as built" drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter;
f. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in
connection with the work.
T. Coordination Of Construction Activities: All grantees arerequired to cooperate with the city and with each other:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 552/640
1. By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their proposed construction
activities in, around or that may affect the public ways.
2. Each grantee shall meet with the city, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by
the city to schedule and coordinate construction in the public ways.
3. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer, to
minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages.
U. Assignments Or Transfers Of Grants: Ownership or control of a telecommunications system, license or franchise
may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other
act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on such reasonable conditions as may
be prescribed therein.
1. No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within twelve (12) months after the initial grant of the
license or franchise, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
2. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or integral part of a system shall be
assigned or transferred before construction of the telecommunications system has been completed.
3. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system shall provide and certify the following
information to the city not less than one hundred fifty (150) days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
a. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment;
b. All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise applicant pursuant subsection 8-12-5A or
8-12-17A of this chapter, with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee;
c. Any other information reasonably required by the city.
4. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, telecommunications, financial and
other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
5. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all
directand indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or
assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
6. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or integral part of a system without prior
approval of the city under this subsection or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is
cause for revocation of the grant.
V. Transactions Affecting Control Of Grant: Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a charge of ten
percent (10%) or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a
telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership
or working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of
grantee's telecommunications system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or
transfer requiring city approval pursuant to subsection U of this section. Transactions between affiliated entities are
not exempt from city approval.
W. Revocation Or Termination Of Grant: A license or franchise granted by the city to use or occupy public ways of the
city may be revoked for the following reasons:
1. Construction or operation in the city or in the public ways of the city without a license or franchise grant of
authorization.
2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
3. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
4. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 553/640
5. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest
therein.
6. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.
7. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
8. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.
9. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the City.
10. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
11. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
12. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
X. Notice And Duty To Cure: In the event that the City Manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license
or franchise, he shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, and providing the
grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
1. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or
noncompliance.
2. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
3. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.
Y. Hearing: In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the City Manager as
provided in subsection X of this section, the City Manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the
City Council. The City Council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard
concerning the matter.
Z. Standards For Revocation Or Lesser Sanctions: If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with
material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the City Council shall determine whether
to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature,
circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
1. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
2. Whether substantial harm resulted.
3. Whether the violation was intentional.
4. Whether there is a history of prior violation of the same or other requirements.
5. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
6. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
8-12-32: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. General: No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of
telecommunications facilities within the City except as provided in this chapter.
B. Construction Codes:
1. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all
applicable Federal, State and local codes, rules and regulations, including the National Electrical Safety Code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 554/640
2. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed and installed in accordance with chapter 2, "Utility Occupancy
Of Public Rights-Of-Way Or Public Easements, Smart Dig Requirements, And City Excavation Permits", of this
title.
C. Construction Permits: No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within the City without
first obtaining any required construction permit therefor, provided, however:
1. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the City unless
the telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the City pursuant to section 8-12-4 of this
chapter.
2. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public ways
unless the telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to sections 8-
12-5 and 8-12-17 of this chapter.
3. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without payment of
any and all construction permit fees.
D. Applications: Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to
demonstrate:
1. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.
2. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.
3. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade
proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public ways.
4. The location and route of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which
are within the public ways along the underground route proposed by the applicant.
5. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the city, but not within the public ways.
6. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or
adjacent to the public ways.
7. The location and dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed
by the applicant, together with landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any
trees or areas to be described during construction.
E. Engineer's Certification: All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional
engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical
codes, rules and regulation.
F. Traffic Control Plan: All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall
be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed,
consistent with uniform manual of traffic control devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to
minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
G. Issuance Of Permit: Within forty five (45) days after submission of all plans and documents required of the
applicants and payment of the permit fees required by this chapter, the city engineer, if satisfied that the
applications, plans and document comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing
construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place
and manner of performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate.
H. Construction Schedule: The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the city engineer ten (10)
working days before commencing any working in or about the public ways. The permittee shall further notify the city
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 555/640
engineer not less than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public ways.
I. Compliance With Permit: All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved
final plans and specifications for the facilities. The city engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to
the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.
J. Display Of Permit: The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the
construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for inspection by the city engineer or his
representatives at all times when construction work is occurring.
K. Survey Of Underground Facilities: If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade,
proximity to other facilities or other standards, the permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to be verified
by a registered Nevada land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in
compliance with permit requirements.
L. Noncomplying Work: Upon order of the city engineer, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved
plans and specifications for the work or the requirements of this title, shall be removed.
M. Completion Of Construction: The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize
disruption of the city ways and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit within
city ways, including restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of issuance.
N. As Built Drawings: Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the city with two
(2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit.
O. Restoration Of Improvements: Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair any
and all public and provide property improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise
damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its condition before the
start of construction.
P. Landscape Restoration: All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the
construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is
done pursuant to a franchise, license or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the
condition existing prior to performance of work. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in
accordance with landscape plans approved by the city engineer.
Q. Construction Surety: Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, as
provided in subsection 8-12-31R of this chapter.
R. Exception: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all telecommunications carriers are
subject to the requirements of this chapter.
S. Responsibility Of Owner: The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or franchise
grantee, are responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 543, 7-11-
2000)
8-12-33: EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES:
Any franchise ordinances or agreements effective on the effective date hereof shall remain in effect until the expiration
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 556/640
or renewal date. Upon renewal, the franchisee may be required to follow the provisions of this chapter, or may be
allowed to remain under the existing franchise, at the city's option. (Ord. 543, 7-11-2000)
Chapter 13
RUBY VIEW GOLF COURSE
8-13-1: PURPOSE:
The city provides public golfing facilities to the public through the Ruby View golf course. (Ord. 558, 1-23-2001)
8-13-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
To enhance the golfer's experience, provide rules for safe play and to maintain the quality and value of the Ruby View
golf course, the city council may adopt rules, regulations and policies for the Ruby View golf course. (Ord. 558, 1-23-
2001)
8-13-3: FEES:
The city council may set, by resolution, user fees and charges associated with the Ruby View golf course. (Ord. 558, 1-
23-2001)
Chapter 14
ELKO MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
8-14-1: PURPOSE:
The city owns and operates the Elko municipal swimming pool and may set user fees to fund its operation and adopt
rules and regulations to ensure safe operations of the pool. (Ord. 580, 2-12-2002)
8-14-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council may adopt rules and regulations to enhance the swimmer's expertise and maintain the quality and safe
operation of the Elko municipal swimming pool. (Ord. 580, 2-12-2002)
8-14-3: FEES:
The city council may set, by resolution, user fees and charges associated with the Elko municipal swimming pool. (Ord.
580, 2-12-2002)
Chapter 15
ELKO REGIONAL AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
8-15-1: PURPOSE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 557/640
The city owns and operates the Elko regional airport and desires to establish an airport advisory board to advise and
give recommendations to the Elko regional airport director. (Ord. 584, 5-28-2002)
8-15-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The airport advisory board is established to educate, support and promote the aviation and aerospace industry,
including the facilities, air carriers, general aviation, fixed base operators and any other airport tenants for the benefit of
the Elko regional airport. (Ord. 584, 5-28-2002)
8-15-3: ORGANIZATIONS AND TERMS OF APPOINTMENTS:
The airport advisory board shall consist of seven (7) members, which shall include at least one member of the city
council. The members shall be appointed by the city council. The members shall elect from their membership a chair
and vice chair in July of each odd numbered calendar year. (Ord. 584, 5-28-2002)
Chapter 16
EVENTS ON CITY PROPERTY
8-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DOWNTOWN CORRIDOR: That area bounded by the northern right of way along Railroad Street and the southern
right of way along Commercial Street from 3rd Street to 11th Street.
FACILITY USE FEE: A fee as payment for the use or rental of a city facility or real property.
ORGANIZER/SPONSOR: Means, but not limited to, any individual, firm, organization, club, partnership, corporation, or
nonprofit that is responsible for the organization of a public event.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any planned gathering of persons, show, entertainment, celebration, or similar activity of temporary
duration open to the general public which occupies any part of a street or other city property (excluding city owned
public park areas when the event does not include street closures), and which hinders the general public in the
ordinary and usual use of such street or public property, and includes at least one of the following features:
A. Vendors;
B. The event is being held in the downtown corridor, or the event requires closure of any city street, sidewalk, alley,
right of way or public property which is owned or controlled by the city. "Special events" do not include parades or
any prior contractual agreements made with the city for the use of city property.
VENDOR: Any individual, firm, organization, club, partnership, corporation or nonprofit offering goods and/or services
for sale to the public. (Ord. 592, 12-10-2002)
8-16-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A special event will only be permitted on or upon any city street, sidewalk, alley, park which includes street closures,
right of way, or public property which is owned or controlled by the city after submission of a complete application and
approved by the city council as outlined in section 8-16-5 of this chapter. Determination of the completeness of the
application shall be made by the city manager or authorized designee. (Ord. 699, 9-23-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 558/640
8-16-3: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
A. Sale Or Consumption Permitted: The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in conjunction with a special event
may be permitted, provided any procedures or criteria adopted by ordinance or resolution of the city council are
adhered to. An application for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages must be filed with an application for a
special event permit and follow all procedures set forth.
B. Application Procedure: An application for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall follow the procedures
set forth in section 4-5-4 of this code.
C. Fees: All license fees applicable, as set by resolution by the city council, to the sale of alcoholic beverages must be
paid in addition to any special event fees.
D. Glass Containers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to serve alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages in glass containers
within an area designated for a special event. (Ord. 592, 12-10-2002)
8-16-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Filing: The application for a permit under this chapter to conduct or engage in any special event which involves the
use of city streets, parks which include street closures, rights of way, alleys, sidewalks, or other public property
owned or controlled by the city, shall be filed with the city clerk or authorized designee. Such application shall be
filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the date that the permit is to become effective. Each application shall be
accompanied by the established fees set forth by resolution by the city council.
B. Consideration Of Application Filed Later: The city manager or authorized designee shall have the authority, in their
discretion, to consider any application for a permit which is filed later than the time prescribed in this section.
C. Information Required: Every organizer/sponsor of a special event in the city must file an application which is
furnished by the city for the event. The application must include, at least the following where applicable, as
determined by the city:
1. Event application which includes the following:
a. Name of the event;
b. The name, address and telephone number of the organizer/sponsor conducting the proposed event;
c. The date or dates and the specific times the property is to be utilized;
d. The streets or other property and the specific area or areas which will be utilized in connection with the
proposed use, event or activity; and
e. Signature of an authorized representative from the Nevada department of taxation.
2. Application to reserve city properties, indicating the area to be used and the services being requested by the city.
3. Events contacts and sign off:
a. Name, address, telephone number and cellular number of the person or persons responsible for coordinating
or conducting the event;
b. Name, address, telephone number and cellular number of the contact person or persons responsible for
safety;
c. Name, address, telephone number and cellular number of the contact person or persons responsible for
security;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 559/640
d. Name, address, telephone number and cellular number of the contact person or persons responsible for traffic
and parking; and
e. Approval signatures must be obtained from the police, fire, street and park departments after the completion of
the previous forms have been completed in their entirety. The applicant will be required to contact each
department for preapproval if the event is being proposed to be held on any city property.
4. Proof of a liability insurance policy in the amount deemed appropriate by the city council with the city named as
additional insured.
5. Special events vendor business license pursuant to section 4-1-16 of this code. The city recognizes that the
organizer/sponsor of a special event has all control and authority over the decision to allow or refuse participation
by any individual vendor.
6. Area mapping must be completed to include:
a. Location of event;
b. All proposed road and property closures;
c. Traffic control plan;
d. Emergency access plans to include traffic patterns and parking;
e. A detailed plan, including, but not limited to, the location of all bandstands, bleachers, additional garbage
disposal, electrical connections, tables, barricades; and
f. Any additional information which the city deems reasonably necessary to a fair determination of the application.
D. Use Of State Right Of Way: Every organizer/sponsor of a special event in the city who is proposing the use of any
state right of way in conjunction with the city property for the event must file an application with the state
department of transportation with a copy to be furnished to the city along with the application. (Ord. 592, 12-10-
2002)
8-16-5: APPROVAL, DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Approval Required: All special events requiring the closure of a street or right of way shall receive initial approval
from the city council prior to the event being held. Subsequent requests for the same special event may be
approved administratively after completion of the required application and process as outlined in section 8-16-4 of
this chapter.
B. Terms And Conditions Of Permit: In addition to the requirements of this code or other applicable laws or rules or
regulations, each permit shall contain such terms and conditions regarding the time, place and manner of utilizing
the city streets or other property which are necessary and appropriate under the circumstances as set forth by the
city council.
C. Sanitation And Disposal Needs: It is the responsibility of the event organizer/sponsor to provide for the sanitation
and disposal needs as identified through the application process to ensure the health and safety of the participants
and citizens.
D. Committee Established: A committee made up of the mayor, or mayor pro tem in his absence, one city council
member, the fire chief and the police chief may revoke any permit if the committee determines that the
organizer/sponsor, applicant, agent, employee or associate of any such applicant cannot meet the criteria set forth
by the city council or has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or the provisions of any other applicable law,
rule or regulation. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked in this manner to protect the safety of
persons or property. If a special event is in progress when any such revocation occurs, the committee shall have
the authority to take actions to protect city property and/or rights of way. (Ord. 699, 9-23-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 560/640
8-16-6: PERMIT FEES:
Except as otherwise provided, the applicant shall be required to pay all applicable fees as established by the city
council through resolution for the use of city streets or other city owned or city controlled real and personal property,
including all city owned park and other equipment. The total amount of fees due for the entire permit period must be
paid to the city at least two (2) working days prior to the date on which the permit becomes effective. (Ord. 606, 7-22-
2002)
8-16-7: INSURANCE:
A. Each permit shall expressly provide that the permittee agrees to defend, protect, indemnify and hold the city, its
officers, employees and agents free and harmless from and against any and all claims, damages, expenses, loss or
liability of any kind or nature whatsoever arising out of or resulting from, the alleged acts or omissions of permittee,
its officers, agents, employees and invitees in connection with the permitted event or activity; and the permit shall
expressly provide that the permittee shall, at permittee's own cost, risk and expense, pay for the defense of any and
all claims or legal actions that may be commenced or filed against the city, its officers, agents or employees, and
that permittee shall pay any settlement entered into and shall satisfy any judgment that may be rendered against
the city, its officers, agents or employees as a result of the alleged acts or omissions of permittee or permittee's
officers, agents, employees and invitees in connection with the uses, events or activities under the permit.
B. Concurrent with the issuance of a permit under this chapter, and as a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the
permit, the permittee shall procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit a policy of
insurance from a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, which policy includes the city,
its boards, officers, agents and employees, as named insured or additional named insured and which provides the
coverage that the city council determines to be necessary and adequate under the circumstances, and proof of
insurance shall be submitted with the application. Said insurance policy must provide liability coverage for the
activities of entertainers and vendors participating in a special event.
C. It is the responsibility of the organizer/sponsor to maintain the condition of all city property being utilized in the
event. The event organizer/sponsor will be responsible for any and all repairs needed as a result of the event. All
expenses for repairs will be reimbursed at the actual cost of the repairs by the event organizer/sponsor. (Ord. 618,
4-27-2004)
8-16-8: GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or physically possess any container for liquids made of glass, or a mixture of
glass, to be used for personal consumption within an area designated for a special event. This section does not apply
to persons within an operating casino, hotel, bar or restaurant.
A. Confiscation: The police department may confiscate any container in violation of this chapter.
B. Penalty: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punished as set forth in section 1-
3-1 of this code. (Ord. 592, 12-10-2002)
8-16-9: SPECIAL EVENTS CURFEW:
In all special events on city property in which alcohol will be sold or served to the public and require a permit under this
chapter, except those within the city parks, it shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be idle, remain, wander, stroll or play
within the special event venue or within three hundred feet (300') of the special event venue, either on foot or through
any other mode of transportation, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. during the
dates in which the special event is being held or the hours immediately following the conclusion of the event. A
"juvenile" shall mean a person under the age of eighteen (18).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 561/640
A. A curfew violation in this section may be treated, for all purposes, as curfew violations under title 5, chapter 16 of
this code concerning minor curfews.
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided herein or in conflict with the provisions of this section, sections 5-16-2,
"Definitions", 5-16-4, "Responsibility Of Owners Of Public Places", 5-16-5, "Parents' Responsibility And Civil
Liability", 5-16-7, "Procedures" and 5-16-8, "Penalties", of this code are incorporated herein and shall apply to
special event curfew violations to the extent such provisions can be made applicable.
C. A juvenile in the direct care and custody of a parent or other person awarded legal guardianship or acting in
furtherance of employment duties requiring his presence at the place and time where the juvenile is contacted shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section. For purposes of this section, "direct care and custody of a parent"
shall mean a juvenile within thirty feet (30') of his/her parent or legal guardian and who is, at the time and place the
juvenile is contacted, exercising care and custody over the juvenile. (Ord. 735, 5-10-2011)
Chapter 17
PUBLIC TREE MANAGEMENT
8-17-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation
of the planting, maintenance, and removing of public trees; to provide a basis for the professional management of
public trees; to provide for their enduring viability and safety; and to perpetuate the many contributions they make to
the financial, aesthetic, and environmental well being of the city, its residents, and visitors. (Ord. 673, 4-10-2007)
8-17-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter concerns the management of all trees located in public parks. (Ord. 673, 4-10-2007)
8-17-3: PUBLIC TREE PROTECTION:
It is unlawful for any person to damage, transplant, top, remove, or mutilate any public tree without the consent of the
Elko city parks and recreation board. (Ord. 673, 4-10-2007; amd. Ord. 684, 1-22-2008)
Chapter 18
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
8-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. (Ord. 680, 10-23-2007)
8-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, certain words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:
ALLEY: A public way providing secondary vehicular access and service to properties which also abut a street.
ARTERIAL AND MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS: A general term describing large major streets, including freeways,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 562/640
expressways and interstate roadways, and state and/or county highways having city and regional continuity.
COLLECTOR RESIDENTIAL AND LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS: City streets serving the primary function of
providing access to abutting property:
Cul-De-Sac Street: A short collector residential and local residential street having one end permanently terminating in
and including a vehicular turning area.
Marginal Access Street: A collector residential and local residential street parallel to and abutting an arterial street
which provides access to abutting property, intercepts other collector residential and local residential streets, and
controls access to the arterial street.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street generally with limited continuity serving the primary function of moving traffic between
arterial streets and local residential streets, and the secondary function of providing access to abutting properties.
PRIVATE STREET: A nondedicated, privately owned right of way or limited public way that affords the principal means
of emergency and limited vehicular access and connection from the public street system to properties created through
the division or subdivision of land.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS: A set of standards approved by the city council regulating the design and
construction of public improvements in the city of Elko public roads or the city of Elko.
PUBLIC ROAD AND PUBLIC ROADS: The public highways, streets, avenues, alleys, bridges and ways as the same
may now or hereafter exist within the city and future additions thereto over which the city has jurisdiction.
PUBLIC STREET: A dedicated public right of way that is part of the public street system and which affords the principal
means of emergency and general vehicular access to abutting property.
STREET: Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement
for public vehicular access; or, a street shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or, a street in a plat duly
filed and recorded in the county recorder's office. A street includes all land within the street right of way, whether
improved or unimproved, and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulder, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking
space, bridges, viaducts, lawns and trees.
STREET LINE: A line describing the limits of a street right of way. (Ord. 680, 10-23-2007)
8-18-3: PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be known as the public improvement standards code of the city of Elko, hereinafter "code". This
chapter adopts the following public improvement standards:
A. Latest edition of the "Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction" ("Orange Book") as distributed to the
cities and counties of northern Nevada by the regional transportation commission (RTC) of Washoe County, and
B. Latest edition of the "Standard Details For Public Works Construction" as distributed to the cities and counties of
northern Nevada by the regional transportation commission (RTC) of Washoe County, and
C. Latest edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways" (MUTCD), and
D. Latest edition of the "American Water Works Association" (AWWA).
Certain sections of the public improvement standards may be added or deleted by resolution.
All public improvement designs, construction, and modifications within the city of Elko public roads or the city of
Elko shall conform with the above adopted public improvement standards, in addition to any other applicable codes
or amendments set forth by the Elko city council. (Ord. 680, 10-23-2007)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 563/640
8-18-4: HORIZONTAL CONTROL DATUM:
The basis of bearings for all engineering plans submitted to the city of Elko shall be based upon the following:
North American datum of 1983 (NAD83), Nevada east, U.S. feet, ground distance using a datum adjustment ground to
grid factor of 0.99964312740 and be effective as of October 28, 2008. (Ord. 701, 10-14-2008, eff. 10-28-2008)
Chapter 19
SIDEWALK CAFES
8-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the aesthetics and economic vitality of the city by providing safe and visually
appealing opportunities for outdoor dining. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
BAR: A business which is licensed and otherwise lawfully permitted to serve alcoholic beverages for on premises
consumption.
OUTDOOR DINING: The use of sidewalks in city owned public rights of way for the consumption of food and/or
beverages in connection with a bar or restaurant occupying an adjacent structure.
RESTAURANT: A business licensed to serve food and beverages for on premises consumption and which uses a
kitchen on the premises for food preparation with a minimum floor area of two hundred (200) square feet. (Ord. 750, 5-
22-2012)
8-19-3: OUTDOOR DINING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Outdoor dining is not allowed without an outdoor dining permit as set forth in this chapter. This chapter does not apply
to outdoor dining authorized by a special event permit issued pursuant to chapter 16 of this title. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-4: OUTDOOR DINING IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY PERMITTED:
Outdoor dining is not permitted where the speed, volume or nearness of vehicular traffic is not compatible with
sidewalk dining. All outdoor dining areas must be adjacent to and incidental to the operation of an indoor bar or
restaurant. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-5: REQUIRED SIDEWALK CLEARANCE:
Outdoor dining is permitted only where the sidewalk provides at least five feet (5') of unimpeded clearance for
pedestrians, unless an exception is granted. An exception may only be granted if the city determines that, due to
unique circumstances, a lesser amount of clearance can safely accommodate all uses of the public sidewalk and other
public property in the vicinity of the outdoor dining area. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-6: HEALTH STANDARDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 564/640
The operator shall not permit the following within or adjacent to the outdoor dining area: unoccupied tables present with
utensils, glasses, napkins, condiments, busing service stations, or trash not promptly placed in a trash receptacle.
Outdoor food preparation is not allowed except in compliance with conditions of an outdoor dining permit. All exterior
surfaces within the outdoor dining area shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee.
Restrooms sufficient for indoor and outdoor dining shall be provided in the adjoining indoor bar or restaurant. The
permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the outdoor dining area, including the sidewalk surface, furniture and
adjacent areas in a clean and safe condition. The permittee shall promptly dispose of any waste generated in their own
disposal facilities and shall not use any public wastebaskets. The permittee may not place open flame heaters, candles
or any devices which the city determines to be fire hazards within the outdoor dining area. Smoking shall be prohibited
in outdoor dining areas to the maximum extent such prohibition is permitted by state law. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Outdoor dining is only permitted during the hours set forth in an outdoor dining permit issued by the city. All outdoor
furniture associated with the permit shall be removed at the end of each business day. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-8: SPECIAL CLOSURES:
Outdoor dining is a privilege. The city shall have the right and power, acting through the city manager, or his or her
designee, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor dining area at any time because of anticipated or actual problems and
conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area or any other public property in the vicinity of the outdoor dining area. Such
problems and conflicts may arise from, without limitation, scheduled festivals, parades, marches and similar events,
repairs to the street or sidewalk, demonstrations or emergencies. To the maximum extent practicable, the permittee
shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor dining area will be
prohibited by the city. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-9: PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
A. Standards For Issuance: The city may issue an outdoor dining permit upon such terms, conditions and fees as it
deems appropriate, provided that fees, if any, shall be set by resolution of the city council. The design and signage
of the proposed outdoor dining area must meet the minimum standards set by the city. The city may change any
minimum standards at any time, subject to at least thirty (30) days' prior notice to all affected permittees. The city
may deny an outdoor dining permit application that fails to satisfy any applicable city requirements. An outdoor
dining permit shall, once issued, notwithstanding any other provision in this code, entitle any person to hold, carry
or transport any open glass bottle which contains, previously contained or is designed or intended to contain
alcoholic beverages, provided such bottles remain within the area subject to the permit.
B. Public Notice: Once it is determined that an applicant has met all of the basic requirements, the city will issue a
public notice, informing the public that a permit is being considered to allow the applicant's business to place tables
and chairs in the sidewalk area. The public notice must be served by United States mail or hand delivery to all
adjacent operators of businesses and the applicant must promptly thereafter provide the city with a certificate,
signed under penalties of perjury, stating that the public notice has been served upon adjacent operators of
businesses in the manner required by this section.
C. Public Objections: If there are no objections from the public and all applicable requirements have been satisfied, the
application will be approved and an outdoor dining permit will be issued. If there are objections from the public, the
city may, on that basis, deny the application.
D. Appeal To City Council: Any aggrieved person may appeal the approval or denial of an outdoor dining permit to the
city council within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. Any appeal must be commenced by filing a notice of
appeal with the city clerk on a form provided by the city. In the event the city council disagrees with the
administrative decision, the permit shall be immediately issued, provided, the city council may impose reasonable
conditions precedent to the issuance of the permit if the city council determines that such conditions will remedy or
mitigate any reason(s) for the denial decision identified.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 565/640
E. Prior Revocation: The city shall not issue an outdoor dining permit to any applicant who was previously issued an
outdoor dining permit which was revoked by the city within one year prior to the date of the application, provided the
previously revoked outdoor dining permit was not later reinstated by the city as the result of an appeal pursuant to
this chapter.
F. Concurrent Outdoor Display Permits: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preclude the city from issuing an
outdoor dining permit for a business that also has an outdoor display permit, provided all requirements applicable to
each type of permit are satisfied. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the city may deny an outdoor dining
permit if it is found to be incompatible with a concurrent outdoor display permit issued to the same applicant or
permittee. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
8-19-10: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A. Grounds For Revocation: The outdoor dining permit may be revoked by the city if the permittee fails to comply with:
1) the requirements of this chapter, 2) any applicable outdoor display guidelines issued by the city, 3) the terms and
conditions of any permit application signed and submitted by the permittee or 4) any requirements stated on the
outdoor dining permit, to include any requirements incorporated by reference into the outdoor dining permit. In
addition to the foregoing, the outdoor dining permit may be revoked by the city if the outdoor dining area is being
operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance or if the operation of the outdoor dining area unduly impedes or
restricts the movement of pedestrians.
B. Appeal To City Council: In the event the city revokes an outdoor dining permit, the permittee may, within no more
than ten (10) days, appeal the revocation decision to the city council, which shall conduct a hearing to review the
revocation decision. Any appeal must be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk on a form
provided by the city. In the event the city council disagrees with the revocation decision, the permit shall be
immediately reinstated subject to any conditions applicable to the previously revoked permit, provided that the term
of the permit shall be extended for a period of time equal to the time between the date of revocation and the date of
reinstatement, and, further provided, the city council may impose reasonable conditions precedent to the
reinstatement of the permit if the city council determines that such conditions will remedy or mitigate any reason(s)
for the revocation identified by the city. (Ord. 750, 5-22-2012)
Chapter 20
SIDEWALK DISPLAYS
8-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the aesthetics and economic vitality of the city by providing safe and visually
appealing opportunities for outdoor displays of merchandise. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
OUTDOOR DISPLAY: The use of sidewalks in city owned public rights of way for the display of merchandise in
connection with a retail business occupying an adjacent structure.
RETAIL BUSINESS: A business which sells goods to the public. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-3: OUTDOOR DISPLAY PERMIT REQUIRED:
Outdoor displays are not allowed without an outdoor display permit as set forth in this chapter. This chapter does not
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 566/640
apply to outdoor displays authorized by a special event permit issued pursuant to chapter 16 of this title. (Ord. 751, 5-
22-2012)
8-20-4: OUTDOOR DISPLAYS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY PERMITTED:
Outdoor displays are not permitted where the speed, volume or nearness of vehicular traffic is not compatible with the
display. All outdoor display areas must be adjacent to and incidental to the operation of an indoor retail business which
sells the same goods that are in the outdoor display. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-5: REQUIRED SIDEWALK WIDTH:
Outdoor displays are permitted only where the sidewalk provides at least five feet (5') of unimpeded clearance for
pedestrians, unless an exception is granted by the city. An exception may only be granted if the city determines that,
due to unique circumstances, a lesser amount of pedestrian clearance can safely accommodate all uses of the public
sidewalk and other public property in the vicinity of the outdoor display area. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-6: HEALTH STANDARDS:
The outdoor display area shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for
maintaining the outdoor display area, including the sidewalk surface, furniture and adjacent areas in a clean and safe
condition. The permittee may not place open flame heaters, candles or any devices which the city determines to be fire
hazards within the outdoor display area unless otherwise allowed by the fire department. The permittee shall promptly
and properly dispose of all waste generated in conjunction with the outdoor display. Such solid waste shall be
deposited in the permittee's own trash receptacles and shall not use any public wastebaskets. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Outdoor displays are only permitted during the hours set forth in an outdoor display permit issued by the city. All
outdoor displays and merchandise shall be removed at the end of each business day, unless a waiver is granted by the
city due to unique circumstances which render such removal impractical, provided such waiver does not create an
unreasonable risk to public health or safety. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-8: SPECIAL CLOSURES:
Outdoor displays are a privilege. The city shall have the right and power, acting through the city manager, or his or her
designee, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor display area at any time because of anticipated or actual problems
and conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area or any other public property in the vicinity of the outdoor display area.
Such problems and conflicts may arise from, without limitation, scheduled festivals, parades, marches and similar
events, repairs to the street or sidewalk, demonstrations or emergencies. To the maximum extent practicable, the
permittee shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor display area
will be prohibited by the city. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-9: PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
A. Standards For Issuance: The city may issue an outdoor display permit upon such terms, conditions and fees as it
deems appropriate, provided fees, if any, shall be set by resolution of the city council. The design and signage of
the proposed outdoor display area must meet the minimum standards set by the city. The city may change any
minimum standards at any time, subject to at least thirty (30) days' prior notice to all affected permittees. The city
may deny an outdoor display permit application that fails to satisfy any applicable city requirements. An outdoor
display permit does not grant a permittee the right to make sales in an outdoor display area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 567/640
B. Public Notice: Once it is determined that an applicant has met all of the basic requirements, the city will issue a
public notice, informing the public that a permit is being considered to allow the applicant's business to place a
display in the sidewalk area. The public notice must be served by United States mail or hand delivery to all adjacent
property owners and the applicant must promptly thereafter provide the city with a certificate, signed under
penalties of perjury, stating that the public notice has been served upon adjacent business operators in the manner
required by this section.
C. Public Objections: If there are no objections from the public and all applicable requirements have been satisfied, the
application will be approved and an outdoor display permit will be issued. If there are objections from the public, the
city may, on that basis, deny the application.
D. Appeal To City Council: Any aggrieved person may appeal the approval or denial of an outdoor display permit to the
city council within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. Any appeal must be commenced by filing a notice of
appeal with the city clerk on a form provided by the city. In the event the city council disagrees with the
administrative decision, the permit shall be immediately issued, provided, the city council may impose reasonable
conditions precedent to the issuance of the permit if the city council determines that such conditions will remedy or
mitigate any reason(s) for the denial decision identified.
E. Prior Revocation: The city shall not issue an outdoor display permit to any applicant who was previously issued an
outdoor display permit which was revoked by the city within one year prior to the date of the application, provided
the previously revoked outdoor display permit was not later reinstated by the city.
F. Concurrent Outdoor Dining Permits: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preclude the city from issuing an
outdoor display permit for a business that also has an outdoor dining permit, provided all requirements applicable to
each type of permit are satisfied. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the city may deny an outdoor display
permit if it is found to be incompatible with a concurrent outdoor dining permit issued to the same applicant or
permittee. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
8-20-10: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A. Grounds For Revocation: The outdoor display permit may be revoked by the city if the permittee fails to comply with:
1) the requirements of this chapter, 2) any applicable outdoor display guidelines issued by the city, 3) the terms and
conditions of any permit application signed and submitted by the permittee or 4) any requirements stated on the
outdoor display permit, to include any requirements incorporated by reference into the outdoor display permit. In
addition to the foregoing, the outdoor display permit may be revoked by the city if the outdoor display area is being
operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance or if the operation of the outdoor display area unduly impedes or
restricts the movement of pedestrians.
B. Appeal To City Council: In the event the city revokes an outdoor display permit, the permittee may, within no more
than ten (10) days, appeal the revocation decision to the city council, which shall conduct a hearing to review the
revocation decision. Any appeal must be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk on a form
provided by the city. In the event the city council disagrees with the revocation decision, the permit shall be
immediately reinstated subject to any conditions applicable to the previously revoked permit, provided that the term
of the permit shall be extended for a period of time equal to the time between the date of revocation and the date of
reinstatement, and, further provided, the city council may impose reasonable conditions precedent to the
reinstatement of the permit if the city council determines that such conditions will remedy or mitigate any reason(s)
for the revocation identified by the city. (Ord. 751, 5-22-2012)
Title 9
HEALTH AND SANITATION
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 568/640
Chapter 1
ELKO WATER CODE
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the ELKO WATER CODE. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following are to mean:
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Elko.
CONNECTION CHARGES OR CONNECTION FEE: A fee charged in order to equalize the investment in plant and
equipment and other facilities made by the city of Elko. The charge is for the right of service in the system.
DIRECTOR: The city engineer or any of his duly authorized representatives.
ELKO MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM OR WATER SYSTEM: The system of conduits, pumps, tanks and structures
used for the purpose of conveying from its sources, treating in any manner and conveying to final points of use, all
water services requested of the city and on a schedule approved by the city council. Specifically included as integral
parts of the system are all conduits of any nature forming a part of the general network of conduits or connected
directly or indirectly to said network; all pumps, treatment facilities, tanks and structures of any kind used in connection
with the collection, treatment and disposition of water; and all appurtenances to any of the above, either physically or
functionally connected therewith.
FIXTURE UNIT SURVEY: The tabulation of fixture units by physical inspection or review of construction plans to
determine the fixture unit count.
FULL FRONTAGE: All lot lines of any lot, parcel or tract of property adjacent to a road, street, alley or right of way, to
include lots, parcels or tracts containing multiple borders or edges, such as corner lots.
HOOKUP CHARGE: See definition of Tap Fee Or Hookup Charge.
PREMISES: A continuous tract of land, building or group of adjacent buildings under a single control with respect to
use of water and responsibility for payment therefor. Subdivision of such use or responsibility shall constitute a division
into separate premises, as herein defined, except that where more than one dwelling is being served through the same
water service, in which case each of said dwellings shall constitute a separate premises and shall be subject to the
same separate charges as if separate single-family dwellings.
TAP FEE OR HOOKUP CHARGE: A charge made by the department for installation of a service to a customer. The
cost includes installation of a corporation stop on the main in front of the property and installation of the service line
and curb stop terminating the service line at a point at or near the property line.
WATER DEPARTMENT: The city of Elko water department, located at 1751 College Avenue.
WATER FIXTURE UNIT: A numerical value assigned to different types of plumbing fixtures to reflect demand of the
water system. Fixture units shall be utilized for billing on the basis of demand of each user. A tabulation of the
numerical value assigned to the various types of plumbing fixtures is included in section 9-1-51 of this chapter.
WATER FIXTURE UNIT COUNT: The total water fixture units (WFUs) determined by counting or estimating and
assigned to an individual water billing account number.
WATER FIXTURE UNIT RATE: The dollar amount charged per water fixture unit per month ($/WFU/mo). (Ord. 740, 8-
9-2011)
9-1-5: WATER SERVICE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 569/640
A. Applications:
1. Content: Each applicant for water service shall be required to sign, on a form provided by the water department,
an application which shall set forth:
a. Date.
b. Location of premises to be served, giving street address and description of property to be served.
c. Applicant's name and mailing address and the name and mailing address of the legal owner of the premises.
d. Purpose for which the property will be used (residential, commercial, apartments, etc.).
e. Person and address to which the monthly bills are to be mailed.
f. The date the applicant will be ready for water service.
g. The name of the contracting or plumbing agency that will be hooking the premises to the city water system
(new connections).
h. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the applicant shall provide written evidence of
authorization to apply for service from the legal owner of the property.
2. Purpose: The application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the applicant to take service
for any period of time, nor does it bind the city to serve, except under reasonable conditions.
3. Responsibility: The legal owner is responsible for the payment of all water charges at the premises for which an
application is made. Only the legal owner of the premises may request termination of water service or a change
in the person or address to which the monthly water bill is to be sent.
B. Change In Customer Equipment Or Operations: A customer making any change in the size, character or extent of
the equipment or operations for which the service is utilized shall immediately file with the water department a new
application for additional service.
C. Charges For Service Taps (Tap Fee):
1. The city will install service pipes to a point at or near the property line. In no case will a service connection be
made unless the property to be served fronts on a street or alley with an adequately sized main and the distance
the department has to run the service is less than seventy five feet (75'). In no instance will service connections
be installed across private property. The property owner shall, at his cost, install the meter box, yoke and
complete the service line. If adequately sized mains are not available, any required main extensions shall be
extended in accordance with the terms and conditions of this code. The adequacy or inadequacy of main sizes
shall be determined by the director.
2. Charges for service taps will be set from time to time by resolution of the city council.
If the service is installed in an existing paved street or area, a street cut permit shall be obtained from the city
engineer's office and all costs associated with the street cut, including, but not limited to, the street cut, required
excavation, repair of the street and any required traffic control shall be paid by the applicant.
Services over two inches (2") will be charged at actual cost of labor, materials and equipment, plus fifteen percent
(15%) to cover overhead. In addition, for all sizes of services, the actual cost will be charged, plus fifteen percent
(15%) overhead, when unusual conditions require excessive time to complete, such as when a street of
reinforced concrete must be trenched manually, or when it is necessary to tunnel under a railroad or a street
rather than open trench, or to push or jack service pipe. Unusual conditions will be determined by the director.
3. Charges for service taps shall be collected in advance, normally at the time the building permit is issued. When
services are to be at cost plus overhead, an estimate of costs shall be first collected and when the actual cost
and overhead is determined, any overpayment will be refunded or an underpayment billed.
D. Individual Service And Shutoff:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 570/640
1. Each residence shall have an individual service and shutoff, whether the homes are constructed on the same lot
or not. Existing residences wherein more than one are served by a single service shall be allowed to continue as
long as all bills for water service are kept current and so long as all rules are abided by. The water department
may, at its own discretion and at any time the above conditions are violated, decline to furnish water until
separate services are provided. In all cases where water has been supplied to several parties or tenants from
connection with supply controlled by one valve, the water department has contracted with one of the several
parties and upon his or their failure to abide by said rules and regulations the water may be shut off.
2. Billings for commercial accounts shall be based on individual services and shut off whether or not there are
several separate commercial users of said service. One billing shall be made to the property owner or his
authorized agent.
E. Alterations Or Extensions: No person shall make any alterations or extensions in any water pipe or fixture except in
compliance with the provisions of this code.
F. Service Lines: Service lines shall be placed in a covered trench with at least forty two inches (42") cover over the
pipe.
G. Master House Or Building Valve: Every building or premises served by a water service line shall have a master
house or building valve installed at the expense of the owner, in addition to the city valve, so that the occupant or
owner can shut off the water supply to the building or premises without using the city valve or requiring the water
department to close any city or other valves to permit repairs or to shut off the water to the property for any
purpose. The property owner's shutoff valve shall be located inside the structure located upon his property.
H. Tampering Prohibited: No person, other than authorized city personnel, shall open, close, operate, tamper with, tap
or connect into any city valve or any city mains, pipes, laterals, hydrants or other valves or pipes owned or
controlled by the city or used by the city in connection with the municipal waterworks, unless authorized by the
director.
I. Application: Application hereunder may be made by any owner of property to be served, or such owner's duly
authorized agent.
J. Exemptions: Except as herein provided, subdividers and developers who install complete water facilities, including
service taps to individual services in their developments as provided in this code, are exempt from the tap fees
when these facilities are acceptably installed solely at the expense of the subdivider or developer. The normal
connection charge will be paid prior to the issuance of grading and/or building permits.
K. Water Charge: The water charge begins when a service connection is installed unless the water is ordered to be left
shut off when the service connection is ordered to be installed. Before water is turned on by the water department
for any purpose whatsoever, the property owner must sign a form in which he guarantees payment of future water
bills for the service required. The person signing the guarantee form will be held liable for water used until the city
council is notified in writing to discontinue service or to transfer the account to another property owner.
L. Water Used Without Water Service Application Being Made: A person taking possession of premises and using
water from an active service connection without having made application to the water department for water service,
shall be held liable for the water delivered from the date of the last recorded billing. If proper application for water
service is not made upon notification to do so by the water department, and if accumulated bills for service are not
paid immediately, the service may be discontinued by the water department without further notice.
M. Damages Through Leaking Pipes And Fixtures: When turning on the water supply as requested and the house or
property is vacant, the water department will endeavor to ascertain if water is running on the inside of the building. If
such is found to be the case, the water will be left shut off at the curb stop. The city council's jurisdiction and
responsibility ends at the property line and the city council will in no case be liable for damages occasioned by
water running from open or faulty fixtures, or from broken or damaged pipes inside the property lines. (Ord. 731, 4-
12-2011)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 571/640
9-1-7: MANDATORY CONNECTION:
Each owner of any real or personal property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, commercial,
industrial or other like purposes situated within the incorporated areas of the city shall connect to the city water system.
Connections to the water system shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the property so connected as provided
in this chapter. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-9: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; CUSTOMER REQUEST:
A. Advance Notice: A customer may have service discontinued by giving not less than one business day's advance
notice thereof at the office of the water department. Charges for service may be required to be paid until the
requested date of discontinuance or such later date as will provide not less than the required one business day's
advance notice.
B. Failure To Provide Notice: When such notice is not given, the customer will be required to pay for service until one
business day after the water department has knowledge that the customer has vacated the premises or otherwise
has discontinued water service.
C. Exemption For Emergency: Emergency situations will not require this prior notice. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-11: TERMINATION FOR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH RULES:
The water department may terminate service to any customer for violation of these rules after it has given the customer
written notice of such intention. Where safety of water supply is endangered, service may be discontinued or curtailed
immediately without notice. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-12: REGULATING AND LIMITING OUTDOOR USE OF MUNICIPAL WATER:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Elko.
MUNICIPAL WATER: Water from the city water supply system, but does not include the city wastewater treatment
plant effluent. The effluent is not subject to the regulations contained herein.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
B. Voluntary Encouragement Of Certain Uses: Between the dates of September 16 through June 14 of each calendar
year, all persons using municipal water within the city are encouraged to voluntarily water yards, wash sidewalks,
driveways, filling station aprons, parking lots and other similar outdoor uses of water on odd/even days. That is to
say, persons living or working at odd numbered addresses (addresses ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9) are encouraged to
use municipal water for outdoor purposes on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Persons living or working at
even numbered addresses (addresses ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 and 8) are encouraged to use municipal water for
outdoor purposes on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays. Irrigation of public park areas is encouraged on Mondays
and Thursdays. For dust abatement at construction sites, the use of reuse water is encouraged.
C. Prohibition Of Certain Uses:
1. Between the dates of June 15 through September 15 of each calendar year, it shall be a civil infraction subject to
civil fines for any person to use municipal water within the city for the following outdoor uses: watering yards,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 572/640
watering sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, parking lots, the outside of dwellings and office buildings and
other outdoor surfaces except in compliance with the following schedule:
a. With the exception of the city, persons living or working at odd numbered addresses (addresses ending in 1, 3,
5, 7 and 9) shall only use municipal water for the purposes stated above on Tuesdays, Thursdays and
Saturdays.
b. With the exception of the city, persons living or working at even numbered addresses (addresses ending in 0,
2, 4, 6 and 8) shall only use municipal water for purposes stated above on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.
c. With the exception of the city, there shall be no use of municipal water for the above stated purposes on
Mondays.
d. The city park lands shall be irrigated on Sunday from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until Monday at eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M., Tuesday from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until Wednesday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., and Thursdays
from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until Friday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Exceptions may be made for public parks
that demonstrate stress from lack of water.
e. Hand held watering of yards shall be permitted seven (7) days per week.
f. Reuse water shall be used for dust abatement at construction sites. The city engineer may permit use of fresh
water for dust abatement in certain situations at his/her discretion. Rules and regulations for the use of reuse
water, as determined by the city engineer and/or the state division of environmental protection, shall be
adhered to by users of reuse water.
g. The city manager or his designee may grant exceptions to the above listed restrictions after application by a
person, only for the following demonstrated reasons:
(1) Fire safety concerns;
(2) Dust suppression;
(3) Establishing new turf;
(4) Installation of a moisture sensing irrigation system that has been verified and approved by the city engineer
or designee;
(5) Inability to irrigate on designated schedule due to verified absence, disability or other legitimate reason, as
determined by the city manager.
2. Approved applications for exception from outdoor watering restrictions shall be kept on file in the city clerk's
office, and a copy will be provided to the police department.
D. Prohibiting Waste Of Municipal Water: It shall be a civil infraction for any person to waste municipal water within the
city. Prima facie evidence of waste of municipal water includes escaping through defective plumbing or, when
watering yards, gardens or other vegetation, permitting municipal water to escape and flow onto adjoining property
or into or along a public street, alley or gutter.
E. Additional Prohibition Of Certain Uses:
1. If the conditions set forth in subsection E2 of this section occur, additional prohibitions of use of water may be
ordered by the city engineer after approval by two (2) members of the city council. It shall be a civil infraction
subject to civil fines for any person to use municipal water for those additional prohibited uses identified under
this section.
2. The above mandatory civil infraction may be imposed if the following conditions occur:
a. Two (2) members of the city council, together with the city manager and the city engineer verify in writing that
either of the two (2) following conditions exist:
(1) The total water storage capacity of the city has dropped below fifty percent (50%); and/or
(2) Daily water use exceeds maximum pumping ability.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 573/640
b. The city has caused to be published in a newspaper of local circulation, a one time notice that beginning at
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. the next morning following the publication of the notice that the city will begin issuing
civil infraction citations for violations of the approved outdoor watering requirements.
c. That prior to the issuance of a civil infraction citation to any person, said person will first be issued a warning
citation that upon the next violation a civil infraction citation subject to a civil fine will be issued.
F. Compliance: The city council may, by majority vote at a properly noticed meeting, discontinue the process of issuing
mandatory civil infraction citations and reinstate the voluntary compliance provisions of this section if in its
discretion the city council believes circumstances have sufficiently changed so as to justify such action.
G. Notice Of Civil Infraction; Form: A notice of civil infraction must be on a form which is prescribed by the police
department and must contain the following information:
1. The location in which the violation occurred;
2. The date and time of the violation;
3. The signature of the person who issued the notice of civil infraction;
4. The section of this code which is allegedly being violated;
5. Information which advises of the manner in which and the time within which the notice of civil infraction must be
answered;
6. Any other reasonable information which is prescribed by the police department.
H. Duties Of Respondent:
1. A person who responds to a notice of infraction must either:
a. "Admit" the commission of the infraction and pay the appropriate civil fine; or
b. "Deny" liability for the infraction.
2. A person may "admit" pursuant to subsection H1a of this section by paying the amount of the civil fine which is
appropriate for the violation to the municipal court.
3. A person may "deny" liability pursuant to subsection H1b of this section by appearing in person before the
municipal court at the time specified on the notice of civil infraction.
I. Commencement Of Civil Action Procedure: If liability is denied in the manner set forth herein or if there is no
admission or denial within the prescribed time, judicial enforcement of notices of infraction must be by way of civil
suit in the municipal court if the person denies liability. The civil action may be commenced by the filing of a
complaint in the name of the city and the issuance of a summons with respect thereto and service of such
complaint and summons on the defendant must be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to
the defendant at his or her last known address or in any other manner which is authorized by law. The proceedings
in municipal court for actions commenced pursuant to this subsection shall be governed by rule 1 and rules 3
through 87 of the Nevada justice court rules of civil procedure, except that there shall be no right of trial by jury.
J. Schedule Of Civil Fines: The civil fines imposed on any person violating this water conservation section of this
chapter shall be established by a resolution as adopted by the city council.
K. Termination Of Service For Waste Of Water: Where negligent or wasteful use of water exists from a customer's
premises, the water department may terminate the service if such practices are not remedied after it has given the
customer written notice to such effect by certified mail or citation issued by the city police, three (3) days prior to
proposed date of termination. (Ord. 620, 6-8-2004)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 574/640
9-1-15: TERMINATION FOR UNSAFE APPARATUS:
If any condition is found to exist on a customer's premises which, in the opinion of the director constitutes a hazard to
health or which may contaminate the water supply or which threatens to damage any portion of the city water system
or if the use of water thereon by apparatus, appliances, equipment or otherwise is found to be detrimental or damaging
to the water supply, the water department or its customers, the service may be terminated without notice. The water
department will notify the customer immediately of the reasons for the discontinuance and the corrective action to be
taken by the customer before service can be restored. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-16: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL CODE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is: 1) to protect the public water supply against actual or potential
contamination through cross connections by isolating sources of contamination that may occur within a water user's
premises because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross connection on the premises; 2) to eliminate existing
connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable
for human consumption; 3) to eliminate cross connections between drinking water systems and sources of
contamination; 4) to prevent the making of cross connection(s) in the future.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASSE STANDARD: An official standard developed and approved by the American Society of Sanitary
Engineering.
AWWA STANDARD: An official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association
(AWWA).
AIR GAP SEPARATION: The unobstructed vertical distance or physical separation between a point of free
flowing discharge of water from a pipe that supplies water to an open or nonpressurized vessel, tank or
receptacle and the overflow rim of that vessel, tank, or receptacle. An air gap must be at least twice the effective
diameter of that pipe or, if the pipe is affected by sidewalls at least three (3) times the effective diameter of that
pipe. In no case shall an air gap separation be less than one inch (1").
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: Any assembly manufactured and utilized to prevent back
pressure and/or back siphonage in full conformance with the standards established by the American Waterworks
Association entitled, AWWA C506 (current revision) standards for reduced pressure principle and double check
valve backflow prevention devices, and which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a
recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER: An assembly that consists of a vacuum breaker that contains an air inlet
valve, a check seat and one or more air inlet ports, in which the flow of water causes the air inlet valve to close
the air inlet ports; and when the flow of water stops:
1. The air inlet valve falls and forms a check valve against back siphonage; and
2. The air inlet ports open to allow air to enter the pipe and satisfy the vacuum.
3. Has been manufactured, tested and approved, by an approved backflow testing laboratory, in accordance
with the American Water Works Association standard C512.
4. Does not protect against back pressure conditions.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply.
BACKFLOW: A flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids,
gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 575/640
other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the
other cause.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The duly appointed building official of the city of Elko, Nevada. Any act stated in this plan
that is required or authorized by the "building official" may be done on his behalf by an authorized representative
of the city building department.
CITY UTILITIES DIRECTOR: The duly appointed city utilities director of the city of Elko, Nevada. Any act stated
in this plan that is required or authorized by the "city utilities director" may be done on his behalf by an authorized
representative of the city engineering department or the city water department.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a
hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical plumbing arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected,
directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir,
plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water or chemicals that are capable
of contaminating the public water supply in the event of "backflow", "back siphonage" or "back pressure". Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other assemblies
through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross connections.
CUSTOMER: Any person, persons, firm or corporation that is provided potable water from the public water supply
system through a legal water service connection to the public water supply distribution network.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: Shall express the results of an evaluation of a health, system, or plumbing hazard. The
degree of hazard will be used to evaluate the type of backflow and back siphonage protection required to protect
the public water supply.
DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR CHECK ASSEMBLY: An assembly that:
1. Is composed of two (2) spring loaded check valves;
2. A bypass assembly that contains a water meter and another double check valve assembly; and
3. Has tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA): An approved backflow prevention assembly that:
1. Is composed of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves;
2. Has tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end;
3. Is fitted with properly located, resilient seated test cocks; and
4. Has been manufactured, tested and approved, by an approved backflow testing laboratory, in accordance
with the American Water Works Association standard C510.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, or practice in a water supply system and/or its operation that creates,
or may create, a danger to the health and well being of a customer. Health hazards may occur on the customer's
premises and must be addressed to remedy the danger to the customer and/or the public water supply.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other
public body or institution.
PLUMBING HAZARD: A cross connection within a customer's potable water system that may permit back
siphonage in the event of a negative pressure in the supply line or in the public water distribution system.
PREMISES: Any and all areas on a water user's property which are served or have the potential to be served by
the public water system.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB): Approved assembly that:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 576/640
1. Contains an independently operating, internally loaded approved check valve and an independently
operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the approved check valve; and
2. Is equipped with properly located, resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff
valves that are attached at each end of the assembly.
3. Does not protect against back pressure conditions.
PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICER: Shall be a representative of the Nevada bureau of consumer health with the
authority to enforce state public health requirements.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that
has fifteen (15) or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty five (25) individuals daily at
least sixty (60) days out of the year.
RECLAIMED WATER: A wastewater, which as a result of treatment is suitable for uses other than potable use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW (RPPB): An approved assembly that:
1. Contains two (2) independently acting approved check valves and a hydraulically operating, mechanically
independent pressure relief valve that is located between the approved check valves and below the
upstream check valve;
2. Has properly located, resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves at each
end of the assembly;
3. Is designed to protect against pollution and contamination under conditions of back siphonage or back
pressure; and
4. Has been manufactured, tested and approved by an approved backflow testing laboratory, in accordance
with the American Water Works Association standard C511.
REDUCED PRESSURE DETECTOR ASSEMBLY (RPDA): An assembly that:
1. Is composed of a line sized, reduced pressure principle assembly;
2. A bypass assembly that contains a water meter and another reduced pressure principle assembly; and
3. Has tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK VALVE: An approved assembly that:
1. Contains two (2) inline spring loaded poppet check cartridges;
2. Meets the performance requirements specified in the American Society of Sanitary Engineering standard
#1024.
SERVICE CONNECTION: Refers to the point of connection of a customer's piping to the water supplier's
facilities. Except, when the customer's water piping system distributes to more than one family dwelling, each
dwelling shall be considered as a service connection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: Threat to the physical properties of the public or the customer's potable water system by a
material not dangerous to the health but aesthetically objectionable that would have a degrading effect on the
quality of the potable water within the system.
WATER DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR: Shall be that person or persons employed by the Elko city water
department that have been trained and are qualified to perform the designated inspection work.
WATER SUPPLIER: The person who owns or operates an approved water supply system.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 577/640
WATER USER: Any person obtaining water from an approved water system.
C. Cross Connection Protection Requirements:
1. General Provisions:
a. Unprotected cross connections with the public water supply are prohibited. The Nevada administrative code
requires the state health officer's written approval to interconnect water supplies.
b. Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the city of Elko will require the water user to install
an approved backflow prevention assembly by and at the user's expense for continued services or before new
service will be granted. For new water meter sets, the required backflow assembly shall be installed, inspected,
and approved. Certified test results must be provided to the city of Elko within five (5) days of meter set, unless
the city of Elko, or its designee approves otherwise. The service will be locked off if inspections and
certifications are not completed as specified above. A fee will be established by resolution for additional
inspections.
c. Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user's
premises, any and all water supply lines for the city of Elko mains entering such premises, buildings, or
structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. The type of assembly to be
installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
2. Where Protection Is Required:
a. Each service connection from the city of Elko water system for supplying water to premises that have an
auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water
system unless the auxiliary water supply is an approved water supply. The Nevada administrative code
requires the state health officer's written approval to interconnect water supplies.
b. Each service connection from the city of Elko water system for supplying water to the premises in which any
substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against
backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process
waters and waters originating from the city of Elko water system which have been subjected to deterioration of
its sanitary quality.
c. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having: 1) internal
cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the city of Elko, or
2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily
accessible for inspection purposes, making it impractical or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross
connections exist.
d. Each service connection from the city of Elko water system for supplying water to premises with fire sprinkler
or fire suppression systems must have a cross connection control system.
3. Type Of Protection Required:
a. The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be
appropriate for the degree of hazard that exists on the water user's premises. The type of protective assembly
that shall be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC),
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP), and an air gap separation (AG). The water
user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city of Elko. The minimum types of backflow
protection required to protect the approved water supply at the user's water connection are provided in the
Nevada administrative code. Situations that are not covered by the Nevada administrative code shall be
evaluated on a case by case basis, and the city of Elko shall determine the appropriate backflow protection.
b. When two (2) or more services supply water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or
premises through which an interpreted main flow may occur, each water service shall have at least a standard
check valve to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. These check valves
shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the mains from
pollution or contamination, in which case the installation of approved backflow assemblies should be required.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 578/640
D. Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1. Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
a. Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been manufactured, tested, and approved according to
AWWA specifications shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city of Elko's potable
water system.
2. Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation:
a. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner prescribed in the AWWA standards, the uniform
plumbing code, and specifically NAC 445A.6723-6724 inclusive, as adopted by the city of Elko.
(1) Air Gap Separation (AG): An air gap must be at least twice the effective diameter of that pipe, or, if the pipe
is affected by sidewalls at least three (3) times the effective diameter of that pipe. In no case shall an air gap
separation be less than one inch (1"). An air gap must be installed in a manner prescribed in the AWWA
standards, the uniform plumbing code, and specifically NAC 445A.6723 as adopted by the city of Elko. No
water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air gap separation. The
water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two (2) pipe diameters from the supply inlet, but in no
case less than one inch (1") above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.
(2) Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP): The approved reduced pressure principle
assembly shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as practical.
Measured from the bottom of the assembly the assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches (12")
above grade, floor, or platform and not more than thirty six inches (36") above grade, floor or platform and
with a minimum of twelve inches (12") side clearance. The assembly shall be installed so that it is readily
accessible for maintenance and testing. An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly must be installed in a manner prescribed in AWWA standards, the uniform plumbing code, and
specifically NAC 445A.67235 as adopted by the city of Elko. Water supplied from any point between the
service connection and the RP assembly shall be protected in a manner approved by the city of Elko.
(3) Double Check Valve Assembly (DC): The approved double check valve assembly shall be installed on the
user's side of and as close to the service connection as possible. The assembly shall be installed inside a
heated vault or similar structure and readily accessible for testing and maintenance. The assembly must be
installed a minimum of twelve inches (12") above grade, floor, or platform, and not more than thirty six inches
(36") above grade, floor, or platform. A minimum of twenty four inches (24") of clearance between the side of
the assembly with test cocks and the side of the vault and a minimum of twelve inches (12") clearance
between the assembly and the side of the vault. An approved double check valve assembly must be installed
in a manner prescribed in the AWWA standards, the uniform plumbing code, and specifically NAC
445A.6724 as adopted by the city of Elko.
(4) Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Assembly: Atmospheric vacuum breaker assemblies do not protect against
back pressure conditions. Any installation of atmospheric vacuum breaker assemblies shall be approved by
the city of Elko. The assembly shall be installed at least six inches (6") higher than the final outlet. An
approved atmospheric vacuum breaker assembly must be installed in a manner prescribed in the AWWA
standards and the uniform plumbing code as adopted by the city of Elko.
(5) Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly: Pressure vacuum breaker assemblies do not protect against back
pressure conditions. Any installation of pressure vacuum breaker assemblies shall be approved by the city of
Elko. The assembly shall be installed at least six inches (6") to twelve inches (12") higher than the existing
outlet. An approved pressure vacuum breaker assembly must be installed in a manner prescribed in the
AWWA standards and the uniform plumbing code as adopted by the city of Elko.
(6) Residential Dual Check Valve Assembly: The approved residential dual check valve assembly shall be
installed on the user's side and as close to the service connection as possible. Any installation of residential
dual check valve assemblies shall be approved by the city of Elko. An approved residential dual check valve
assembly must be installed in a manner prescribed in the uniform plumbing code as adopted by the city of
Elko.
3. Backflow Prevention Assembly Testing And Maintenance:
a. Testing Frequency; Report: The owner of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention
assemblies are installed shall have the assemblies tested by a certified person who has demonstrated
competency in testing of these assemblies to the city of Elko. Backflow prevention assemblies must be tested
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 579/640
at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city of Elko may require a more
frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No assembly shall be placed back in service
unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable must be filed with the city of Elko each time
an assembly is tested, relocated or repaired. The assemblies shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced
whenever they are found to be defective, and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the
water user.
b. Backflow Prevention Assembly Removals: Approval must be obtained from the city of Elko before a backflow
prevention assembly is removed, relocated, or replaced.
(1) Removal: The use of an assembly may be discontinued and the assembly removed from service upon
presentation of sufficient evidence to the city of Elko to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to
be created in the future.
(2) Relocation: An assembly may be relocated following confirmation by the city of Elko that the relocation will
continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required
following the relocation of the assembly.
(3) Repair: An assembly may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until the
repair is completed and the assembly is tested and returned to service, or the service connection is equipped
with other backflow protection approved by the city of Elko. The retest will be required following the repair of
the assembly.
(4) Replacement: An assembly may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the
replacement assembly is installed and tested. All replacement assemblies must be approved by the city of
Elko and must be appropriate with the degree of hazard involved. A retest will be required following the
replacement of the assembly.
E. Administrative Procedures:
1. Water System Survey:
a. The city of Elko will review all requests for new service to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans
and specifications must be submitted to the city of Elko upon request for review of possible cross connection
hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention
assembly is necessary to protect the public water system, the required assembly must be installed before
service will be granted.
b. The city of Elko may require an on site inspection to evaluate cross connection hazards. The city of Elko will
transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who
cannot or will not allow an on premises inspection of the premises' piping system shall be required to install the
backflow prevention assembly or air gap which the city of Elko considers necessary. Wherever the safety of the
water supply is endangered services may be discontinued immediately without notice.
c. The city of Elko may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross connection hazards of any premises to
which it serves water. The city of Elko will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to
each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on premises inspection of the
premises' piping systems shall be required to install the backflow prevention or air gap which the city of Elko
considers necessary. Wherever the safety of the water supply is endangered services may be discontinued
immediately without notice.
2. Customer Notification; Assembly Installation:
a. The city of Elko will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing the corrective actions to be taken if any
are required. A period of up to ninety (90) days will be given to complete all corrective actions required,
including installation and testing of approved backflow prevention assemblies or air gap, unless a written
extension is granted.
b. A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not take the required corrective actions prescribed in
the first notice, within the period allowed. The second notice will give the water user up to thirty (30) days to
take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the thirty (30) day period, the city of Elko may
terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 580/640
3. Customer Notification; Testing And Maintenance:
a. The city of Elko will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention assembly
installed on their service connection to be tested or the air gap to be inspected. This written notice shall give
the water user thirty (30) days to have the assembly tested or air gap inspected and supply the water user with
the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city of Elko.
b. A second notice shall be sent to each water user who does not have the backflow prevention assembly tested
or air gap inspected as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty (30) day period allowed. The second notice
will give the water user up to thirty (30) days to have the backflow prevention assembly tested or the air gap
inspected. If no action is taken within the thirty (30) day period, the city of Elko may terminate water service to
the affected water user until the subject assembly is tested or air gap inspected.
F. Water Service Termination:
1. General: When the city of Elko encounters water users that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the water
supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city of Elko will institute the procedure for discontinuing the city of
Elko water service.
2. Basis For Termination: Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination include, but are
not limited to, the following items:
a. Refusal to install a required backflow prevention assembly or air gap separation;
b. Refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly or inspect an air gap separation;
c. Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly;
d. Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly;
e. Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line;
f. Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment
providing the potential of contaminating the public water supply;
g. Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system;
h. A situation that presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system.
3. Water Service Termination Procedure:
a. For conditions in subsection F2a, F2b, F2c, or F2d of this section, the city of Elko will terminate service to the
customer's premises after two (2) written notices have been sent by first class regular mail specifying the
corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allotted
time period, water service may be terminated.
b. For high risk conditions in subsection F2e, F2f, F2g, or F2h of this section, the city of Elko will terminate the
water supply and lock the service valve. The water service will remain inactive until the city of Elko has
approved corrections of violations.
G. Enforcement, Penalties: The city of Elko shall have the authority to enforce this section.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or
maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross connection between plumbing
pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city of Elko water system and any other source of water
supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction,
may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city of Elko and/or
the service of water pipes or fixtures of any customer of the city of Elko. (Ord. 688, 3-25-2008, eff. 5-1-2008)
9-1-17: TERMINATION FOR FRAUDULENT USE OF SERVICE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 581/640
When the water department has discovered that a customer has obtained service by fraudulent means, or has diverted
the water service for unauthorized use, the service to that customer may be discontinued without notice. The water
department will not restore service to such customer until that customer has complied with the water code and rules
and reasonable requirements of the water department and the water department has been reimbursed for the full
amount of the service rendered and the actual cost to the water department incurred by reason of the fraudulent use.
(Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-19: RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 536, 12-28-1999)
9-1-21: REFUSAL TO SERVE:
A. Conditions For Refusal: The water department may refuse to serve an applicant for service under the following
conditions:
1. If the applicant fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
2. If the intended use of the service is of such nature that it will be detrimental or injurious to existing customers.
3. If, in the judgment of the director, the applicant's installation for utilizing the service is unsafe or hazardous, or
subject to freezing, or of such nature that satisfactory service cannot be rendered.
4. Where service has been discontinued for fraudulent use, the director will not serve an applicant until it has been
determined that all conditions of fraudulent use or practice have been corrected.
B. Notification To Customers: When an applicant is refused service under the provisions of this chapter, the water
department will notify the applicant that he may appeal the decision of the water department to the city council.
(Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-23: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE:
A. Emergency Interruptions:
1. The water department will make all reasonable efforts to prevent interruptions to service and when such
interruptions occur will endeavor to reestablish service with the shortest possible delay consistent with the safety
of its customers and the general public.
2. Where any emergency interruption of service affects the service to any public fire protection device, the water
department will promptly endeavor to notify the fire department headquarters of such interruption and of
subsequent restoration of normal service.
B. Scheduled Interruptions: Whenever the water department finds it necessary to schedule an interruption to its
service, it will, where feasible, notify all customers to be affected by the interruptions, stating the approximate time
and anticipated duration of the interruption. Scheduled interruptions will be made at such hours as will provide least
inconvenience to the customers consistent with reasonable water department operations.
C. Apportionment Of Supply During Times Of Shortage: During times of threatened or actual water shortage, the
director will apportion the supply in the manner that appears most suitable under circumstances then prevailing,
and with due regard to public health and safety. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-25: SERVICE AND CHARGES TO ALL WATER USERS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 582/640
A. The city council shall have authority to make and enter into such contract as may be necessary, convenient or
proper with respect to water service to improved property outside the territorial limits of the city and with respect to
the payment of proper charges for such service, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
connection charges, and justly relating to, but in no case less than the rates established for users within the city;
provided that no such contract shall impair the ability of the water department to properly service its customers
within the city.
B. All water charges (connection charges and user charges), except tap fees, to applicants and customers of any class
outside the city limits shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the amount normally charged for services within
the city limits for such classification. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-27: WATER CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Connection Fee: For each initial or new connection made to the water system, there shall be charged an initial
payment in the form of a connection fee which shall be set by resolution of the city council in accordance with the
following schedules:
1. Residential And Other Housing Units:
a. For each residential or other housing unit, multi-family dwelling, apartment house or trailer court, the charge
shall be fifty (50) times the monthly bill until changed by resolution of the city council, determined by the water
fixture unit rate in effect and the established water fixture unit count.
b. The connection charge shall apply to all parcels and lots which have not previously been served by the
municipal water system and each lot of any new subdivision to be served by the municipal water system.
2. Commercial And Industrial Connections:
a. For all initial or new commercial and industrial water connections, the connection fee shall be fifty (50) times
the monthly bill until changed by resolution of the city council determined by the water fixture unit rate in effect
and the water fixture unit count determined by the building inspector.
b. Note: Water lines installed for fire protection only with normal service usage are exempt from the connection
charge.
3. Modification And Expansion Of Facilities:
a. If any premises is modified or expanded, increasing the WFU count, the connection charge will be fifty (50)
times the monthly bill until changed by resolution of the city council. The monthly bill shall be, for purposes of
this subsection, determined by the water fixture unit rate in effect times the net increase in the water fixture unit
count (net increase WFU x 50 x WFU rate).
b. In converting a residential building to commercial use or developing a commercial use on a lot with previous
water service (in which the building has been demolished or removed), the applicant shall pay the connection
charge based upon the net increase in fixture units. In the event there is no record of the fixture units in the
original structure, the applicant will be credited sixty six (66) fixture units unless changed by resolution of the
city council. In no case will a refund be granted for a new reduction in fixture units.
4. Determination Of Water Fixture Unit Count: The building inspector will conduct a fixture unit survey at the time a
building permit is requested. This will be done off of construction drawings provided by the applicant. The final
count will be based on a final inspection by the building inspector of any completed structure.
B. Payment: The water connection charge shall be payable on demand to the city at the time the building inspector
issues a building permit.
C. Water Fixture Unit Count: Until further resolution of the city council, the water fixture unit count and resulting rates
for water use and consumption for residences shall be based on the following water fixture units (WFU) per dwelling
unit:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 583/640
WFU
All single-family dwellings 66
All multiple-family dwellings (duplex, triplex and quadraplex) 66
Apartments 46
Trailers in trailer courts (RV parks not included) 66
D. Places Of Worship: Churches, synagogues and other facilities for religious worship shall be charged at the minimum
commercial rate.
E. Other Water Users: All water users not specifically set forth in subsection C of this section shall be classified as
commercial or industrial users and water fixture units will be determined on the basis of the "fixture unit value table"
contained in section 9-1-51 of this chapter. (Ord. 694, 4-22-2008)
9-1-29: WATER RATES:
A. Residential: Rates for water use and consumption shall be set by resolution of the city council.
B. Classes Of Service Other Than Residential:
1. Rates Set By Resolution: Rates for water use and consumption for all other classes and types of uses shall be
set by resolution of the city council.
2. Water Fixture Unit Count For Existing Accounts: The water fixture unit count for all existing accounts shall be
determined by the citywide fixture unit survey conducted in November 1981.
3. New Water Fixture Counts: New water fixture counts shall be determined by the building inspector who will
conduct a fixture unit survey at the time a building permit is requested from the construction drawings provided by
the applicant or when a final building inspection is done by the building inspector of the completed structure.
4. Revision Of Water Fixture Unit Count: The director, or his designee, may revise any water fixture unit count
based on a resurvey of any establishment or property at his sole discretion.
5. Resurvey Of Water Fixture Unit Count; Fee: The property owner may also request a resurvey of his water fixture
unit count at any time upon payment of a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
6. Meter Rates:
a. As an alternative to the water fixture unit method of billing, the city will bill based upon a metered quantity
consumed. The user must submit a method of reporting meter readings satisfactory to the director to assure
safeguards against tampering with the meter. Once the user selects to use a meter as a basis of his billing, he
may revert to a WFU basis only on the anniversary date of his selection to use the meter as the basis for
billing. The user shall purchase his water meter from the city and the user shall pay all costs incurred in
installing such meter.
b. The meter rate shall be set by resolution of the city council.
C. Minimum Charge: The minimum charge for water service for any classification of water user shall be based on sixty
six (66) WFUs times the rate per water fixture unit for such classification.
D. Public Facilities: Water fees shall be assessed for all public buildings unless specifically waived by the city council
as part of a lease of public property. (Ord. 560, 1-23-2001)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 584/640
E. Changes In Rates: All changes in user rates for water use and consumption shall first be proposed to the city
council at a regularly scheduled meeting. The proposed change in rates shall not be acted upon until the following
regularly scheduled or subsequent meeting. (Ord. 561, 2-27-2001)
9-1-30: METER TESTS AND METER ERROR BILLING ADJUSTMENTS:
A. Meter Tests:
1. On Consumer Request:
a. A customer may request the city test the meter serving his/her premises.
b. The charge for the test shall be an amount to be specified by resolution of the city council. The customer will
be required to deposit the full amount with the city prior to the test being performed.
c. The full deposit including shipping, testing, and labor will be returned to the customer if the meter is found to
register more than two percent (2%) inaccurate.
d. The meter may be tested by an outside meter manufacturer or its agency, or by a reliable organization
equipped for water meter testing.
e. A report showing the results of the test will be furnished to the customer.
B. Meter Error Billing Adjustments:
1. Fast Meters: When, upon testing, a meter is found to be registering more than two percent (2%) fast, the city will
refund to the customer the amount of the overcharge based on the corrected meter readings for the period the
meter was in use but not to exceed three (3) months.
2. Slow Meters: When, upon testing, a meter is found to be registering more than two percent (2%) slow, the city
will bill the consumer for the amount of the undercharge based on the corrected meter readings for the period the
meter was in service but not to exceed three (3) months.
3. Nonregistering Meters: The city may bill the consumer for water consumed while the meter was nonregistering
for a period not to exceed three (3) months at an estimate of the consumption based upon the consumer's prior
use during the same season of the previous year if conditions were unchanged, or at an estimate based upon a
reasonable comparison with the use of other consumers during the same period, receiving the same class of
service under similar conditions.
4. General: When the city determines that a meter is malfunctioning or it is found that an error in a meter is due to a
certain cause, the date of which can be determined, the overcharge or undercharge will be computed back to, but
not beyond, such date.
5. Estimation: When a meter has been removed for testing, if available, a replacement meter will be substituted to
track usage. In the event a replacement meter is not available, the usage will be accounted for and estimated
based on historical data of the customer's prior use or a reasonable comparison of other customers under similar
conditions.
The customer is responsible for the purchase of the initial meter. The city will maintain and replace thereafter at
the city's expense, except in cases of vandalism, fraud or damage caused by the customer. (Ord. 689, 3-11-2008)
9-1-31: METERS ON NEW SERVICES:
All new water services (excluding the replacement of an existing water service not on metered service) shall be made
with the user purchasing from the city the water meter brand required by the city at the user's expense and also
installing the appropriate meter box approved by the director. The city will install the water meter. The city may not
charge the user any cost greater than the city cost of purchasing and installing the required water meter. (Ord. 641, 6-
28-2005)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 585/640
9-1-32: WATER USER FEES FOR CERTAIN COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS:
A. Authorized: Any metered commercial business which maintains and beautifies the Nevada department of
transportation (NDOT) right of way for State Route 225 (Mountain City Highway) will be charged for water use only
as related to the maintenance and beautification of the right of way.
B. Metering: The metered commercial customer's water use for right of way irrigation shall be determined as follows:
1. Measuring the actual volume of water used through a secondary water meter; or
2. If circumstances allow, subtracting the winter water usage (when the right of way is not being irrigated) from the
summer water usage (when the right of way is being irrigated), as recorded on the master water meter. Any such
customer shall inform the water department of the dates when the right of way irrigation began and when it
stopped. (Ord. 656, 10-25-2005)
9-1-33: TEMPORARY SERVICE:
A. Duration Of Service: Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six (6) months
after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the director.
B. Deposit: The applicant shall deposit, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities required
to furnish said service, exclusive of the cost of salvageable material. Upon discontinuance of service, the actual
cost shall be determined and an adjustment made as an additional charge, refund or credit. If service is supplied
through a fire hydrant, the applicant will be charged in accordance with the following rate schedule:
Flat charge per connection, for both installation and removal of service facilities, including meter $75.00
Each additional move of facilities to another location 25.00
C. Installation And Operation: All facilities for temporary service to the customer connection shall be made by the water
department and shall be operated in accordance with its instructions.
D. Responsibility For Meters And Installations: The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the
meter or to any other loaned facilities of the water department which are involved in furnishing temporary service
from the time they are installed until they are removed, or until forty eight (48) hours' notice in writing has been
given to the water department that the contractor or other person is through with the meter or meters and the
installation. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer.
E. Supply From Fire Hydrant: An applicant for temporary use of water from a fire hydrant must secure a permit therefor
from the water department and pay the regular fee charged for the temporary service connection and provide
himself with a hydrant wrench necessary to operate such hydrant, or pay the water department fifteen dollars
($15.00) for the loan of such equipment, and pay for the water use in accordance with the meter readings at the
rates prescribed by the city council. The water department will notify the fire department of any such connections
and/or use.
F. Unauthorized Use Of Hydrants: Tampering with any fire hydrant for the unauthorized use of water therefrom, or for
any other purpose, is a city offense, punishable by fine and/or incarceration.
G. Rates: The rates for temporary service shall be one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. The
minimum charge for water shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month. Water charges shall be billed monthly.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 586/640
H. Credit: The applicant shall pay the estimated cost of service in advance or shall be otherwise required to establish
credit. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-35: EXTENSION OF WATER MAIN FACILITIES:
Water main facilities may be extended by subdivider, developer, property owner or other persons in accordance with
plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city engineer.
A. Construction And Extension: The inside diameter of every water main shall not be less than ten inches (10"), except
as may be determined by the city engineer. The subdivider, developer, property owner or other persons shall
construct all water mains in accordance with the plans and specifications as submitted and approved by the city
engineer and pay any and all costs for the minimum size water main required for this development as determined
by the city engineer. Every water main extension must be extended across the full frontage of the developer's or
property owner's property and not only to the closest corner of their property.
B. Connection: Upon connection to the water system, the subdivider, developer, property owner or other persons shall
dedicate all water mains located on property owned or controlled by the city to the city. Upon dedication and after
the one year contractor warranty period has expired, the city will operate and maintain the water main located on
said property.
C. Construction Of Larger Mains: Whenever, in the opinion of the city council or city engineer, it is necessary that a
water main be constructed of a larger capacity than the minimum capacity set forth in subsection A of this section,
then the city shall pay the difference in pipe material cost for the oversized water main. The subdivider, developer,
property owner or other person shall be required to purchase materials, construct and install such oversized water
main required.
D. Reimbursement: In a situation where water main facilities are required to be extended at least one hundred feet
(100') from an existing main and the city council determines that the area through which the main will be extended
is well suited for growth, the city council may determine to apply the following reimbursement process:
1. Water main facilities may be extended by a subdivider, developer, property owner or other person (the applicant).
2. The actual cost of extending the water main (cost of materials and labor only) shall be paid by the applicant.
3. The city may thereafter collect from any water user connecting directly to such extension an extension
connection fee which is represented by that fraction of the actual cost of such extension, as approved by the city,
as the number of front feet or acreage, or combination of the two (2), which may be served by such extension
when connected to the city water system.
4. Extension connection fees, together with regular fees collected pursuant to section 9-5-29 of this title from new
water users above the extension, shall be paid by the city to the applicant originally installing such extension up
to an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the cost of the extension.
a. The use of connection fees for payment to the applicant shall be limited to not longer than seven (7) years after
the date said extension is originally connected to the city water system.
b. The use of extension connection fees for payment to the applicant shall not be limited in time.
c. The city shall in no way be obligated to assure that the applicant making such extension is paid ninety percent
(90%) of the total costs thereof nor to initiate any action or incur any expense to collect any sum to be paid to
the applicant.
5. Where different applicants contribute to the making of the extension, such sums shall be refunded to such
applicants prorated according to the amounts which they separately contributed toward the extension and
pursuant to the preceding plan.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 587/640
E. Special Reimbursement Agreements: Where special conditions exist in the opinion of the city which justify
reimbursement to the person paying the costs of a main extension which justify reimbursement on any basis other
than that provided in subsection D of this section, the city council may authorize a special reimbursement contract
by the city and the person or persons constructing the main extension. Said special reimbursement agreement shall
be made and entered into prior to acceptance of the work and water main by the city. (Ord. 494, 12-9-1997)
9-1-37: BILLING (PAYMENT AND LIEN RIGHTS):
All bills for water services shall be rendered monthly or bimonthly at the established rate in advance, or such bills may
be rendered on a regularly established day of each and every period in which the service was rendered. Each bill shall
show the amount of the water service charge. In the event the water bill, or any part thereof, is not paid in full within
fifteen (15) days after the date when billed, it will be considered delinquent and subject the customer and property
owner to termination of service, and allow the city to claim a lien on the property for the amount of the bill. In all cases,
the property owner shall be ultimately responsible for the payment of the water bill. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-39: PROCEDURE FOR TERMINATION OF SERVICES FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. Notice Of Delinquency: On the sixteenth day succeeding the mailing of any water bill, or in the event the sixteenth
day falls on a holiday, Saturday or Sunday, then on the next succeeding working day, all charges to that date,
whether or not billed, are deemed due and payable. Upon nonpayment of such water charges, the water billing
shall be considered delinquent and the finance department shall mail notice to the legal owner or the applicant for
service and shall either mail a copy of the notice to the occupant or post a copy of the notice on the premises of the
occupant at the address receiving service, notifying the owner and occupant that the water service will be
terminated on a specific date, which date shall not be less than ten (10) days after the date of mailing or posting
such delinquency notice.
B. Request To Be Heard: The owner or applicant applying for service or occupant of the premises may request to
present his position concerning termination of water services to the city council and the city council's action will be
final.
C. Failure To Appear: Failure of the owner, customer or occupant to appear before the city council after having
requested such right, as provided above, will cause the water service to be terminated.
D. Lien For Services: On the date of termination of water services, or any date thereafter, the finance department may
cause to be filed with the county recorder a statement of the amount due and unpaid for water services and a
description of the property to which the services were rendered to perfect a lien against the property.
E. Vacation Of Premises; Notice Required: Upon vacating the premises, all customers desiring to discontinue water
service shall notify the water department not less than one business day prior to vacating the premises. Unless
discontinuance of service is ordered, the customer shall be liable for charges whether or not the water is used.
F. Delinquency Penalty: When payment is not made prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. the working day immediately
preceding the date the service is scheduled for termination, the finance department shall charge a one hundred
dollar ($100.00) delinquent penalty.
G. Failure To Pay: If payment is made after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. the working day immediately preceding the date the
service is scheduled for termination, and said payment does not include the one hundred dollar ($100.00)
delinquent penalty, the water service shall be disconnected and the one hundred dollar ($100.00) delinquent
penalty will remain due and payable.
H. Reconnections: The water department will endeavor to make reconnections for water shutoffs during regular
working hours on the day of the request, if conditions permit, otherwise reconnections will be made on the regular
working day following the day the request is made.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 588/640
I. Reconnections Other Than Working Hours: When a customer has requested that the reconnection be made at other
than regular working hours, the water department will reasonably endeavor to so make the reconnection if
practicable under the circumstances, but will be under no obligation to do so. (Ord. 536, 12-28-1999)
9-1-41: APPEALS:
The city council shall review any decision made by the director, or his representatives or agents in interpreting,
applying or enforcing the provisions of this chapter, upon receipt of an application or petition, in writing, requesting a
review of such decision. In exercising its powers of review, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of the
law, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination of the director
appealed from and make such order, requirement or determination as ought to be made. The city council may also
initiate a review of the director's interpretation of the provisions of this chapter by a motion and by a vote of a majority
of the quorum or a majority of the members present if such number exceeds a quorum. In all cases, the decision of the
city council shall be final. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-43: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-45: ANNUAL REVIEW OF FINANCIAL STATUS:
The city council will annually review the statement of expenditures and revenues of the department. The city council
will use the information from the review and recommendations from the city clerk, auditors and the director to adjust
schedules of rates, fees and charges for all service by the department. System revenues shall be sufficient at all times,
after making reasonable allowances for contingencies and errors in estimates to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses and produce net revenues to retire any outstanding indebtedness, and maintain any reserve accounts for
system replacement and capital improvements. If recommended actions are not taken, the city council shall specifically
address why recommended action was not taken. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-47: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Pools And Tanks: When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool or other
purposes, arrangements must be made with the water department prior to taking such water. Permission to take
water in unusual quantities will be given only if it can be safely delivered through the water department facilities and
if other consumers are not inconvenienced thereby.
B. Responsibility For Equipment: The customer shall, at his own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good
and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the
water department shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such
equipment, or the negligence or wrongful act of the customer or of any of this tenants, agents, employees,
contractors, licensees or permittees in installing, maintaining, operating or interfering with such equipment. The
water department shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by faucets, valves and other equipment
that are open when water is turned on at the curb stop, either originally or when turned on after a temporary
shutdown.
C. Water Connections: No residential customer shall be allowed more than one water service per residence. (Ord. 323,
2-19-1982)
9-1-49: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 589/640
The board shall have the power to adopt and may from time to time amend rules and regulations for the operation of
the Elko municipal water system including, but not limited to, rules and regulations concerning the method of hooking
up and the type of use of water, so long as such rules and regulations are not in conflict with federal or state statutes or
this chapter. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-51: FIXTURE UNIT VALUE TABLE:
Fixture unit surveys are conducted and fixture units established in accord with the following table:
Description Of Fixture
Fixture Value Per Unit
Continuous flow per GPM 200
Dishwashers:
Conveyor
Residential
Under counter
100
8
10
Disposals 50
Drinking fountains 2
Floor drains:
Grease, oil, solids
4
6
Hose bibs 2
Landscaping per 1,000 square feet 12
Laundry: 4
Tub and faucets 4
Clothes washer:
Automatic 8 pound
12 _ 19 pound
20 _ 39 pound
40 _ 50 pound
50+ per pound of machine weight
16
20
22
24
1.5
Receptors for refrigerator, coffee urn, soft drinks, ice machines, etc. 2
Showers, per head, and drain 4
Sinks:
Bar
Flushing rim (clinic)
Industrial; wash up, etc.
Kitchen
Lavatory
2
12
6
4
2
Swimming pool per 100 square feet 5
Trailer parks:
Dump station
Recreational vehicle park, per pad
25
7
Urinals:
Pedestal-siphon
Stall
Trough/2 foot
Wall
12
4
6
4
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 590/640
Water closet:
Flush valve
Tank
12
8
Water for cooling per ton 15
For fixture types not listed, fixture units shall be estimated by using similar use and performance description.
For nonresidential facilities which operate or are open to the public in excess of twelve (12) hours per day, a multiplier
of 1.5 shall be applied to the fixture unit value per unit. (Ord. 323, 2-19-1982)
9-1-53: APPROVAL FEES FOR CERTAIN PROJECTS REQUIRING FIVE ACRE FEET OR MORE
OF WATER PER YEAR:
A. Project Defined: As used in this section, "project" means any development, including new construction and
expansion or modification of existing development, that requires the use of five (5) acre feet or more of water per
year and requires the approval of an officer or agency of a local government.
B. Exception: This section does not apply to:
1. A publicly owned project;
2. A "subdivision", as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.230;
3. A parcel map filed pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.461;
4. A division of land pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.471 through 278.4725, inclusive; or
5. A planned unit development pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278A.
C. Charges: Each owner or developer of an approved project must pay seventy five dollars ($75.00), together with a
ten dollar ($10.00) administrative fee, plus fifty cents ($0.50) per acre foot of water, or fraction thereof, required by
the project to the city upon approval of the project. The determination of the number of acre feet of water shall be
determined by the projected water use table adopted by the city and on file in the city clerk's office.
D. Report And Information:
1. Each local governmental officer or agency that is required to approve a project shall file a report of each project
the officer or agency approves, on a form provided by the administrator of the division of water planning of the
state department of conservation and natural resources.
2. The owner or developer of an approved project must provide the city with the following information for the report:
a. The name and mailing address of the owner or developer of the project;
b. A legal description of the location of the project;
c. A description of the project, including a summary of the amount of water required annually for the project;
d. A statement concerning how the water will be supplied; and
e. If the water is self-supplied, the source of the water and identification of the water rights.
3. The local governmental officer or agency shall file all reports for the projects approved during a quarter of the
calendar year on or before fifteen (15) days after the last day of the quarter.
4. The report is to be submitted to the administrator of the division of water planning of the state department of
conservation and natural resources, together with the required fee. (Ord. 406, 11-27-1990)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 591/640
9-1-54: VACANT UNITS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES, COMMERCIAL COMPLEXES AND
MOBILE HOME PARKS:
A. Exemption Requirements: Any owner (or the owner's authorized representative) of an apartment complex,
commercial complex or mobile home park containing more than one rental unit or space (hereinafter "unit") served
by a single water service connection may obtain an exemption from monthly water user fees for any vacant rental
unit, provided the following requirements are met:
1. The entire apartment complex, commercial complex or mobile home park must utilize the fixture unit method for
the determination of water fees for the entire month during which the exemption is sought;
2. The unit for which the exemption is sought must be vacant for thirty (30) continuous days during the month for
which the exemption is sought;
3. The unit for which the exemption is sought must be offered to the public for rent and must constitute a separate
"premises";
4. The owner (or the owner's authorized representative) of the apartment complex, commercial complex or mobile
home park must request an exemption for the vacant unit on a form specified by the city, which form shall be
entitled "verification of nonoccupancy";
5. The fully completed and executed verification of nonoccupancy form shall be received by the finance department
no later than the twentieth day of the month during which the unit is vacant, and if the unit is rented after the
twentieth day of the month, then the city must be notified;
6. Exemptions for months other than the month in which the verification of nonoccupancy form is received by the
finance department shall not be granted;
7. The customer may submit the verification of nonoccupancy form by fax, in person, by mail, or by depositing the
form in the city drop box; and
8. The verification of nonoccupancy form must be signed under oath and dated by the owner (or the owner's
authorized representative) of the apartment complex, commercial complex or mobile home park.
B. Amount: The exemption shall be in an amount corresponding to the fixture unit count applicable to the vacant unit.
C. Not Granted For Individual Fixtures: Exemptions shall not be granted for individual fixtures within premises,
regardless of whether the fixture has been in use during any given month.
D. Resurveys: Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the owner of a premises from requesting the city to
perform a resurvey of fixtures on the premises for the purpose of making adjustments to the fixture count.
E. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
APARTMENT COMPLEX: A building or tract of land containing two (2) or more family dwelling units, at least one of
which is offered for rent to the public, all of which are owned by a common person or group of persons.
COMMERCIAL COMPLEX: A building or tract of land containing two (2) or more commercial units, at least one of
which is offered for rent to the public, all of which are owned by a common person or group of persons.
MOBILE HOME PARK AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Shall have the meanings ascribed to those terms in
section 3-5-3 of this code.
F. Transient Lodging Rental Business Not Applicable: Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this chapter,
the exemption from water fees described in this section shall not apply to vacant rooms, spaces or other
accommodations in a "transient lodging rental business", as that term is defined title 4, chapter 6 of this code. (Ord.
629, 11-23-2004)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 592/640
9-1-55: RIGHT OF WAY TOLL:
The Elko municipal water utility shall pay a right of way toll, to be charged to the water enterprise fund, to the city of
Elko as follows:
A. Commencing August 1, 2010, equal to 2.5 percent of the gross receipts derived by it from each utility bill of a
customer of the Elko municipal water utility during each calendar year; said payments shall be made on or before
the fifteenth day of each month of the month immediately following collection of such revenues, and each payment
shall equal 2.5 percent of the aforesaid gross revenues obtained by the Elko municipal water utility, its successor or
assigns.
B. Upon its receipt of payments of the right of way toll collected and transmitted to the city of Elko pursuant to
subsection A of this section, the city of Elko shall allocate one hundred percent (100%) of the proceeds to the city's
general fund. (Ord. 714, 7-27-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
Chapter 2
ELKO MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL
CODE
9-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF ELKO MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE
MATERIAL CODE. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter and any franchise collection agreement, the following words and phrases shall, when
used in this chapter, have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BULKY ITEMS: Furniture, household or industrial appliances, shipping crates and containers, and other large bulky or
heavy objects not normally discarded on a regular basis at residential, commercial or industrial premises.
CITY: The city of Elko, Nevada, a municipal corporation, and all of the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of
the city as presently existing or as such boundaries may be modified during the term.
COLLECTION: Collection of municipal solid waste (MSW) and itstransportation to a disposal site.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Any premises occupied by stores, offices and other commercial facilities providing goods
or services.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Includes waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavement, houses, commercial buildings and other
structures.
CONTRACTOR: The contractor to whom the MSW collection contract is granted.
DELIVERY: "Delivery" of MSW by a waste generator shall be deemed to occur when MSW is deposited in a receptacle
or at a location that is designated for collection pursuant to this chapter, or is otherwise discarded.
DISPOSAL CHARGE: The portion of the rates to cover payment of landfill or transfer station tipping fees.
DISPOSAL SITE: The solid waste facility or facilities designated by the city for the ultimate disposal (by the contractor)
of MSW collected by the contractor. The disposal site may include, but is not limited to, a solid waste landfill, a solid
waste transfer or processing station, or a combination thereof.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 593/640
ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS: All federal and state statutes and county and city ordinances concerning public health,
safety and the environment including, by way of example and not limitation, the comprehensive environmental
response, compensation and liability act of 1980, 42 United States code section 9601 et seq.; the resource
conservation and recovery act, 42 United States code section 6901 et seq.; the federal clean water act, 33 United
States code section 1351 et seq.; the occupational safety and health act, 29 United States code section 651 et seq.; as
currently in force or as hereafter amended, and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
GARBAGE: All kitchen and table food waste, and animal or vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage,
preparation, cooking or handling of foodstuffs.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, may do either of the following: a) cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase
in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; b) pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise managed. "Hazardous waste" includes all substances defined as hazardous waste, extremely hazardous
waste or acutely hazardous waste identified and listed as hazardouswaste by the U.S. environmental protection
agency pursuant to the resource conservation and recovery act, 42 United States code section 6901 et seq.
INDUSTRIAL PREMISES: Premises occupied by manufacturing operations and other industrial facilities.
INSTITUTIONAL PREMISES: Premises occupied by educational, healthcare, correctional, research and other similar
facilities.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSU): A. All discarded putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes,
including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes,
discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid wastes and other discarded
substances or materials.
B. MSW does not include: 1) hazardous waste; 2) low level radioactive waste; 3) untreated medical waste which is
regulated pursuant to the medical waste management act; or 4) recyclable materials which can be segregated
from other waste material.
OFFICER: Includes any elected or appointed member of the city of Elko government.
OWNER: The person holding legal title to the real property constituting the premises to which MSW collection service
is to be provided under this agreement.
PERSON: An individual, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever.
PREMISES: Any land or building in the city where MSW is generated or accumulated.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials which are capable of being recycled and which may be segregated from other
waste material for collection and recycling, rather than collection and disposal.
RECYCLE/RECYCLING: The process of collecting, sorting, cleaning, treating and reconstituting materials that would
otherwise become MSW and returning these materials to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials for
new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards to be used in the marketplace.
REFUSE: Includes garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Single-family homes, townhouses, multi-unit buildings such as apartments and
condominiums, and mobile home parks.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, plastics, and rubber byproducts.
SEGREGATED FROM OTHER WASTE MATERIAL: A. The placement of recyclable materials in separate containers
by the waste generator, or other person;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 594/640
B. The binding of recyclable materials separately from other waste material by the waste generator, or other person;
C. The physical separation of recyclable materials from other waste material by the waste generator, or other
person.
TERM: The term of this agreement.
TON: A short ton of two thousand (2,000) pounds avoirdupois.
WASTE GENERATOR: The owner or occupant of premises which initially produce MSW. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-3: DEPOSIT UPON PUBLIC PLACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit upon the streets, alleys, public grounds or upon any vacant lot of the city,
any garbage or debris of any nature, except at such times and places and under such regulations as the city council
may from time to time permit or adopt. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-4: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
Except as may be otherwise provided, the collection and removal of any and all municipal solid waste herein provided
shall be performed by the city or such collection may be handled exclusively for the city through a private collector
approved by the city council.
A. By City:
1. The city council may carry out the provisions of this chapter; and
2. May haul all or part of the refuse; and
3. May purchase such equipment as may be required to carry out the provisions of this chapter, and charge and
collect charges for services provided pursuant to this chapter.
B. By Contractor:
1. Franchise Agreement: The city council may, if considered to be for the best interests of the city, enter into a
franchise agreement with one or more persons, firms or corporations authorizing the collecting, removing and
disposing of all MSW within the city and for the assessing and collecting of charges for such services. The city
council, in letting any such agreement under the provisions of this chapter, shall include therein such provisions
as may be deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the city and its citizens and inhabitants and,
particularly, provisions relieving the city from any responsibility for any acts of such contractor or contractors and
from any damages that may result from collecting, hauling or disposing of refuse.
2. Written Agreement Required: The franchise agreement granted hereunder shall not become effective until a
written agreement is entered into between the franchisee and the city, such agreement shall include all the
requirements set forth herein. The franchisee shall be required to perform all of the following:
a. Guarantee that MSW service shall be available to business locations, public places and all other locations
within the city which the city may designate at all times and that all MSW in connection therewith within the city
shall be removed in an expeditious manner in accordance with all the terms of the franchise.
b. Collect MSW from all business locations, public places and other locations which the city may designate
wherever situated in the city at least once a week.
c. Guarantee that in the collection of MSW from any location in the city, care shall be taken to deposit all MSW
inside the collection truck, leaving no evidence or bits or pieces of garbage upon any streets, alleys or other
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 595/640
public places within the city or any private property used for the collection of garbage.
d. Provide safe, adequate and clean equipment which is constructed in a manner to be completely covered so as
to prevent the sifting, spilling, dropping or blowing of any of the garbage contained therein upon any of the
streets, alleys or public places in the city.
e. The equipment used by the franchisee shall be modern, up to date and watertight. The outside of the
equipment shall be kept free from dirt and the inside of carriers of garbage shall be thoroughly cleaned after
dumping each day.
3. Guarantee Against Liability: Guarantee that in the exercise of the duties under the franchise, every reasonable
and proper precaution to avoid damage or injury to persons or property shall be used and the franchisee shall
covenant, contract and agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city and all customers of the franchise from
which MSW is removed from any and all claims, damages, costs, fees and liabilities by reason of injury or
damage to persons or property growing out of any act of the franchisee and the agents and employees of the
franchisee in removing, hauling and dumping any garbage, rubbish and waste matter by reason of the contract.
Franchisee shall further agree that if the city is sued by any person of any kind to recover damage to any person
or property on account of actions during the performance of duties under the franchise, the franchisee, its heirs,
successors and assigns shall defend all such suits and pay all judgments courts may enter in such suit. Further, it
shall be required to provide liability insurance of a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) bodily
injury coverage and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) property damage.
a. Bond Provided: Provide a performance bond or time certificate in an amount determined by the city council to
ensure faithful performance of the requirements of the franchise, the form of bond or time certificates subject to
approval by the city attorney.
b. Performance Agreement: Agree that in the event that the franchise contractor fails to perform any condition of
the franchise, fails to abide by all of the laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the franchise or become
bankrupt or insolvent, the city shall have the right to terminate the franchise and agreement so awarded if the
franchisee fails to correct the deficiency within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice of such deficiency
from the city council.
c. Transfer Agreement: Agree that no assignment or transfer of the franchise shall be made without written
consent of the city council.
d. Responsibility Agreement: Agree to be responsible to the city council or other officials designated by the city
council.
4. Proposal; Award Of Contract:
a. Before awarding any such contract or contracts, sealed proposals may be called for under such notice as may
be deemed reasonable and as may be provided by the city council. Persons submitting any proposals shall
include therein all statements or requirements required by the city council, including descriptions, plans and
specifications of all equipment used or to be used, and fees to be charged for regular services and for
additional or special hauling of refuse. The city council, in awarding one or more contracts hereunder, shall
take into consideration the type of equipment used or to be used, the responsibility of the party submitting the
proposal, the rates and charges named in the proposal and all other pertinent matters as well as the amount of
money offered by the bidder to the city for the awarding of such contracts.
b. The city council shall have the right to waive formalities in awarding contracts hereunder. It may award one or
more contracts with such designations, differences and restrictions as to districts, areas, nature of hauling,
charges and other matters, as may be deemed proper and may make such contracts exclusive in the
contractor or contractors or exclusive as to districts, nature of hauling or otherwise. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-5: RECEPTACLES:
A. Receptacles Required:
1. No owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any public or private premises shall permit to accumulate upon his
premises any MSW, garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste, except in approved type receptacles approved by the city.
These receptacles shall be of adequate capacity and be provided in sufficient number to hold all garbage, refuse
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 596/640
or waste that accumulates between collections. Individual family residences shall not use more than three (3)
receptacles.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit, or cause to be dumped or deposited, any MSW, garbage,
refuse, rubbish or waste in any receptacle not owned or maintained by him or by an approved franchise collector.
3. The lids or covers of refuse containers or receptacles shall be kept securely in place at all times, except when the
refuse is being deposited or removed for collection, so that flies and other insects may not have access to the
contents thereof.
B. Placing For Collection:
1. All receptacles, containers, bins or enclosures used by commercial establishments and residential users shall be
placed in areas designated by the city.
2. Receptacles may be placed in the city right of way only when collected by the city or the city's collector.
3. No receptacles, containers, bins or enclosures shall be placed beneath a fire escape or so as to restrict egress
from an exit door. None shall be placed under a street floor window unless the window is of fire resistant
construction. All containers, receptacles, bins or enclosures shall be required to meet the construction and
placement specifications provided in this chapter, except that the sanitation department may temporarily waive
these requirements in extreme hardship cases. When receptacles are placed in city alleyways forcollection, the
owner shall be required to place alley access numbers on their properties with the same access number placed
on each receptacle, together with the owner's street address.
C. Special Handling Of Refuse:
1. All large types of refuse such as boxes, cartons and crates over twenty eight inches (28") on any one side shall
be collapsed for each handling by collection crews.
2. Tree trimmings, branches and limbs shall be cut into four foot (4') lengths. Trunk sections shall be cut so as not to
exceed fifty (50) pounds for any one section. It shall not be necessary to provide receptacles, but it shall be
necessary to have refuse contained in wooden or cardboard boxes or plastic bags. It shall be placed in a neat
and orderly manner.
3. Ashes shall not be placed in the same receptacle with any inflammable substance, but shall be placed in
separate metal containers of the type required for garbage. Ashes shall be soaked with water when necessary to
extinguish live embers.
4. Disposal of the following types of refuse is prohibited: auto bodies, septic tank or cesspool pumping, hazardous
waste, toxic chemicals, insecticides, pathological or biological waste, radioactive material, explosives and
flammable material.
5. Body wastes and debris shall not be placed with refuse for collection, but shall be disposed of directly by the
person or persons owning, occupying or leasing the premises wherein such matter is accumulated; however,
animal offal of domestic pets may be placed with refuse provided it is securely wrapped.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant, lessee or contractor to dispose of or cause to be disposed of all
construction rubbish or debris accumulated as a result of construction operations.
7. Every contractor or builder engaged in the erection or repair of a building shall provide a receptacle for the
deposit of garbage and other refuse. He shall keep surroundings free of debris and trash at all times.
8. Any person, firm or corporation who shall place any refuse or debris upon any private or public property not
owned or under the control of said person, firm or corporation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition
to any fine which may be imposed for violation of any provision of this code, shall be liable for all charges which
may be assessed for the removal of said refuse or debris. It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the city
to remove any waste or other material from any existing or any previously operational landfill of the city. (Ord.
479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-6: SCAVENGERS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 597/640
It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the owner of an MSW receptacle to remove any MSW from a receptacle
or scatter the same upon a public alley, street or public place. It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to
remove any MSW from any city landfill or to scatter the same upon a public alley, street, public place or the area of the
landfill. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-7: VEHICLES TRANSPORTING SOLID WASTE:
It is unlawful for any person or permitted private franchise collector to haul or cause to be hauled on or along any public
street or alley any MSW unless it shall be contained in vehicles or receptacles so constructed as to prevent the
contents from falling, leaking or spilling or any noxious odor escaping therefrom, and to prevent any flies, insects or
rodents from having access to the contents. Every person hauling any refuse along any street or alley shall replace
immediately in the conveyance used for such hauling any of the contents which may fall therefrom in or upon any
street, alley or public or private premises. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-8: FLY BREEDING CONDITIONS:
A. Premises To Be Kept Free Of Fly Breeding Substances: It shall be the responsibility of every owner, lessee or tenant
of any premises within the city to keep the premises at all times clean and inoffensive and free from any
accumulation of MSW garbage, refuse, ashes, rubbish, putrescible wastes, vegetable waste, animal offal,
carcasses of dead animals and any other conditions wherein houseflies or other flies will breed.
B. Fly Breeding Conditions Declared Nuisance; Abatement; Penalty: Any condition wherein flies breed is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Any person who, upon written notification of the sanitation department, its
authorized agent or the city clerk, fails purposely to abate such nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If found
guilty by the municipal court, the nuisance shall be abated and removed by the city at the expense of such person.
(Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The city or its authorized agent shall be and is hereby authorized to enter into or upon any premises within the
corporate limits of the city for the purpose of making necessary inspections and issuing instructions for abatement and
correction of any and all violations of the provisions ofthis chapter. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-10: CONFLICT WITH OTHER CODES OR ORDINANCES:
Whenever the provisions of this chapter shall conflict with any other provisions of this code or other ordinance, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-11: ENFORCEMENT:
When the owner, lessee, tenant or other possessor of land being served under the provisions of this chapter has had
charges or penalties assessed against them, and payment has not been received, the city clerk may assign the
account of a bona fide collection agency or institute legal action for the recovery of the amount due. (Ord. 479, 12-10-
1996)
9-2-12: COLLECTION AND HAULING OF REFUSE:
A. Hours: The time of collection and hauling of refuse shall be between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 598/640
B. Individuals: The hauling of refuse by an individual from premises occupied, owned or controlled by him will be
permitted, provided such collection and hauling conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-13: RATES TO BE CHARGED:
A. Charges Authorized: A charge shall be made and collected by the refuse collector from all occupied premises in the
city for services rendered under the provisions of this chapter.
B. Amount; Disputes: From the collection, removal and disposal of refuse there shall be a flat monthly charge to be
based upon the average amount of material at each collection and for extra services, and this charge shall be
specifically indicated in the application for permission to collect and dispose of garbage and, this charge shall not
be changed except by consent of the city council at a regular meeting. In case of dispute over service or charge for
service, the city council shall investigate and decide proper service and charge for service and its decision in this
matter shall be final. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-14: FAILURE TO REMOVE:
A. Order To Remove; Nuisance; Lien: If at any timeaccumulation of MSW, refuse or other waste material is not hauled
or removed, or MSW or garbage becomes offensive and is not removed by the owner or person responsible for the
same, an order for such removal may forthwith be made by the city council. If not removed within the time required
by such order, the city shall declare the same a nuisance, have such material removed in whatever manner may be
reasonable and shall collect the reasonable charges and costs of such removal from the person or entity violating
this provision and/or the property involved. The city may file a lien upon the property. Such lien shall be perfected by
filing with the county recorder a statement by the city clerk of the amount of the expenses and charges due and
unpaid and describing the property subject to the lien. Such lien shall be coequal with the latest lien thereon to
secure the payment of general taxes. The lien shall not be subject to extinguishment by the sale of any of the
property on account of the nonpayment of general taxes. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all claims,
encumbrances and titles other than the liens of assessment and general taxes.
B. Ashes And Clinkers: No hot ashes or clinkers shall be kept in any building or basement, but must be moved outside
and placed in a metal container and kept ten inches (10") away from any building or wooden fence and shall not be
placed directly under any roof or protruding part of a building.
C. Notices: Notices to owners under this section and under any other provision of this chapter may be given personally
or by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address or address appearing on the tax rolls or
otherwise general delivery, Elko, Nevada.
D. Responsibility Of Owner: Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the owner shall be responsible for
removal of refuse from his premises and for otherwise complying with the terms of this chapter whether such owner
is in possession personally or through a tenant or otherwise, and the property owner shall in each instance be
responsible for all costs and charges for removal of refuse whether the same accrued during occupancy of the
premises by the owner or by a tenant or while vacant or otherwise. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed as relieving from any civil or criminal liability the person actually responsible for any violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-15: STATUS OF DUMPED MATERIAL:
All material dumped at the city landfill, of any nature or description, be it ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish, for any
length of time, no matter how short, is deemed abandoned and becomes the property of the city. (Ord. 479, 12-10-
1996)
9-2-16: OPERATION OF CITY LANDFILL:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 599/640
All dumping of any material, of any nature or description, be it ashes, MSW, garbage, refuse or rubbish, shall be in
conformity to the following provisions:
A. Dumping shall be performed during, and access to the city landfill limited to, only those hours of operation adopted
from time to time by the city council and posted at the main entrance to the city landfill.
B. All dumping of any materials, of any nature or description, be it ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish, and all access
within the city landfill area shall be at the direction of the city landfill operator.
C. There shall be no burning at the city landfill, except under the direction of the city landfill operator.
D. There shall be no scavenging or salvaging about the city landfill nor removal of any material, of any nature or
description, from the city landfill without the written authorization of the director of the department of streets. (Ord.
479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-17: CERTAIN ACTS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person to whom a contract shall have been awarded or to whom a
license shall have been granted as herein provided, to collect or remove refuse in or from the city other than to haul his
own refuse as herein provided. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-18: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in title
1, chapter 3 of this code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-19: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
Any and all remedies herein provided shall be deemed cumulative. The city and the officers thereof shall in addition
thereto have the right to exercise and enforce all rights and remedies otherwise created or existing, including the right
of injunction, the right of abatement of nuisances, the right of action for damages, the right of prosecution for violation
of any statute of the state or other laws of the city and any other right existing or available, including all rights arising
from breach of any contract or contracts awarded hereunder and the right to proceed under the provisions of section 9-
2-14 of this chapter, notwithstanding the issuance of contracts or licenses under the provisions of said section, if it
should appear that refuse is not being satisfactorily hauled or disposed of by any contractor or licensee. (Ord. 479, 12-
10-1996)
9-2-20: COUNCIL TO MAKE REGULATIONS:
The city council is authorized to make any and all necessary or proper regulations to carry out and enforce the
provisions of this chapter, including all matters as to notices, procedures, regulations of hours, segregation of districts,
classifications of services, routes of travel, regulation of landfill grounds or disposal site and similar matters. Licensees,
contractors and owners hauling their own refuse shall be bound by all such rules and regulations of which notice may
be given as required by the city council and, as to method of disposal of refuse at the disposal site, by notices posted
at such site or on the road leading thereto, and a violation of the requirements of such notices shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 479, 12-10-1996)
9-2-21: CITY LANDFILL USER FEE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 600/640
Any person or entity of any name or nature using the city landfill for disposal of garbage, rubbish, waste material or
other refuse, shall pay a fee therefor in such an amount as shall be determined and set from time to time by resolution
of the city council. The city council may set said fees based upon the volume of garbage, rubbish, waste material and
other refuse hauled. (Ord. 567, 6-26-2001)
9-2-22: REPEAL OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances and resolutions in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, but only to the extent
of such conflict.
B. If any section, clause or provision of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid, unenforceable or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity, unenforceability or unconstitutionality of such
section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 479, 12-10-
1996)
Chapter 3
RESERVED
Chapter 4
MILK
(Rep. by Ord. 792, 4-14-2015)
Chapter 5
ELKO SEWER CODE
9-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the ELKO SEWER CODE. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following are to mean:
BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20C), expressed in
parts per million by weight.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE: The charge to the user to produce revenues to retire outstanding indebtedness
and maintain reserve accounts for capital improvements to the sewer system, expressed as dollars per month per
fixture unit ($/mo/SFU).
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Elko.
CONNECTION CHARGES: A fee charged in order to equalize the investment in plant and equipment and other
facilities made by the city of Elko. The charge is for the right of service in the system. All connection charges and fees
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 601/640
go to the sewer capital improvement fund.
DIRECTOR: The city engineer or any of his duly authorized representatives.
ELKO MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM OR SEWER SYSTEM: The system of conduits, pumps, treatment plants and
structures used for the purpose of conveying from their source, treating in any manner and conveying to final points of
disposal all wastes of any nature permitted by this chapter to enter said system. Specifically included as integral parts
of the system are all conduits of any nature forming a party of the general network of conduits or connected directly or
indirectly to said network; all pumps, treatment plants and structures of any kind used in connection with the collection,
treatment and disposal of the wastes handled by the system; and all appurtenances to any of the above, either
physically or functionally connected therewith. "Sanitary sewers", as defined in this section, are all included as parts of
the municipal sewer system.
FIXTURE UNIT SURVEY: The tabulation of sewer fixture units by physical inspection or review of construction plans to
determine the fixture unit count.
FULL FRONTAGE: All lot lines of any lot, parcel or tract of property adjacent to a road, street, alley or right of way, to
include lots, parcels or tracts containing multiple borders or edges, such as corner lots.
HOOKUP CHARGE: See definition of Tap Fee Or Hookup Charge1.
PREMISES: A continuous tract of land, building or group of adjacent buildings under a single control with respect to
use of sewer and responsibility for payment therefor. Subdivision of such use or responsibility shall constitute a division
into separate "premises", as defined in this definition, except that where more than one dwelling is being served
through the same sewer service in which case each of said dwellings shall constitute a separate premises and shall be
subject to the same separate charges as if separate single-family dwellings.
REPLACEMENT COST: The cost to replace items which in the normal course of operation become nonfunctional. This
cost is distinguished from capital improvement cost by being less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a singular
replacement.
SANITARY SEWERS: Those sewers which are designated to carry all waste matter permitted by this chapter to enter
the system, other than surface drainage water.
SEWER DEPARTMENT: The city of Elko water department, located at 1751 College Avenue.
SEWER FIXTURE UNIT (SFU): A numerical value assigned to different types of plumbing fixtures to reflect flow
contribution to the sewer system. Fixture units shall be utilized for billing on the basis of flow contribution for each user.
A tabulation of the numerical value assigned to the various types of plumbing fixtures is included in section 9-5-73 of
this chapter.
SEWER FIXTURE UNIT COUNT OR SURVEY: The tabulation of the fixture units by physical unit or inspection or
review of construction plans to fixture unit determine the fixture unit count.
SEWERAGE FIXTURES: Approved type installed receptacles, devices or appliances which are supplied with water or
which receive liquid or liquidborne wastes and discharge such wastes into the drainage system to which they may be
directly or indirectly connected. Industrial or commercial tanks, vats and similar processing equipment are not
sewerage fixtures, but may be connected to or discharged into approved sewerage fixtures.
STORM SEWERS: Those sewers which are designated to carry surface drainage water and such other waters as are
not required to be disposed of through the sanitary sewer system, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set
forth.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewerage or other
liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
USER CHARGE: A charge to the user in order to cover operation, maintenance and replacement costs associated with
the "sewer system", expressed as dollars per SFU per month. (Ord. 740, 8-9-2011)
9-5-5: MATTER EXCLUDED FROM ALL SEWERS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 602/640
A. General Prohibitions: No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass-through, interference, or results in pollutant concentrations that do not allow the city
of Elko to comply with its WDRs (water discharge requirements). These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW (publicly owned treatment works) whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions: No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a
closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140F) (60C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
2. Wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 measured at the point where discharge enters the sewer main, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment. In addition, the user must also meet
the city's local limit in section 9-5-54 of this chapter;
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in
interference, but in no case solids greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") in any dimension, such as ashes, cinders,
sand earth, coal rubbish, mineralized inorganic grit, metal particles or shavings, or any matter which is chemically
or physically stable for at least five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20C) or which would form a deposit or
obstruction or damage or reduce the capacity of the sewer into which it was placed;
4. Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants in excess of three hundred (300) parts per million (1,000,000)
as five (5) day BOD (biochemical oxygen demand), or in excess of five hundred (500) parts per million
(1,000,000) COD (chemical oxygen demand), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
5. Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140F) (60C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant exceeds one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit
(104F) (40C);
6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, matter containing animal or vegetable greases, products of mineral
oil, or oil of any nature in excess of three hundred (300) parts per million (1,000,000), or products of mineral oil
origin, in amounts that will cause pass-through, interference, or results in pollutant concentrations in biosolids in
excess of limits set forth in 40 CFR 503;
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and safety problems;
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants;
9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair;
10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent;
11. Any radioactive wastes. In the event of an accidental spill of radioactive material into any public sewer, the
person responsible shall:
a. Immediately notify the director; and
b. Render such technical or other assistance to the city within its power to prevent the POTW from becoming
contaminated with radioactivity;
12. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool
drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the director;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 603/640
13. Sludges, screenings, reverse osmosis brines, resin regeneration brines, or residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
14. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit;
15. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity
test;
16. Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW, or
are not biodegradable;
17. Any dispersed biodegradable oils and fats, such as lard, tallow, or vegetable oil, and any fats, oils, or greases of
animal origin in amounts that will cause pass-through or interference, or results in pollutant concentrations in
biosolids that do not allow the city of Elko to comply with its WDRs;
18. Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or
at any point in the POTW, of more than ten percent (10%) or any single reading over five percent (5%) of the
lower explosive limit of the meter;
19. Liquid matter of any nature containing suspended solids;
20. Any matter that would be poisonous to or inhibit the biologic organisms associated with any sewage treatment
process, and which in the opinion of the director or his appointee, might interfere with the in excess of one
thousand (1,000) parts per million (1,000,000); satisfactory operation of any treatment facility or any portion of the
sewer system;
21. Mineralized inorganic grit or metallic particles or shavings that would cause the pollutant concentrations in the
biosolids that do not allow the city of Elko to comply with its WDRs;
22. Hair in quantities that may cause disruption in the operation of sampling or other equipment utilized within the
sewer system.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a
manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
Upon obtaining the written approval of the director, sewage wastes or other matters herein excluded may be
discharged into the sewage system upon payment to the city of the additional costs for processing the same as
hereinafter provided and set forth. (Ord. 675, 11-13-2007)
9-5-7: MATTER EXCLUDED FROM STORM SEWERS:
In addition to the matter excluded heretofore, all other matter of any nature shall be excluded from those parts of the
sewer system designated by the director as storm sewers, excepting only surface drainage waters. Such drainage
water shall be directed into storm sewer only under the authorization and direction of the director. (Ord. 324, 2-19-
1982)
9-5-9: MATTER EXCLUDED FROM SANITARY SEWERS:
In addition to the matter excluded heretofore, all surface drainage water shall be excluded from all parts of the sewer
system designated by the director as the sanitary sewer system. This shall include roof drains and other sources of
uncontaminated water. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-11: SEWER SERVICE:
A. Applications:
1. Content: Each applicant for sewer service shall be required to sign, on a form provided by the sewer department,
an application which shall set forth:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 604/640
a. Date.
b. Location of premises to be served, giving street address and description of property to be served.
c. Applicant's name and mailing address and the name and mailing address of the legal owner of the premises.
d. Purpose for which the property will be used (residential, commercial, apartments, etc.).
e. Person and address to which the monthly bills are to be mailed.
f. The date the applicant will be ready for sewer service.
g. The name of the contracting or plumbing agency that will be hooking the premises to the city sewer system
(new connections).
h. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the applicant shall provide written evidence of
authorization to apply for service from the legal owner of the property.
2. Purpose: The application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the applicant to take service
for any period of time, nor does it bind the city to serve, except under reasonable conditions.
3. Responsibility: The legal owner is responsible for the payment of all sewer charges at the premises for which an
application is made. Only the legal owner of the premises may request termination of sewer service or a change
in the person or address to which the monthly sewer bill is to be sent.
B. Change In Customer Equipment Or Operations: A customer making any change in the size, character or extent of
the equipment or operations for which the service is utilized shall immediately file with the sewer department a new
application for additional service.
C. Sewer Service Laterals: All sewer service laterals shall be constructed and maintained by the property owner in
accordance with sewer department standards, rules and regulations. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
D. Installation Of Sewer Service In Existing Paved Street: If the sewer service is installed in an existing paved street or
area, a street cut permit shall be obtained from the city engineer's office and all costs associated with the street cut,
including, but not limited to, the street cut, required excavation, repair of the street and any required traffic control
shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 522, 12-8-1998)
9-5-15: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. Water Service Discontinued: Sewer service will normally be considered terminated when the water service to the
property has been shut off. The billing for sewer service will be discontinued at that time and the customer will be
billed in accordance with this chapter.
B. Continued Billing: If, in the opinion of the director, unusual circumstances warrant continued billing for sewer service
or partially billing for service, the customer shall be so notified. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-17: TERMINATION FOR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH RULES:
The sewer department may terminate water and/or sewer service to any customer for violation of these rules after it
has given the customer written notice of such intention. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-19: TERMINATION FOR UNSAFE APPARATUS:
If any condition is found to exist on a customer's premises which constitutes a hazard to health or which threatens to
damage any portion of the city sewer system, the service may be terminated without notice. The sewer department will
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 605/640
notify the customer immediately of the reasons for the discontinuance and the corrective action to be taken by the
customer before service can be restored. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-21: TERMINATION FOR FRAUDULENT USE OF SERVICE:
When the sewer department has discovered that a customer has obtained service by fraudulent means, the service to
that customer may be discontinued without notice. The sewer department will not restore service to such customer until
that customer has complied with this sewer code and rules and reasonable requirements of the sewer department, and
the sewer department has been reimbursed for the full amount of the service rendered and the actual cost to the sewer
department incurred by reason of the fraudulent use. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-23: RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
Sewer service shall be considered restored and subject to billing at such a time as the water reconnection takes place.
(Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-25: REFUSAL TO SERVE:
A. Conditions For Refusal: The sewer department may refuse to serve an applicant for service under the following
conditions:
1. If the applicant fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
2. If the intended use of the service is of such a nature that it will be detrimental or injurious to existing customers.
3. If, in the judgment of the sewer department, the applicant's installation for utilizing the service is unsafe or
hazardous, or subject to freezing, or of such nature that satisfactory service cannot be rendered.
4. Where service has been discontinued for fraudulent use, the sewer department will not serve an applicant until it
has determined that all conditions of fraudulent use or practice have been corrected. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
5. If, in the judgment of the sewer department or the state division of environmental protection, there is insufficient
capacity to serve the applicant. (Ord. 385, 9-13-1988)
B. Notification To Customers: When an applicant is refused service under the provisions of this chapter, the sewer
department will notify the applicant that he may appeal the decision of the sewer department to the city council.
(Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-27: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE:
A. Emergency Interruptions: The sewer department will make all reasonable efforts to prevent interruptions to service
and when such interruptions occur will endeavor to reestablish service with the shortest possible delay consistent
with the safety to its customers and the general public.
B. Scheduled Interruptions: Whenever the sewer department finds it necessary to schedule an interruption to its
service it will, where feasible, notify all customers to be affected by the interruptions, stating the approximate time
and anticipated duration of the interruption. Scheduled interruptions will be made at such hours as will provide least
inconvenience to the customers consistent with reasonable sewer department operations. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-29: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Connection Fee: For each initial or new connection made to the sewer system, there shall be charged an initial
payment in the form of a connection fee which shall be set by resolution by the city council in accordance with the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 606/640
following schedules:
1. Residential:
a. For each residential or other housing unit, multi-family dwelling, apartment house or trailer court, the charge
shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per sewer fixture unit (SFU) until the charge is changed by resolution of the city
council. The number of SFUs is determined in subsection C of this section.
b. The connection charge shall apply to all parcels and lots which have not previously been served by the
municipal sewer system and each lot of any new subdivision to be served by the municipal sewer system.
2. Commercial And Industrial: For all initial or new commercial and industrial sewer connections, the connection fee
shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per SFU until the charge is changed by resolution of the city council. The number
of SFUs is determined by using the schedule for commercial and industrial buildings as set forth in section 9-5-73
of this chapter.
3. Modification And Expansion Of Facilities:
a. If any modification or expansion to the premises increases the SFU count, the connection charge will be thirty
dollars ($30.00) times the net increase in SFUs until the charge is changed by resolution of the city council.
b. In converting a residential building to commercial use or developing a commercial use on a lot with previous
sewer service (in which the building has been demolished or removed), the applicant shall pay the connection
charge based upon the net increase in fixture units. In the event there is no record of the fixture units in the
original structure, the applicant will be credited fifty (50) fixture units. In no case will a refund be granted for a
new reduction in fixture units.
4. Determination Of Sewer Fixture Unit Count: The building inspector will conduct a fixture unit survey at the time a
building permit is requested. This will be done off of construction plans provided by the applicant. The final count
will be based on a final inspection by the building inspector of any completed structure. (Ord. 453, 3-14-1995)
B. Payment: The sewer connection charge shall be payable on demand to the city at the time the building inspector
issues a building permit.
C. Sewer Fixture Unit Count: Until further resolution of the city council, the sewer fixture unit count and resulting rates
for sewer use and connection for residences shall be based on the following sewer fixture units (SFU) per dwelling
unit:
SFU
All single-family dwellings 50
All multiple-family dwellings (duplex, triplex and quadraplex) 50
Apartments 50
Trailers in trailer courts (RV parks not included) 50
Trailers on private lots 50
(Ord. 385, 9-13-1988)
D. Other Sewer Users:
1. All sewer users not specifically set forth in subsection C of this section shall be classified as commercial or
industrial users and SFUs will be determined on the basis of the "sewer fixture value table" contained in section
9-5-73 of this chapter.
2. The minimum SFU count for the purposes of calculating the monthly capital improvements charge under this
subsection shall be two hundred (200).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 607/640
3. The minimum SFU count for the purpose of calculating the sewer connection charge under this subsection shall
be fifty (50). (Ord. 513, 8-11-1998)
9-5-30: TREATED EFFLUENT CONSTRUCTION WATER METERED RATES AND INSTALLATION
CHARGES:
A. Treated Effluent Construction Water Metered Rate: The meter rate for use of treated effluent shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
B. Deposit: The applicant shall deposit with the Elko city clerk the cost of installing and removing the metering facilities
required to furnish the service. The applicant will be charged in accordance with the following rate schedule:
1. Flat charge per connection, for both installation and removal of metering facilities, in such amount as specified by
resolution of the city council.
2. Additional relocation of metering facilities to another location, in such amount as specified by resolution of the city
council.
C. Application, Installation And Operation: An application for treated effluent construction water service must be
completed by the applicant, and approved by the water reclamation facility (WRF) superintendent, or city designee,
prior to treated effluent construction water service. All facilities for treated effluent construction water service to an
applicant shall be installed at designated sites by the (WRF) department and shall be operated in accordance with
their written instructions. All applicants shall provide themselves with a hydrant wrench and summer valve
necessary to operate the metering facilities.
D. Responsibility For Installed Metering Facilities: The applicant shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the
metering facilities from the time they are installed until they are removed, or until forty eight (48) hours' written
notice has been given to the WRF department that the applicant has completed its use of the metering facilities. If
the metering facilities or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the applicant.
E. Unauthorized Use Of Hydrants: Tampering with any fire hydrant for the unauthorized use of treated effluent
construction water therefrom, or for any other purpose, is a city offense, punishable by fine and/or incarceration.
F. Duration Of Service: Reuse construction water service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six
(6) months after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the utilities director. (Ord. 687, 3-11-
2008)
9-5-31: SEWER RATES:
The sewer charge for the billing period established by the city shall be as follows:
A. Sewer User Charge:
1. A charge levied to cover the user proportionate share of operation, maintenance and replacement of the sewage
facilities based upon the following formulas:
Cu = Ct x F u . 12
Ft
Where:
= Monthly user charge for operation and maintenance including replacement costs (this charge will
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 608/640
Cu be adjusted to reflect the charge for the billing period).
Ct =
Total annual operation and maintenance costs.
Fu =
Total fixture units for the individual user.
Ft =
Total number of fixture units in the Elko system.
The above formula applies to all sewer users and, in addition, those users discharging pollutant loading higher
than "normal domestic sewage" shall be charged a "surcharge".
The following formula will be utilized in calculating the surcharge:
Cs = BcB + ScS + PcP . 12
Where:
Cs =
Monthly surcharge to user (to be adjusted to reflect the billing period established by the city).
Bc =
Annual operation and maintenance cost for treatment of a unit of BOD above a predetermined
base level.
B =
Annual units of BOD above base level.
Sc =
Annual operation and maintenance for treatment of a unit of suspended solids above a base level.
S =
Annual units of suspended solids above a base level.
Pc =
Annual operation and maintenance cost for treatment of a unit of other pollutants above a base
level.
P =
Annual units of pollutants above base level.
2. The surcharge is to be included when the pollutant loading units are above a base level, but in no case is a
reduction in charge permitted if waste is below the base level for "normal domestic strength" sewage.
3. Fixture units for nonresidential users will be determined by every user based upon the table contained in section
9-5-73 of this chapter.
B. Capital Improvement Charge: A capital improvement charge may be levied by the city. This charge will be
determined by the city supervisors and will be included on the customer's billing statement as an item separate from
the user charge.
C. Sewer Rate Schedule:
1. Rates for sewer user charges shall be set by resolution of the city council.
2. Septic receiving charge shall be set by resolution of the city council.
D. Meter Rates:
1. As an alternative to the sewer fixture unit method of billing, the city will bill based upon forty seven percent (47%)
of the metered quantity of water consumed. The user must submit a method of reporting meter readings
satisfactory to the director to assure safeguards against tampering with the meter. Once the user selects to use a
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 609/640
meter as a basis of his billing, he may revert to an SFU basis only on the anniversary date of his selection to use
the meter as the basis for billing. The user shall purchase his meter from the city and the user shall pay all costs
incurred in installing such meter.
2. The meter rate shall be set by resolution of the city council.
E. Streetlight Utility Charge: Streetlight utility charges shall be based upon the following sewer fixture units and shall be
set by resolution.
Residential:
50 SFU (minimum)
Commercial:
1 to 50 SFU (minimum)
51 to 500 SFU
501 to 3,000 SFU
3,001 or more
F. Public Facilities: Sewer fees shall be assessed for all public buildings unless specifically waived by the city council
as part of a lease of public property. (Ord. 541, 10-26-2000; amd. Ord. 560, 1-23-2001)
G. Rate Changes: All changes in user rates for sewer use shall first be proposed to the city council at a regularly
scheduled meeting. The proposed change in rates shall not be acted upon until the following regularly scheduled or
subsequent meeting. (Ord. 561, 2-27-2001)
9-5-32: WAIVER OF SEWER USER FEES FOR CERTAIN COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS:
A. Any sewer fees related to the maintenance and beautification of the Nevada department of transportation (NDOT)
right of way for State Route 225 (Mountain City Highway) will be waived for any commercial business which has
installed a water utility meter, and which business agrees to maintain the NDOT right of way abutting its property.
B. Additionally, in order to qualify for the waiver of sewer fees, the metered commercial customer's water use for right
of way irrigation shall be determined as follows:
1. Measuring the actual volume of water used through a secondary water meter; or
2. If circumstances allow, subtracting the winter water usage (when the right of way is not being irrigated) from the
summer water usage (when the right of way is being irrigated), as recorded on the master water meter. Any such
customer shall inform the water department of the dates when the right of way irrigation began and when it
stopped. (Ord. 657, 10-25-2005)
9-5-33: EXTENSION OF SEWER MAIN FACILITIES:
Sewer main facilities may be extended by subdivider, developer, property owner or other persons in accordance with
plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city engineer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 610/640
A. Construction And Extension: The inside diameter of every sewer main shall not be less than eight inches (8"),
except as may be determined by the city engineer. The subdivider, developer, property owner or other persons shall
construct all sewer mains in accordance with the plans and specifications as submitted and approved by the city
engineer and pay any and all costs for the minimum size sewer main required for this development as determined
by the city engineer. Every sewer main extension must be extended across the full frontage of the developer's or
property owner's property and not only to the closest corner of their property, provided, however, that the city
council may modify or waive the foregoing requirements contained in this sentence if one or more of the following
conditions can be met: the requirements are: 1) not economically feasible, 2) will discourage future development, or
3) will not serve the best interests of the public.
B. Connection: Upon connection to the sewer system, the subdivider, developer, property owner or other persons shall
dedicate all sewer mains located on property owned or controlled by the city to the city. Upon dedication and after
the one year contractor warranty period has expired, the city will operate and maintain the sewer main located on
said property.
C. Construction Of Larger Mains: Whenever, in the opinion of the city council or city engineer, it is necessary that a
sewer main be constructed of a larger capacity than the minimum capacity set forth in subsection A of this section,
the city shall pay the difference in pipe material cost for the oversized sewer main. The subdivider, developer,
property owner or other person shall be required to purchase materials, construct and install such oversized sewer
main required.
D. Reimbursement: In a situation where sewer main facilities are required to be extended at least one hundred feet
(100') from an existing main and the city council determines that the area through which the main will be extended
is well suited for growth, the city council may determine to apply the following reimbursement process:
1. Sewer main facilities may be extended by a subdivider, developer, property owner or other person (the
applicant).
2. The actual cost of extending the sewer main (cost of materials and labor only) shall be paid by the applicant.
3. The city may thereafter collect from any sewer user connecting directly to such extension an extension
connection fee which is represented by that fraction of the actual cost of such extension, as approved by the city,
as the number of front feet or acreage, or combination of the two (2), which may be served by such extension
when connected to the city sewer system.
4. Extension connection fees, together with regular fees collected pursuant to section 9-5-29 of this chapter from
new sewer users above the extension, shall be paid by the city to the applicant originally installing such extension
up to an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the cost of the extension.
a. The use of connection fees for payment to the applicant shall be limited to not longer than seven (7) years after
the date said extension is originally connected to the city sewer system.
b. The use of extension connection fees for payment to the applicant shall not be limited in time.
c. The city shall in no way be obligated to assure that the applicant making such extension is paid ninety percent
(90%) of the total costs thereof, nor to initiate any action or incur any expense to collect any sum to be paid to
the applicant.
5. Where different applicants contribute to the making of the extension, such sums shall be refunded to such
applicants prorated according to the amounts which they separately contributed toward the extension and
pursuant to the preceding plan.
E. Special Reimbursement Agreements: Where special conditions exist in the opinion of the city which justify
reimbursement to the person paying the costs of a main extension which justify reimbursement on any basis other
than that provided in subsection D of this section, the city council may authorize a special reimbursement contract
by the city and the person or persons constructing the main extension. Said special reimbursement agreement shall
be made and entered into prior to acceptance of the work and sewer main by the city. (Ord. 746, 5-8-2012)
9-5-35: BILLING (PAYMENT AND LIEN RIGHTS):
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 611/640
All bills for sewer services shall be rendered monthly or bimonthly at the established rate in advance, or such bills may
be rendered on a regularly established day of each and every period in which the service was rendered. Each bill shall
show the amount of the sewer service charge. In the event the sewer bill, or any part thereof, is not paid in full within
fifteen (15) days after the date when billed, it will be considered delinquent and subject the customer and property
owner to termination of service and allow the city to claim a lien on the property for the amount of the bill. In all cases
the property owner shall be ultimately responsible for the payment of the sewer bill. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-36: RIGHT OF WAY TOLL:
The Elko municipal sewer utility shall pay a right of way toll, to be charged to the sewer enterprise fund, to the city of
Elko as follows:
A. Commencing August 1, 2010, equal to 2.5 percent of the gross receipts derived by it from each utility bill of a
customer of the Elko municipal sewer utility during each calendar year; said payments shall be made on or before
the fifteenth day of each month of the month immediately following collection of such revenues, and each payment
shall equal 2.5 percent of the aforesaid gross revenues obtained by the Elko municipal sewer utility, its successor or
assigns.
B. Upon its receipt of payments of the right of way toll collected and transmitted to the city of Elko pursuant to
subsection A of this section, the city of Elko shall allocate one hundred percent (100%) of the proceeds to the city's
general fund. (Ord. 715, 7-27-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
9-5-37: TERMINATION OF SERVICE PROCEDURE FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. On the sixteenth day succeeding the mailing of any sewer bill, or in the event the sixteenth day falls on a holiday,
Saturday or Sunday, then on the next succeeding working day, all charges to that date, whether or not billed, and all
charges accrued for sewer services, are deemed due and payable. Upon nonpayment of such sewer charges, the
sewer billing shall be considered delinquent and the finance department shall mail notice to the legal owner or the
applicant for service and shall either mail a copy of the notice to the occupant or post a copy of the notice on the
premises of the occupant at the address receiving service, notifying the owner and occupant that the sewer service
will be terminated on a specific date, which date shall not be less than ten (10) days after the date of mailing or
posting such delinquency notice.
B. The owner or applicant applying for service or occupant of the premises may request to present his position
concerning termination of sewer services to the city council and the city council action will be final.
C. Failure of the owner, customer or occupant to appear before the city council after having requested such right, as
provided above, will cause the sewer service to be terminated.
D. On the date of termination of sewer services, or any date thereafter, the finance department may cause to be filed
with the county recorder a statement of the amount due and unpaid for sewer services and a description of the
property to which the services were rendered to perfect a lien against the property.
E. Upon vacating the premises, all customers desiring to discontinue sewer service shall notify the sewer department
not less than one business day prior to vacating the premises. Unless discontinuance of service is ordered, the
customer shall be liable for charges whether or not the sewer is used.
F. Termination of sewer services shall be accomplished by disconnection of water service at the subject address. (Ord.
537, 12-28-1999)
9-5-39: APPEALS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 612/640
The city council shall review any decision made by the director or his representatives or agents in interpreting, applying
or enforcing the provisions of this chapter, upon the receipt of an application or petition in writing, requesting a review
of such decision. In exercising its powers of review, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of the law,
reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination of the director
appealed from and make such order, requirement or determination as ought to be made. The city council may also
initiate a review of the director's interpretation of the provisions of this chapter by a motion and by a vote of a majority
of the quorum or a majority of the members present if such number exceeds a quorum. In all cases, the decision of the
city council shall be final. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-41: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. Each day's violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-43: BIENNIAL REVIEW OF OPERATIONAL MAINTENANCE CHARGES:
The city council shall review not less often than every two (2) years the contribution of users and user classes, the total
cost of operation and maintenance of treatment works and its approved user charge system. The city council shall
revise the charges for users or user classes to accomplish the following:
A. Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes as
required herein.
B. Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation
and maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works.
C. Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that
class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-45: INSPECTION OF SEWERS AND ATTACHMENTS:
A. Inspection; Notice: The director, or other authorized city officials or employees of the city, may enter upon premises
drained by any side sewer or connected with any public sewer at all reasonable hours to ascertain whether or not
the provisions of the ordinances of the city relative to sewerage have been followed. If such sewer, or its
attachments, are in conflict with the provisions of any law or ordinance in regard thereto, the owner of said
premises, or his agent, shall, upon notice, cause such sewer or its attachments to be so altered, repaired or
reconstructed as to make them conform to the requirements of the laws and ordinances within fifteen (15) days
from the time of receipt of such notice.
B. Wastewater Survey: When requested by the director, or other authorized city staff, all industrial users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to
commencing their discharge. The director, or other authorized city staff, is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be
reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 675, 11-13-2007)
9-5-47: TESTING OF SEWAGE WASTE:
The director, or any authorized city officials or employees of the city, may enter upon any and all premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of sewage waste in
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 613/640
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and it is unlawful for any person to prevent or attempt to prevent any
such entrance or obstruct or interfere with any such officer or employee while so engaged. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-49: SEPTIC TANK CONTENTS:
It is unlawful for anyone to discharge the contents of any septic tank, cesspool or chemical toilet into the sewer system
of the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-51: DESIGNATION OF PLACES AND MANNER OF DISCHARGE OF SEPTIC TANK
CONTENTS:
The director shall designate in writing the particular points where the contents of septic tanks, cesspools or chemical
toilets can be discharged into the sewer system, and the manner in which said contents shall be discharged. No matter
prohibited from sewers by this chapter shall be permitted to be so discharged. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-53: DETERMINATION OF CHARACTER OF WASTE MATTER:
Before any matter of any nature may be discharged into the sewer system, which discharge might reasonably be
considered a violation of this chapter, the controlling characteristic of such matter shall be determined to the
satisfaction of the director. The responsibility of initiating such determinations of any costs involved and of submitting
the results and the decision as to whether or not a permit shall be issued, shall be the responsibility of the director. The
fact that any matter has been discharged into the sewer system prior to the passage of this chapter or subsequent
thereto, but without any objection from the director, does not constitute a valid right to so discharge such matter. If,
upon discovery by the director at any time that any matter being discharged into the sewer does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter, the director may immediately stop the discharge of such matter into the sewer system.
(Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-54: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are hereby
incorporated.
A. Concentration Or Mass Limits: Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the
mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director or authorized city staff may impose equivalent,
or more stringent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
B. Alternate Limits: When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same standard, the director or authorized city staff shall impose an alternate limit.
C. Variance: A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, in the
opinion of the director or authorized city staff, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR
403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
D. Net Gross Adjustment: A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40
CFR 403.15.
E. Local Limits: The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through, interference, or pollutant
concentrations in biosolids that do not allow the city of Elko to comply with its WDRs. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum concentration limits, as determined from the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 614/640
analysis of any grab or composite sample collected:
Parameter Local Limit (mg/l Unless Otherwise Noted)
Arsenic MR
Cadmium MR
Chromium (total) MR
Copper MR
Lead MR
Mercury MR
Molybdenum MR
Nickel MR
Selenium MR
Silver MR
Zinc MR
Biochemical oxygen demand 300
Chemical oxygen demand 500
Total suspended solids 1,000
Ammonia 40
Oil and grease 300
pH (standard units) (allowable range) 6.5 - 8.5
MR = monitor and report (all analysis to be completed using current standard method accepted by the
U.S. EPA)
1. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director or authorized
city staff may impose more restrictive limitations, or mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the
concentration based limitations through any industrial user's discharge permit.
2. The above limits may be revised from time to time by the city as may be deemed necessary to protect the POTW
from pass-through, interference, or pollutant concentrations in WRF biosolids or WRF effluent that do not allow
the city of Elko to comply with its WDRs, or as may be required by the applicable federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards.
3. The director or authorized city staff may authorize discharges containing higher concentrations on a site specific
basis, provided that the concentrations of such discharges shall not cause pass-through, interference, or result in
pollutant concentrations in WRF biosolids or WRF effluent that do not allow the city of Elko to comply with its
WDRs. Upon approval by the director or authorized city staff, site specific limitations shall be established through
the terms specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit. The director or authorized city staff may impose
mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, concentration based limitations, due to reduced water usage by an
industrial user. (Ord. 675, 11-13-2007)
9-5-55: PRETREATMENT OF SEWAGE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 615/640
When at any time it becomes necessary or desirable to discharge into the sewer system any matter from any source
which does not conform to the requirements outlined in this chapter, it is hereby required that such matter may be
discharged into the sewer system, the producer thereof shall pretreat the same at his own expense to a degree that will
produce an effluent which does conform to the said requirements. Such pretreatment plans shall be understood to
include grease traps, chemical or biochemical plants, sedimentation chambers and any other devices which effect a
change of any nature in the characteristics of the matter being treated. Any and all such devices and equipment shall
be subject to the approval of the director, shall not be put into operation without a written permit of approval issued by
the director, shall be provided with all necessary features of construction to permit inspection of operations and testing
of material passing through them, and shall be open to the inspection of the director at any time; but the producer, in
lieu of the treatment of said sewage as hereinabove provided for, may, with the written approval of the director being
first obtained, discharge said sewage, waste or other matter into said sewage system, subject to the provisions of this
chapter and subject to the payment of the additional cost of the treatment hereof, as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 324, 2-
19-1982)
9-5-57: GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director or authorized city staff, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, oil in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients including mineralized inorganic grit; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the director or authorized city staff, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be exterior, inground installations, provided that as to
dischargers at existing locations as of the effective date of this chapter, where it is physically impossible to locate an
interceptor at an exterior, inground location, the director or authorized city staff may grant an exception allowing the
interceptor to be placed in an approved interior location.
B. Fat, oil, grease, and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt
and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Where installed, all fat, oil, grease, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times. It is specifically prohibited to maintain interceptors by bacteriological,
chemical, or enzymatic addition or treatment.
D. Wastewater discharge permits may be issued to users of fat, oil, grease, and sand interceptors. Permits shall
establish minimum requirements for the design, operation, maintenance, and performance of the equipment.
Permits may include other information as described in this chapter.
E. The discharge of waste to a grease, oil, and sand interceptor is subject to all sections of this chapter.
F. Purchase and installation of the interceptor shall be at the user's expense. No exceptions shall be made to the
requirements of this section due to expense, size of the installation, or difficulties in locating the interceptor within
the site boundary.
G. Cleaning and maintenance records shall be kept by user and shall be made available for review by the director or
authorized city staff at any time. Records of any analysis conducted on the water or other contents of the equipment
shall be made available for review by the director or authorized city staff at the request of the director or authorized
city staff. The director or authorized city staff may require submittal of maintenance records to the city for review at
any time. (Ord. 675, 11-13-2007)
9-5-59: CERTAIN INSTALLATIONS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful to so install, change, bypass, adjust or alter any metering device or any piping arrangement connected
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 616/640
therewith as to show the quantity of sewage discharged from the premises to be less than the actual quantity. (Ord.
324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-61: MANDATORY CONNECTIONS:
A. Unless a modification or waiver is granted in accordance with subsection B of this section, each owner of houses,
buildings, or other properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, commercial, industrial or other
like purposes situated within the incorporated areas of the city shall connect to such sewer within ninety (90) days
after such sewer is available for use wherever such public sewer line is within three hundred feet (300') of any
building discharging sanitary or industrial waste. Connections to the sewer system are the sole responsibility of the
owner of the property so connected.
B. The city council may modify or waive the requirements of this section if it determines that unique circumstances exist
whereby the requirements: 1) are in conflict with an existing agreement to which the city is a party at the time of
adoption hereof or 2) will not serve the best interests of the public, provided the modification or waiver is consistent
with state law. (Ord. 746, 5-8-2012)
9-5-63: DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION OF NEW CONNECTIONS, INFLOW SOURCES:
No new connection shall be made to the municipal sewer system unless the same is properly designed and
constructed; inflow sources as defined to EPA rules and regulations section 35.905.11, including, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwaters,
surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage shall not be permitted to be connected to the sewer system. (Ord. 324,
2-19-1982)
9-5-65: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have the power and duty to adopt and may from time to time amend rules and regulations for the
operation of the municipal sewer system including, but not limited to, rules and regulations concerning the method of
hooking up and the type of use of the sewer so long as such rules and regulations are not in conflict with law, this
chapter or EPA rules and regulations section 35.905.11. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-67: CREDIT:
A. Establishment And Maintenance: Each applicant for service shall establish and maintain credit to the satisfaction of
the sewer department before service will be rendered.
B. Loss And Reestablishment Of Credit: Any amount due for sewer service that remains unpaid for twenty (20) days
after presentation of a bill therefor, during the depositor's first year of service, may be deducted from the guarantee
deposit and service shall be subject to discontinuance until the deposit is again restored to the original amount. Any
such unpaid amount accruing subsequently to the depositor's first year of service, where the premises are owned
by the depositor, may also be deducted from any guarantee deposit remaining in the department's possession.
(Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-69: NOTIFICATION:
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges
or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-71: INCONSISTENT AGREEMENTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 617/640
The city council members may have preexisting agreements which address:
A. The reservation of capacity in the city treatment works; or
B. The charges to be collected by the city council in providing wastewater treatment services or reserving capacity.
This user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between
the city council and users (including industrial users, special districts, other municipalities or federal agencies or
installations) which are inconsistent with the requirements of section 204(b)(1)(A) of the act and the regulations of
the U.S. EPA, September 27, 1978. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-73: FIXTURE UNIT VALUE TABLE:
Fixture unit surveys are conducted and fixture units established in accordance with the following table:
Description Of Fixture Fixture Value Per Unit
Bathroom group:
Sewer closet
Sink
Bathtub and/or shower
with flushometer
14
18
Bathtub (with or without shower) 4
Bedpan washer and sterilizer 5
Bidet 4
Car wash per stall 24
Continuous flow per GPM 200
Dental unit cuspidor 2
Dental unit lavatory 2
Dishwashers:
Conveyor
Residential
Under counter
100
8
10
Disposals 50
Drinking fountains 2
Floor drains:
Grease, oil, solids
4
6
Hose bibs 2
Landscaping per 1,000 square feet 12
Laundry: 4
Tub and faucets 4
Clothes washer:
Automatic 8 pound
12 _ 19 pound
20 _ 39 pound
16
20
22
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 618/640
40 _ 50 pound
50+ per pound of machine weight
24
1.5
Receptors for refrigerator, coffee urn, soft drinks, ice machines, etc. 2
Recycled 16
Showers per head and drain 4
Sinks
Bar
Flushing rim (clinic)
Industrial; wash up, etc.
Kitchen
Lavatory
2
12
6
4
2
Swimming pool per 100 square feet 5
Trailer parks:
Dump station
Recreational vehicles park per pad
25
7
Urinals:
Pedestal-siphon
Stall
Trough/2 foot
12
4
6
Water closet:
Flush valve
Tank
12
8
Water for cooling per ton charged under intermittent flow
For fixture types not listed, fixture units shall be estimated by using similar use and performance description.
For nonresidential facilities which operate or are open to the public in excess of twelve (12) hours per day, a multiplier
of 1.5 shall be applied to the fixture unit value per unit. (Ord. 324, 2-19-1982)
9-5-74: VACANT UNITS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES, COMMERCIAL COMPLEXES AND
MOBILE HOME PARKS:
A. Exemption; Requirements: Any owner (or the owner's authorized representative) of an apartment complex,
commercial complex or mobile home park containing more than one rental unit or space (hereinafter "unit") served
by a single sewer service connection may obtain an exemption from monthly sewer user fees for any vacant rental
unit, provided the following requirements are met:
1. The entire apartment complex, commercial complex or mobile home park must utilize the fixture unit method for
the determination of sewer fees for the entire month during which the exemption is sought;
2. The unit for which the exemption is sought must be vacant for thirty (30) continuous days during the month for
which the exemption is sought;
3. The unit for which the exemption is sought must be offered to the public for rent and must constitute a separate
"premises";
4. The owner (or the owner's authorized representative) of the apartment complex, commercial complex or mobile
home park must request an exemption for the vacant unit on a form specified by the city, which form shall be
entitled "verification of nonoccupancy";
5. The fully completed and executed verification of nonoccupancy form shall be received by the finance department
no later than the twentieth day of the month during which the unit is vacant, and if the unit is rented after the
twentieth day of the month, then the city must be notified;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 619/640
6. Exemptions for months other than the month in which the verification of nonoccupancy form is received by the
finance department shall not be granted;
7. The customer may submit the verification of nonoccupancy form by fax, in person, by mail or by depositing the
form in the city drop box; and
8. The verification of nonoccupancy form must be signed under oath and dated by the owner (or owner's authorized
representative) of the apartment complex, commercial complex or mobile home park.
B. Amount Of Exemption: The exemption shall be in an amount corresponding to the fixture unit count applicable to the
vacant unit.
C. Individual Fixtures Not Exempt: Exemptions shall not be granted for individual fixtures within premises, regardless of
whether the fixture has been in use during any given month.
D. Resurvey: Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the owner of a premises from requesting the city to
perform a resurvey of fixtures on the premises for the purpose of making adjustments to the fixture count.
E. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
APARTMENT COMPLEX: A building or tract of land containing two (2) or more family dwelling units, at least one of
which is offered for rent to the public, all of which are owned by a common person or group of persons.
COMMERCIAL COMPLEX: A building or tract of land in a nonresidential zoning district containing two (2) or more
commercial units, at least one of which is offered for rent to the public, all of which are owned by a common person
or group of persons.
MOBILE HOME PARK AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Shall have the meanings ascribed to those terms
as defined in section 3-5-3 of this code.
F. Nonapplicable: Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, the exemption from sewer fees
described in this section shall not apply to vacant rooms, spaces or other accommodations in a "transient lodging
rental business", as that term is defined in title 4, chapter 6 of this code. (Ord. 628, 11-23-2004)
9-5-75: RESURVEYS OF FIXTURES:
A. Authorized: The director, or his designee, may revise any sewer fixture unit count based on a resurvey of any
premises at his sole discretion.
B. Request By Property Owner: The property owner may request a resurvey of his sewer fixture unit count at any time
upon payment of the fee described in section 9-1-29 of this title. (Ord. 628, 11-23-2004)
Chapter 6
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION TO STORMWATER
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens through regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm sewer system or stormwater. This chapter establishes methods for controlling
the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process and to:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 620/640
A. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate stormwater sewer system (MS4) by stormwater
discharges by any user,
B. Prohibit illegal connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system, and
C. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter or
the director employees or the director designees.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good
housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving
water, or stormwater conveyance systems; and also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices
to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits issued by the state of Nevada. NPDES
construction activities on one acre or more. Construction activities on from six thousand (6,000) square feet to one acre
not subject to NPDES construction permits are also included in this definition. Such activities include, but are not
limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, substance or waste that is or has the characteristic of being hazardous,
toxic, ignitable, reactive or corrosive, including, without limitations, petroleum, PCBs, asbestos, materials known to
cause cancer or reproductive problems and those materials, substances and/or waste, including infectious waste,
medical waste, and potentially infectious waste, which are or later become regulated by any local governmental
authority, the state of Nevada, or the United States government, including, but not limited to, substances defined as
"hazardous substances", "hazardous materials", "toxic substances", or "hazardous wastes" in the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980, as amended, 43 USC section 9601 et seq.; the
hazardous materials transportation act, 40 USC section 1801 et seq.; the resource conservation and recovery act, 43
USC section 6901 et seq.; all corresponding and related state of Nevada and local statutes, ordinances and
regulations, including, without limitation, any dealing with underground storage tanks; and in any other environmental
law, regulation or ordinance now existing or hereinafter enacted.
ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS: An illegal connection defined as either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the
storm water conveyance system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow nonstorm water
discharge including, but not limited to, sewage and process wastewater to enter the storm water conveyance
system and any connections to the storm water conveyance system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of
whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm water conveyance
system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 621/640
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the storm water conveyance system or
storm water except as exempted in section 9-6-6 of this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A
permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general area wide basis.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to storm water conveyance system and/or storm water that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and
acting as either the owner or the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that the same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; waste and residues that result
from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent
sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human made drainage channels,
reservoirs, and any other drainage structures.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best management practices and
activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving
waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE: Any drainage or structure through which water may pass or drain. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water generated on any developed and undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted
by an authorized enforcement agency, entering the storm water conveyance system or storm water. (Ord. 670, 3-13-
2007)
9-6-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The city of Elko or its designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the
authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
(Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 622/640
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter
does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor
unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm
water conveyance system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants and hazardous
material or waters containing any pollutants, as described herein, that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm water conveyance system is
prohibited except as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing
or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water,
foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated B typically less than 1 part per million chlorine), firefighting activities, and any
other source not containing pollutants or hazardous materials.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health
and safety.
3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency
prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstorm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under authority of the federal environmental
protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm water conveyance system.
B. Prohibition Of Illegal Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illegal connections to the storm water conveyance
system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether
the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the
MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illegal Discharges In Emergency Situations: The city of Elko may, without prior notice, suspend
MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued
in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illegal Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illegal discharge. The
authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator
may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 623/640
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to the premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all
provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to
allowing of discharges to the MS4. Land disturbance activities on a land parcel of six thousand (6,000) square feet to
one acre not subject to NPDES construction permits are also included in this requirement. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability:
1. This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity including
construction activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The city of Elko or its designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the city of Elko or its designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
3. The city of Elko or its designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge.
4. The city of Elko or its designee has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled
shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city of Elko and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city of Elko or its designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a
storm water discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit
to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this chapter.
7. If the city of Elko or its designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is
discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 624/640
9-6-10: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The city of Elko requires the identification and use of best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm water conveyance
system, or waters of the United States. The city of Elko requires as a minimum the use of its BMP manual to identify
and utilize appropriate BMPs. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm water conveyance system or water courses through the use of these structural or nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illegal discharge, may
be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the
discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
Whenever the city of Elko finds that a person has not properly implemented the storm water pollution prevention plan
or the storm water pollution prevention plan requires modification to prevent the discharge or possible discharge of
pollutants to the storm water conveyance system or storm water, the city of Elko may, at its sole discretion, allow a time
frame not to exceed ten (10) calendar days for the person to correct the identified deficiencies. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that
would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or
lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures
will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible
for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials
which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm water
conveyance system, or water of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous material, said person shall notify the authorized city enforcement agency in person or by
phone or by facsimile or by electronic mail no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall
be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city of Elko within three (3) business days of the person or
phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-13: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city of Elko finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation
to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illegal connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 625/640
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any
affected property; and
5. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. Deadline: If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that,
should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 670,
3-13-2007)
9-6-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The
notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on appeal
before the Elko city council shall take place within forty five (45) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-15: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which could create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-16: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 268 or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be
taken. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-17: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution and shall be
subject to a criminal penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. In addition, any person that has
violated or continues to violate this chapter may be subject to criminal prosecution under federal or state laws.
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-18: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 670, 3-13-2007)
9-6-19: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY FEES:
The stormwater management utility fee for the billing period established by the city shall be as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 626/640
A. Stormwater Management Utility Fee:
1. A fee levied to cover the operation, maintenance and replacement of the city's stormwater conveyance system
and to provide for the monitoring of stormwater quality.
2. Stormwater management utility fees shall be based upon the following sewer fixture units and shall be set by
resolution:
Residential:
50 SFU (minimum) $1.00
Commercial:
1 to 50 SFU (minimum) 1.00
51 to 500 SFU 0.02 per SFU
501 to 3,000 SFU 0.01 per SFU
3,001 or more 0.005 per SFU
(Ord. 716, 9-28-2010)
Chapter 7
CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens through regulation of
construction activities to manage and control pollution from construction sites. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling pollution from construction sites in accordance with the national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit process in order to:
A. Provide for protection of storm water, ground water, water bodies, watercourses, and wetlands pursuant to and
consistent with the clean water act, and NPDES permit granted to the city of Elko,
B. Manage and control the amount of pollutants in storm water discharges and the municipal storm sewer systems, soil
erosion, sediment discharge, sediment on public roadways, and
C. Ensure adequate drainage, storm water management and soil conservation measures are utilized at the site of
construction activity. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter or
the director employees or the director designees.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities,prohibitions of practices, pollution prevention and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 627/640
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge
of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving water, or storm water conveyance systems; and also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes the vegetative cover.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits issued by the state of Nevada. NPDES
construction activities on one acre or more. Construction activities on land from six thousand (6,000) square feet to one
acre not subject to NPDES construction permits are also included in this definition. Such activities include, but are not
limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
CONSTRUCTION SITE: Any land where "construction activity", as defined in this section, is performed.
EROSION CONTROL: Any measure that prevents erosion.
GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A
permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general areawide basis.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to storm water conveyance system and/or storm water that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
PERIMETER CONTROL: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment laden runoff,
or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and
acting as either the owner or the owner's agent.
PHASING: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with stabilization of each phase before clearing the next phase.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse,rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that the
same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent
sidewalks and parking strips.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Any measure that prevents sediment from leaving the site.
STABILIZATION: Any practice that prevents exposed soil from eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first land disturbing activity associated with development, including land preparation
such as clearing, grading and filling, installation of streets and walkways, excavation for basements, footings,
foundations, and erection of temporary forms.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human made drainage channels,
reservoirs, and any other drainage structures.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 628/640
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems,
and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WATERCOURSE: Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water
which have been delineated by the city of Elko. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-3: APPLICABILITY:
Off site impacts of erosion and sedimentation from a construction site are prohibited and polluting substances such as
construction materials and waste shall be contained on the site where such substances cannot drain or be transported
by storm water into awatercourse or the storm water conveyance system. Best management practices shall be
implemented for all construction sites. The performance standards set forth in the city of Elko "Construction Site Best
Management Practices Handbook" together with such addendum, all of which are on deposit in the office of the city of
Elko, are adopted by reference and incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if set forth in full. (Ord. 671, 4-10-
2007)
9-7-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The city of Elko or its designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the
authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
(Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter
does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor
unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-6: CONSTRUCTION SITE DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Construction permit submittal is required on all projects that may require grading, site development, building, site
drainage, or encroachment that will disturb an area of six thousand (6,000) square feet or more (including public
works projects).
B. Prior to issuance of an above referenced permit, the following must be submitted:
1. Construction permit submittal checklist;
2. Performance standards compliance checklist;
3. Copy of notice of intent;
4. Copy of signed confirmation letter;
5. Copy of SWPPP.
C. The installation and maintenance of storm water controls are to be in accordance with standards as set forth in the
BMP manual or manufacturer's specifications. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 629/640
9-7-7: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The city of Elko requires the identification and use of best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm water conveyance
system, or waters of the United States. The city of Elko requires as a minimum the use of its BMP manual to identify
and utilize appropriate BMPs. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm water conveyance system or watercourses through the use of these structural or nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illegal discharge, may
be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the
discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-8: INSPECTION:
A. All construction sites which fall within this chapter shall be subject to the inspection provisions provided herein.
B. The city of Elko or its designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect any construction site.
C. Whenever the city of Elko or its designee finds that a person has not properly implemented the storm water pollution
prevention plan or the storm water pollution prevention plan requires modification to prevent the discharge or
possible discharge of pollutants to the storm water conveyance system or storm water, the city of Elko or its
designee may, at its sole discretion, allow a time frame not to exceed ten (10) calendar days for the person to
correct the identified deficiencies. If an inspector determines the installed storm water controls are placing the city
of Elko at risk of violating its NPDES permit, the inspector may order change to the storm water controls. If the
change to the storm water controls is not acceptable or is not immediately implemented, enforcement action may
be taken.
D. Emergency control measures may be ordered when pollutants are actually leaving the site.
E. A complaint of violation shall be promptly investigated by inspection. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-9: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city of Elko or its designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed
to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice
of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. Violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
2. Abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property; and
3. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
4. Implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. Deadline: If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that,
should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 630/640
designated governmental agency or contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 671,
4-10-2007)
9-7-10: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The
notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on appeal
before the Elko city council shall take place within forty five (45) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-11: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which could create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-12: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation
of any ofthe provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provision of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 268 or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be
taken. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-13: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest
extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. In
addition, any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter may be subject to criminal prosecution under
federal or state laws.
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
9-7-14: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 671, 4-10-2007)
Chapter 8
POSTCONSTRUCTION RUNOFF CONTROL AND WATER QUALITY
MANAGEMENT
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction, and to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 631/640
protect nearby waterways by reducing the quantity of pollutants that stormwater picks up and carries into storm
systems during storm events. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
A. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in
stream temperature, and stream bank erosion, and maintain the integrity of stream channels.
B. Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development that may cause or
contribute to downstream violations of water quality standards of any pollutant of concern.
C. Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following
development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable.
D. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible,
through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained
and pose no threat to public safety.
E. Control and minimize the above impacts through implementation of approved postconstruction stormwater quality
management plans that place a strong emphasis on implementing low impact development (LID) principles and
techniques that include, but are not limited to, disturbing only the smallest area necessary, minimizing soil
compaction and imperviousness in drainage and recharge areas, preserving natural drainages, vegetation and
buffer zones, and utilizing on site stormwater treatment techniques to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 776,
11-12-2013)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
ACCELERATED EROSION: Erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which
the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.
APPLICANT: A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management
permit.
BMP: "Best management practices" as it pertains to stormwater management in this chapter. More specifically, "BMP"
refers to the document "Best Management Practices Manual, NPDES Post-Construction Stormwater Controls",
Klienfelder Consultants, 2012.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically
flowing water.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling
peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION FACILITY: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of
stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPER: A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
DEVELOPMENT: Any disturbance of land including clearing, grubbing, or grading in addition to the construction of
facilities. "Development" does not include tenant improvements or other similar building improvements not involving
site work.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for
stormwater management purposes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 632/640
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A plan designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sediment runoff
at a site during construction activities.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG): A natural resource conservation service (USDA-NRCS) classification system in
which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from "A" soils, with high permeability
and little runoff production, to "D" soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS COVER: Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement,
sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT: A national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to a
commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater
discharges or specifies on site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION: The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Any activity that increases the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff
from the land surface. This may include grading, grubbing, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating the soil; also
included within the definition of "land disturbance activity" are compaction, placement of fill materials, paving,
construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or
piping of any natural or manmade watercourse.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or
any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which
provides for long term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, or discrete
conveyance, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agriculture, silviculture, mining, construction,
subsurface disposal, and urban runoff sources.
OFF SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary and
described in the permit application for land development activity.
ON SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary and described
in the permit application for land development activity.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition of phased projects that disturb the ground
surface or increase the impervious area on previously developed sites in areas where existing land use is high density
commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
REVEGETATION: The recreation of plant communities that cannot be easily distinguished from the healthy native plant
communities surrounding them or in their general proximity.
STOP WORK ORDER: An order issued by the city or its designee which requires that all construction activity on a site
be stopped.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed,
including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, natural and humanmade drainage channels, reservoirs and any other drainage structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce
stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream
temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 633/640
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the best management
practices (BMPs) and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN: The documentation of the basis for design, construction, operation
and maintenance of stormwater management facilities proposed in accordance with this chapter (see section 9-8-8 of
this chapter).
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Flow of water resulting from precipitation on the surface of the ground.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv): The storage needed to capture and treat ninety percent (90%) of the average
annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically, WQv will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or humanmade, which
gathers or carries surface water. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be applicable to approved postconstruction stormwater quality management plans and stormwater
treatment devices. Access and maintenance agreements are required for the following development activities unless
waived according to the terms outlined in section 9-8-7, "Waivers To Applicability", of this chapter:
A. Any new or significant redevelopment involving the following:
1. Building permits, conditional use permits, or site plan reviews that would create new industrial, commercial, or
civic structures;
2. Subdivisions five (5) acres or greater in size;
3. Any new development that would specifically enable outdoor material storage; outdoor material
loading/unloading; fueling areas; outdoor work, maintenance and wash areas; spill prevention, containment and
cleanup; waste handling and disposal uses; any industrial use/automotive repair shop that has been assigned a
standard industrial classification (SIC) code of 5013, 7532, 7533, 7534, 7537, 7538, and 7539;
4. Grading and site permits involving one or more acres of land except for individual single-family homes which are
not subject to city of Elko hillside development regulations, section 3-2-28 of this code;
5. Development activities defined in subsections A2 and A3 of this section that are smaller than one acre if such
activities are part of a larger common plan or development, even though multiple separate and distinct land
development activities may take place at different times on different schedules; or
6. Development that will include constructed open channels and local or regional detention basins for flood
management.
In addition, all plans must be reviewed by the city of Elko to protect established water quality standards after
development of the site and to ensure that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with local and regional
watershed plans. The city of Elko shall not approve plans that fail to comply with this chapter or any applicable
watershed plans.
B. Complete applications for applicable development permits and entitlements that have been submitted before the
effective date hereof are exempt from the requirements of this section.
C. Permits and other approvals that were issued by the city of Elko before the effective date of this section shall not be
subject to this section as long as the accompanying permit is valid. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 634/640
The city of Elko shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-5: PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development
permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to
commencing the proposed activity.
B. Development Application: Any person submitting any form of application under this section for development of
property to the city of Elko for approval shall concurrently submit to the city of Elko a postconstruction stormwater
management plan as a part of the application.
C. Grading Permit Application Requirements: Unless specifically excepted by this chapter, any land owner or operator
desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the city of Elko a grading permit application meeting
the terms of section 9-8-3, "Applicability", of this chapter which application must be accompanied by the following
documents:
1. A postconstruction stormwater quality management plan demonstrating that the project will meet the
requirements of section 9-8-6 of this chapter.
2. Project plans showing a sufficient level of detail to demonstrate that the project meets all applicable city of Elko
requirements.
3. A postconstruction stormwater quality management plan demonstrating that the project will meet the
requirements of section 9-8-8 of this chapter.
4. A stormwater treatment device access and maintenance agreement which meets the requirements of section 9-
8-10 of this chapter.
Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city of Elko notifies
the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under the
permit or associated development approvals expire, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-6: STANDARDS:
A. Postconstruction Stormwater Quality Management Plan: The postconstruction stormwater quality management plan
required in section 9-8-8 of this chapter shall be prepared by a licensed professional civil engineer (PE), registered
in the state of Nevada, and shall be prepared in accordance with the publication: "Best Management Practices
Manual, NPDES Post-Construction Stormwater Controls", Klienfelder Consultants, 2012, and shall satisfy the
requirements of section 9-8-10 of this chapter. The performance standards are set forth in the "City Of Elko
Construction Site Best Management Practices Handbook" together with any addenda, all of which are available for
review at the office of the city clerk, and which are adopted by this reference and incorporated herein and made part
hereof as if set forth in full. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-7: WAIVERS TO APPLICABILITY:
Every applicant for a permit to conduct a land disturbance activity shall perform all acts, to the maximum extent
practicable, needed to provide stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request to waive a
given requirement is granted by the city of Elko at its discretion.
A. The minimum requirements for postconstruction stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part only if
at least one of the following circumstances exists:
1. The proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 635/640
2. Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a
stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city of Elko and the implementation of the plan by
the applicant is required by local ordinance.
3. Provision is made to manage stormwater by an off site facility. The off site facility is required to be in place, and is
designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which
would be afforded by on site practices, and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long term operation
and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
4. The city of Elko finds that meeting the minimum on site management requirements is not feasible due to the
natural or existing physical characteristics of a site and the development will not negatively impact existing public
infrastructure.
5. Nonstructural practices will be used on sites that reduce:
a. The generation of stormwater from the site;
b. The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
c. The pollutants generated at the site.
B. In instances where one of the above conditions applies, the city of Elko may grant a waiver, at its discretion, from
strict compliance with these stormwater management requirements, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are
provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city of Elko
that the waiver will not result in any of the following impacts to downstream waterways:
1. Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, or other structures;
2. Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
3. Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; or
4. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A. Stormwater Quality Management Plan Required For All Developments: No application for development subject to
this chapter (see section 9-8-3 of this chapter) will be approved unless it includes a stormwater quality management
plan (also referred to in this chapter as the "plan") detailing how runoff and associated water quality impacts
resulting from the development will be controlled or managed in accordance with the performance standards
established in the latest edition of the city of Elko "Best Management Practices Manual, NPDES Post-Construction
Stormwater Controls". The plan shall contain sufficient information for the city of Elko to evaluate the environmental
impact, effectiveness, and acceptability of the measures proposed by the applicant for reducing adverse impacts
from stormwater. The plan must fully describe the proposed project in drawings and narrative.
The final stormwater quality management plan must be submitted with the development plan(s). No permit(s) shall
be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater quality management plan, or a waiver thereof, has been approved by
the city of Elko.
B. Final Stormwater Quality Management Plan Requirements:
1. Contact Information: The applicant shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of all persons having
a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties
affected. This information shall include a locus map and description of the existing zoning and land use (including
all existing structures) at the site as well as the proposed land use.
2. Hydrology Report: The applicant shall submit a hydrology report, which must include: a map showing the
location(s) of existing and proposed easements; existing and proposed utilities; existing and proposed
topography with contours at two foot (2') intervals and the existing site hydrology. This shall consist of a
description and delineation of existing stormwater conveyances, impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 636/640
the site or into which stormwater flows; surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, and ditches; a
delineation of 100-year floodplains and estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation in areas to be used for
stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration (if applicable).
A drainage area map shall accompany the hydrology report and shall show existing and proposed vegetation and
ground surfaces, and pre- and post-construction watershed boundaries, drainage area and stormwater flow
paths.
The plan shall include a description and drawings of all components of the proposed drainage system including:
locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks, streams, drainage swales and their methods of stabilization;
all measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water; all measures for the protection of water quality; the
structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems and stormwater management facilities;
notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction specifications, and other features typically shown
in such plans and drawings, and expected hydrology (calculations to be provided as described in subsection B3
of this section).
3. Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms shall be provided in the manner specified in the "Best Management Practices
Manual, NPDES Post-Construction Stormwater Controls", Klienfelder Consultants, 2012. Such calculations shall
include: a) description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration, b) time of concentration, c) soil curve
numbers or runoff coefficients, d) peak runoff flow rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area, e)
infiltration rates, where applicable, f) culvert capacities, g) flow velocities, h) data on the increase in rate and
volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the "Best Management Practices Manual, NPDES Post-
Construction Stormwater Controls", Klienfelder Consultants, 2012, and i) documentation of sources for all
computation methods and field test results.
4. Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils
(e.g., infiltration basins), then the applicant shall submit a soils report to the city of Elko. The soils report shall be
based on on site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the
location of the control measure.
5. Maintenance And Repair Element For Private Stormwater Facilities: The design and planning of all stormwater
management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued
function. Components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and
skills or training required must be identified and described in the plan. Provision for the periodic review and
evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance
procedures shall be included in the plan.
6. Maintenance And Drainage Easements And Agreements: The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater
treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance
easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements shall be recorded with the plan and shall run with
the land.
Prior to the issuance of any permit that requires a stormwater management facility, the applicant or owner of the
site must execute a maintenance agreement with the city of Elko that shall be binding on all subsequent owners
of land served by the stormwater management facility. The maintenance agreement shall provide for access to
the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City of Elko, or its contractor or agent, and for
regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition, and that it meets the design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The
maintenance agreement shall be recorded by the City of Elko with the Elko County Recorder.
Maintenance of all private stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal
maintenance agreement that must be approved by the City of Elko and recorded into the land record prior to final
acceptance of the development by the City of Elko. As part of the agreement, a schedule shall be developed for
periodic inspections and maintenance to ensure proper performance of the facility.
All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document
maintenance and repair needs, and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. These needs
may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets, and drainage pipes, grass cutting
and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs must be
addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City of Elko, and the inspection and maintenance
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 637/640
requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater
management facility. See section 9-8-10 of this chapter for further information on maintenance requirements.
7. Other Environmental Permits: The applicant must either attach appropriate erosion and sediment control plans to
the stormwater pollution prevention plan (if required under other provisions of this Code) or prepare an erosion
and sediment control plan employing practices that conform to the "City of Elko Construction Site Best
Management Practices Handbook" for all construction activities related to implementing on site structural BMPs
included in the final stormwater quality management plan.
The applicant shall ensure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to
approval of the final stormwater design plan.
8. Performance Guarantee: The City of Elko may require the submittal of a performance guarantee in a form
provided under subsection 3-3-22B of this Code in order to ensure that the stormwater quality management plan
has been implemented or will be implemented correctly and by a certain date. The amount of the performance
guarantee shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under
the permit. The performance guarantee shall contain forfeiture provisions, approved by the City of Elko, for failure
to complete work specified in the stormwater quality management plan.
The City of Elko may partially release the performance guarantee at its discretion as work is satisfactorily
completed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the performance guarantee shall be released in full only upon
submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a licensed professional engineer (PE), that the
stormwater quality management plan has been fully implemented. The City of Elko will make a final on site
inspection to ensure that all construction is in full compliance with the approved plan(s) and the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-9: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION PROVISIONS:
A. Notice Of Construction Commencement: The applicant must notify the City of Elko in advance before the
commencement of construction. During construction, inspection of stormwater management facilities may be
required by the City of Elko and, if so, the inspections shall be conducted by a licensed professional engineer (PE).
All inspections shall be documented by written reports prepared by the licensed professional engineer and shall
contain the following information:
1. The date and location of the inspection;
2. Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater quality management plan;
3. If and where variation from the approved construction specifications have occurred. If variations from the
approved construction plans have occurred, the professional engineer's report will specify the nature and location
of any variation(s).
B. As Built Plans: All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities
located on site after final construction has been completed. One hard copy, together with a digital copy of the "as
built" plans must be provided to the City of Elko. The plans must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a licensed professional engineer (PE) registered in the
state of Nevada. A final inspection by the city of Elko is required before the release of performance securities can
occur.
C. Landscaping And Stabilization Requirements: Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been
either partially or wholly cleared, or removed by development activities shall be: 1) stabilized within fourteen (14)
days of the substantial completion of such clearing and construction in order to prevent erosion and provide
sediment control and 2) revegetated no later than the next growing season. The owner of the property shall be
responsible for implementing appropriate fertilization and irrigation measures, if deemed necessary by the city of
Elko.
The following criteria shall apply to the revegetation requirement:
Complete revegetation must be permanently established in accordance with one of the following time frames, and
at the sole discretion of the city of Elko:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 638/640
1. Within two (2) years after the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy (C of O) of the building or premises,
subject to the execution of a performance agreement with the city of Elko which includes bonding or some other
acceptable form of security that guarantees completion of the required work; or
2. Prior to final approval of the project; or
3. Within two (2) years after completion of grading activity, subject to the execution of a performance agreement
with the city of Elko to include bonding or some other acceptable form of security that guarantees completion of
the required work.
Seeding or reseeding should occur during the season most appropriate for the plant species and/or type of
vegetation being planted. The installation of a temporary irrigation system, at the expense of the owner, may be
required by the city of Elko to ensure establishment of the seeding or planting project, at the city of Elko's
discretion. The foregoing requirements may depend upon factors such as the season in which planting takes
place and variation in climatic condition.
Reseeding must include an annual or perennial cover crop in addition to the primary and secondary revegetation
species. Revegetation species are preferably composed of native drought tolerant plant species, and are
accompanied by the placement of an acceptable mulch of sufficient thickness and coverage to limit erosion until
such time as the cover crop equals, averages, or exceeds a plant cover of seventy percent (70%) over the entire
seeded area. Such establishment shall be in place for a period of one year. The "City Of Elko Construction Site
Best Management Practices Handbook" contains an extensive list of suitable plant species that are adapted to
the climate and weather conditions of northeastern Nevada and are recommended for revegetation of disturbed
sites.
Replanting with native woody and/or herbaceous plant species must be accompanied by application of an
appropriate mulch of sufficient thickness and coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and
are themselves capable of controlling erosion. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-10: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES:
A. Access And Maintenance Agreements: As provided in section 9-8-8 of this chapter, a formal maintenance
agreement for all structural stormwater facilities is required by the city of Elko under this chapter. Under certain
circumstances, the city of Elko may require that the maintenance agreement be recorded with the county recorder
as a condition precedent to final plan approval. Also, at the city of Elko's sole discretion under certain conditions
and for specific development types, the city of Elko may accept dedication of existing or future stormwater
management facility(ies) in lieu of a maintenance agreement. This exception will be considered only if such
facility(ies) meet all requirements of this chapter and include(s) adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area,
by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. This exception will be considered on a case by
case basis and at the sole discretion of the city of Elko, with preference given to residential developments.
B. Inspection Of Stormwater Facilities: Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including,
but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or
other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual
discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical
discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and/or material or water in drainage control facilities; and to evaluate the condition of drainage control
facilities or other stormwater treatment practices.
C. Right Of Entry For Inspection: When any new stormwater management or control facility is installed on private
property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system,
sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city of Elko the right to enter said property
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection and/or maintenance. This includes
the right to enter a property when the city of Elko has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is
occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a
violation of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 639/640
D. Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities shall make and maintain records of the installation including all maintenance and
repairs, and shall retain said records for at least seven (7) years from the date of completion or installation and will
include all maintenance and repair activities. These records shall be made available to the city of Elko during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
E. Failure To Maintain Practices: If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance
agreement, the city of Elko, after reasonable notice sent by certified mail, may correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to return the facility to proper working condition.
In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city of
Elko shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have thirty (30) days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner approved by the city of Elko. After proper notice, delivered personally or by certified mail, the
city of Elko may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of any repair work deemed necessary by the city of
Elko, together with any penalties which may be assessed under this code; and the cost of the work shall be a lien
on the property and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. (Ord. 776, 11-12-
2013)
9-8-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations: Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained
by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
B. Notice Of Violation (NOV): When the city of Elko determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation (NOV) to the owner of the property.
The notice of violation shall contain:
1. The name and address of the owner or applicant;
2. The address of the facility when available or a legal description of the building, structure or land upon which the
violation is occurring;
3. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
4. A description of the remedial measure(s) necessary to bring the development's activity into compliance with this
chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
5. A statement of the penalty or penalties, if any, that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the
notice of violation is directed; and
6. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Elko city council by filing a written notice
of appeal with the proper department within thirty (30) days of service by personal delivery or certified mail of the
notice of violation.
C. Stop Work Orders: A notice of violation shall automatically constitute a stop work order; accordingly, persons
receiving a notice of violation will be required to cease all construction activities. The stop work order will be in
effect until the city of Elko confirms that the development activity is in compliance with all city of Elko requirements
and that the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation (NOV) by the date
specified in the notice of violation letter can result in civil, criminal, and/or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
D. Civil And Criminal Penalties: In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person
who has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be subject to a criminal penalty up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day.
The city of Elko may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=316 640/640
E. Restoration Of Lands: Any person found in violation of this chapter may be required to restore land disturbed by
construction activities to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within the time
specified in a notice of violation, the city of Elko may take necessary corrective action to restore the land, the cost of
which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Elko from using a
performance guarantee to obtain reimbursement for the cost of restoring land pursuant to this subsection.
F. Holds On Occupation Permits: Certificates of occupancy (C of O) and/or acceptance of public improvements will not
be granted until required corrections to all stormwater facilities and practices have been made and accepted by the
city of Elko.
G. Injunctive Relief: The city of Elko may seek injunctive relief in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-12: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency to the
Elko city council. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of
violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Elko city council shall take place within forty five (45) days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal, unless otherwise extended at the request of the applicant. An aggrieved person may
seek judicial review of the decision of the city council by filing an appropriate petition with a court of competent
jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of the decision. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)
9-8-13: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the city of Elko to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 776, 11-12-2013)