7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 1/565
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
BILL NO. 557
ORDINANCE NO. 557
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MESQUITE, NEVADA, TO AMEND TITLE 1 OF THE MESQUITE MUNICIPAL CODE
“ADMINISTRATION”; CHAPTER 7 “CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES” SECTION 1 “APPOINTIVE OFFICERS” OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE AND
MATTERS PROPERLY RELATED THERETO;
WHEREAS, the City Council has the responsibility to provide for the safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Mesquite;
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article II, Section 2.080 authorizes the City Council to enact ordinances and orders that are not repugnant to the
Constitution of the United States or of the State of Nevada necessary for the municipal government and management of City affairs, for the executions of all powers
vested in the city, and for the punishment for violations of such ordinances;
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article I, Section 1.010 authorizes the City Council to have the power to be able to regulate and control the appointment
of executive officers within the City;
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate for the City of Mesquite to review and revise the City Code from time to time to ensure consistency with the Nevada
Revised Statutes;
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Mesquite, Nevada, does ordain:
Section 1: Mesquite Municipal Code Title 1, Chapter 7, Section 1, is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
1-7-1: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
A. Appointment:
. The Mayor shall appoint the City Manager and City Attorney, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
. The City Manager shall appoint all other executive officers pursuant to article I, section 1.080 of the Mesquite City Charter. Such appointment shall be subject to
ratification of the City Council.
. The City Manager shall appoint all other heads or directors of departments of the City, along with all subordinate officers and employees. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-
2017)
. If a vacancy exists in an executive office under subsection 2 of the above, the City Manager may appoint, on an interim basis an interim Director. Said Director may not
stay for longer than 6 months without must be ratified ratification by the City Council by special meeting or at the following regular Council Meeting. An interim City
Manager or interim City Attorney must be appointed with Council approval.
B. Qualifications: Appointive officers of the City shall have such qualifications as Nevada Revised Statutes or the City Council by ordinance may prescribe, and not be in
default to the City. (Ord. 393, 1-8-2008, eff. 1-31-2008)
C. Oath And Bond: Appointive officers shall subscribe to the constitutional oath of office and must be bonded if required by Nevada Revised Statutes section 266.420.
D. Duties: Duties of appointive officers are those imposed by Nevada Revised Statutes and as may be additionally defined by the City Council by ordinance pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes section 266.460. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 230, 8-24-1999, eff. 9-16-1999; Ord. 259, 12-10-2001)
Section 2: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 2/565
Section 3:The City Clerk is instructed and authorized to publish the title to this ordinance as provided by law.
Section 4:This ordinance shall become effective upon passage, approval and publication.
Section 5:The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health safety, welfare and
convenience.
Section 6: If any subsection, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
Section 7: The City Council finds that this ordinance is not likely to impose a direct and significant economic burden upon a business or directly restrict the formation,
operation or expansion of a business, and complies with Nevada Revised Statutes Chapter 237.
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND APPROVED this 22nd day of January, 2019.
By: __________________________
Allan S. Litman, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________
Tracy E. Beck, City Clerk
AYE: Annie Black
George Rapson
Sandra Ramaker
Brian Wursten
NAY: George Gault
ABSTAIN: None
PUBLICATION DATE: 1/24/2019
EFFECTIVE DATE: 2/12/2019
Approved as to Form:
By: ____________________________
Robert D. Sweetin, City Attorney
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 3/565
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
BILL NO. 559
ORDINANCE NO. 559
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MESQUITE MUNICIPAL CODE TITLE 2 “BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS”; CHAPTER 13 “VACATION HOME
RENTAL”; SECTION 8 “APPLICATION FOR VACATION HOME RENTAL LICENSE” AND TITLE 9 “UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT”; CHAPTER 7
“ZONING DISTRICTS”; ARTICLE F “SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SF)”; SECTION 2 “PERMITTED USES” AND SECTION 3 “CONDITIONAL
USES” AND OTHER MATTERS PROPERLY RELATED THERETO
WHEREAS, the City of Mesquite is the fastest growing community in the State of Nevada; and
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate for the City of Mesquite to review and revise the regulations for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals
or general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Mesquite; and
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article II, Section 2.080 authorizes the City Council to enact ordinances and orders that are not repugnant to the
Constitution of the United States or of the State of Nevada necessary for the municipal government and management of City affairs, for the executions of all powers
vested in the city, and for the punishment for violations of such ordinances; and
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article II, Section 2.130 authorizes the City Council to regulate businesses and trades within the City of Mesquite; and
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate to amend the Mesquite Municipal Code from time to time;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Mesquite City Council that vacation home rentals be a permitted use.
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Mesquite, Nevada, does ordain:
Section 1: Mesquite Municipal Code Title 2, Chapter 13, Article 8, is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
2-13-8: APPLICATION FOR VACATION HOME RENTAL LICENSE:
An application for a license must be filed with the development services department before use of the property as a vacation home rental. License applications for
properties presently used as vacation home rental must be filed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date hereof upon forms provided by the city and
must contain the following information:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vacation home rental for which the permit is issued.
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the managing agency, agent or local contact person for the owner of the vacation home rental. This shall also contain the
landline phone number of the vacation home rental unit.
C. Proof of homeowners' and liability insurance.
D. A current copy of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or bylaws of the rental unit's community showing that they expressly permit vacation home rentals in that
subdivision or apartment/condominium project. If no such applicable covenants, conditions, and restrictions or bylaws exist, this requirement shall be waived. (Note:
Owners of rental units in projects whose CCRs and bylaws do not expressly permit vacation home rentals shall first apply for and receive from the city a conditional
use permit in order to make application for a vacation home rental permit.)
E. Acknowledgment that all designated bedrooms contain a minimum of seventy (70) square feet and meet all requirements of the current international residential code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 4/565
F. List the number of bedrooms (each containing a minimum of 70 square feet), approximate total heated square footage in the vacation home rental, and the maximum
number of overnight occupants.
G. A diagram or photograph of the premises showing and indicating the number and location of designated on site parking spaces and the maximum number of vehicles
allowed for overnight occupants.
H. Evidence of a valid transient occupancy tax remittance form issued by the city of Mesquite for the vacation home rental.
I. Acknowledgment that the owner, agent, and local contact person have read all regulations pertaining to the operation of a vacation home rental.
J. Acknowledgment that the owner, agent, and local contact person have received and read the good neighbor brochure for vacation renters provided by the city, and a
further acknowledgment that the owner will provide copies of the brochure to each renter.
K. Acknowledgment that the owner, agent, or local contact person has or will post the vacation home rental with the notice required in this chapter.
L. Other information the development services director or a designee deems reasonably necessary to administer this chapter.
If the information supplied by the property owner on the application for a vacation home rental license is not consistent with city records, an inspection can be
required prior to or after the issuance of the vacation home rental permit. An inspection fee established by resolution of the council must be charged for any
inspection. The city will provide a copy of the application to the general improvement district and homeowners' association in which the proposed vacation home
rental property is located having responsibility for streets, parking, trash and refuse pick up or any combination of these responsibilities. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
Section 2: Mesquite Municipal Code Title 9, Chapter 7F-2, is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
9-7F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Manufactured home1.
Parks or recreation areas and facilities.
Playgrounds and trails.
Religious assembly.
School.
Single-family detached home.
Subdivision sales office/model home (temporary).
Vacation home rentals in all areas including where permitted by a common interest community or homeowners' association by way of express permission through the
entity's declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs), bylaws, or Design Standards Handbook. (Ord. 536, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
Section 3: Mesquite Municipal Code Title 9, Chapter 7F, Section 3, is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
9-7F-3: CONDITIONAL USES2:
Aviaries.
Childcare facilities.
Community residence - transitional.
Golf courses.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 5/565
Home occupations3.
Homes of more than two (2) stories.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Vacation home rentals in all areas where not a permitted use under section 9-7F-2 of this article, unless expressly prohibited by a common interest community or
homeowner's association through its declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs).
Zero lot line development/attached homes. (Ord. 536, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
Section 4:All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 5:The City Clerk is instructed and authorized to publish the title to this ordinance as provided by law.
Section 6:This ordinance shall become effective upon passage, approval and publication.
Section 7:The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health safety, welfare and
convenience.
Section 8:If any subsection, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
Section 9:The City Council finds that this ordinance is not likely to impose a direct and significant economic burden upon a business or directly restrict the formation,
operation or expansion of a business, and complies with Nevada Revised Statutes Chapter 237.
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND APPROVED this 12th day of February, 2019.
By: __________________________
Allan S. Litman, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________
Tracy E. Beck, City Clerk
AYE: Annie Black
George Gault
George Rapson
Sandra Ramaker
Brian Wursten
NAY: None
ABSTAIN: None
PUBLICATION DATE: February 14, 2019
EFFECTIVE DATE: March 5, 2019
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 6/565
Approved as to Form:
By: ____________________________
Robert D. Sweetin, City Attorney
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
BILL NO. 560
ORDINANCE NO. 560
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MESQUITE MUNICIPAL CODE TITLE 9 “UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT”; CHAPTER 8 “SUPPLEMENTARY USE AND
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS”; SECTION 1 “ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES”; SUBSECTION B “ACCESSORY BUILDINGS” AND OTHER
MATTERS PROPERLY RELATED THERETO
WHEREAS,the City of Mesquite is the fastest growing community in the State of Nevada; and
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate for the City of Mesquite to review and revise the regulations for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals
or general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Mesquite; and
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article II, Section 2.080 authorizes the City Council to enact ordinances and orders that are not repugnant to the
Constitution of the United States or of the State of Nevada necessary for the municipal government and management of City affairs, for the executions of all powers
vested in the city, and for the punishment for violations of such ordinances; and
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article II, Section 2.130 authorizes the City Council to regulate businesses and trades within the City of Mesquite; and
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate to amend the Mesquite Municipal Code from time to time;
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Mesquite, Nevada, does ordain:
Section 1: Mesquite Municipal Code Title 9, Chapter 8, Section 1, Subsection B is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
9-8-1: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
B. Accessory Buildings:
1. Placement: Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited from being placed in front of the principal building and shall be placed in the rear yard, except that a
detached garage may be located in front of the principal residential building.
2. Side Street Yard: Accessory buildings adjacent to a side street shall have a side yard not less than six feet (6').
3. Rear Yard; Conditions: Accessory buildings may be erected in the rear yard in compliance with all of the following conditions:
a. There shall be a six foot (6') rear yard setback;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 7/565
b. The building height does may not exceed fourteen feet (14') thirty-five feet (35’);
c. No portion of the building shall be within one foot (1') of any utility easement;
d. The building shall have a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from any dwelling or other buildings.
4. Building Permit Required: Accessory buildings may only be constructed upon the issuance of a building permit, except as provided in the building code. Accessory
buildings must be incidental to the principal building. (Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
Section 2: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 3: The City Clerk is instructed and authorized to publish the title to this ordinance as provided by law.
Section 4: This ordinance shall become effective upon passage, approval and publication.
Section 5: The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health safety, welfare and
convenience.
Section 6: If any subsection, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
Section 7: The City Council finds that this ordinance is not likely to impose a direct and significant economic burden upon a business or directly restrict the formation,
operation or expansion of a business, and complies with Nevada Revised Statutes Chapter 237.
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND APPROVED this 26 day of February, 2019.
By: __________________________
Allan S. Litman, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________
Tracy E. Beck, City Clerk
AYE: George Gault
Sandra Ramaker
George Rapson
Brian Wursten
NAY: None
ABSTAIN: None
ABSENT: Annie Black
PUBLICATION DATE: February 28, 2019
EFFECTIVE DATE: March 5, 2019
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 8/565
Approved as to Form:
By: ____________________________
Robert D. Sweetin, City Attorney
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
BILL NO. 561
ORDINANCE NO. 561
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MESQUITE MUNICIPAL CODE TITLE 1 “RESIDENCY”; CHAPTER 11 “PERSONNEL POLICIES”; SECTION 17
“RESIDENCY” AND OTHER MATTERS PROPERLY RELATED THERETO
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate for the City of Mesquite to review and revise the regulations for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals
or general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Mesquite; and
WHEREAS, the Mesquite City Charter, Article II, Section 2.080 authorizes the City Council to enact ordinances and orders that are not repugnant to the
Constitution of the United States or of the State of Nevada necessary for the municipal government and management of City affairs, for the executions of all powers
vested in the city, and for the punishment for violations of such ordinances; and
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate to amend the Mesquite Municipal Code from time to time; and
NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Mesquite, Nevada, does ordain:
Section 1: Mesquite Municipal Code Title 1, Chapter 11, Article 17, is hereby amended and shall read as follows:
1-11-17: RESERVED [RESIDENCY]:
Reserved.
A. Required For Employment; Proof Of Compliance; Termination:
1. Definitions:
FULL TIME RESIDENT: A resident whose principal place of residence is located within Clark County, Nevada, and within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the city of
Mesquite, and who primarily resides in that principal place of residence twelve (12) months out of the year.
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE: An employee employed full time by the city, or a full time equivalent employee, or a part time employee who is not a seasonal employee.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF RESIDENCE: The primary location an employee and his or her family resides and live out the common activities of life. This may be
determined by reviewing relevant facts and circumstances by the city manager. Relevant factors may include, but are not limited to: the place of abode of family members;
the address listed on federal tax returns, a driver's license, automobile registration, and voter registration cards; the employee's mailing address for bills and
correspondence; the location of banking institutions; location of religious organizations and recreational and/or social clubs with which the employee is affiliated.
SEASONAL EMPLOYEE: An employee employed for a specific purpose, for no longer than three (3) months, with no expectation of continued employment beyond the
short time period or specific purpose for which the employee was hired.
. Maintain Place Of Residence: Absent the existence of a collective bargaining agreement to the contrary, every permanent employee of the city, within ninety (90) days of
the date of initial employment, or within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof, or within ninety (90) days after the expiration of a collective bargaining agreement
to the contrary, whichever may be applicable, shall establish and maintain a principal place of residence within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the city of Mesquite. Such
residency shall be, without exception, full time. This provision shall apply without regard to any required probationary period.
. Proof Of Residency: Employees shall provide three (3) of the following four (4) items to the human resources department or the city manager within the allotted time
frame for compliance with this section:
. A utility bill.
. Vehicle registration.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 9/565
. Driver's license.
d. Voter registration.
. Inconclusive Documents: Documents provided pursuant to subsection A3 of this section may be considered in determining an employee's principal place of residency, but
are not conclusive.
. Lacking Documents: An employee who does not own a vehicle, is ineligible to obtain a driver's license or is not eligible to vote, may petition the city manager to provide
only a utility bill and a driver's license or Nevada department of motor vehicles issued identification card (or federal equivalent) which shows upon the face thereof the
employee's address under subsection A3 of this section. The granting of such a petition shall be at the sole discretion of the city manager.
. Termination: An employee who fails to comply with the provisions of this section is subject to immediate termination.
. Employee Responsible For Proof: The burden of proving principal place of residency shall be on the employee at all relevant times. The city shall have no obligation to
demonstrate nonresidency prior to termination for violation of this section.
. Mesquite Fire Department: No part of this section shall apply to reserve employees of the Mesquite fire department.
. Nonapplicable: Employees hired before July 1, 2013, that have established residency outside the fifteen (15) mile radius of the city limits will not be required to comply
with the requirements of this section.
0. Applicable: This section shall apply to any employee hired before July 1, 2013, who resides within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the city of Mesquite at the time this
ordinance takes effect.
1. False Information: Providing false information to the city pursuant to this section shall be a misdemeanor and the employee shall be subject to immediate termination and
prosecution. (Ord. 494, 6-23-2015)
Section 2:All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 3:The City Clerk is instructed and authorized to publish the title to this ordinance as provided by law.
Section 4:This ordinance shall become effective upon passage, approval and publication.
Section 5:The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health safety, welfare and
convenience.
Section 6:If any subsection, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.
Section 7:The City Council finds that this ordinance is not likely to impose a direct and significant economic burden upon a business or directly restrict the formation,
operation or expansion of a business, and complies with Nevada Revised Statutes Chapter 237.
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND APPROVED this 9th day of April, 2019.
By: __________________________
Allan S. Litman, Mayor
ATTEST:
By: __________________________
Tracy E. Beck, City Clerk
AYE: Annie Black
George Gault
George Rapson
Sandra Ramaker
NAY: Brian Wursten
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 10/565
ABSTAIN: None
PUBLICATION DATE: April 11, 2019
EFFECTIVE DATE: April 30, 2019
Approved as to Form:
By: ____________________________
Robert D. Sweetin, City Attorney
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
BILL NUMBER 562
ORDINANCE NUMBER 562
AN ORDINANCE
AMENDING TITLE 9 OF THE MESQUITE MUNICIPAL CODE ENTITLED “UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE”, BY ADDING A DEFINITION FOR
FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE TO SECTION 9-2-2 DEFINITIONS, AND ADDING FUNERAL HOME INTERMENT SERVICE TO
SECTION 9-7-6 USE TABLES TABLE 9-7:2 USE MATRIX; BY ADDING FUNERAL HOME INTERMENT SERVICE TO SECTION 9-7M-3 IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (CR-1) ZONE, TO SECTION 9-7N-2 IN THE GENERAL COMMERCIAL CR-2 ZONE; TO SECTION 9-7W-2 IN THE
COMMERCIAL CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CR-3) ZONE, TO SECTION 9-7P-2 IN THE LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (IR-1) ZONE; AND BY ADDING
FUNERAL HOME INTERMENT SERVICE TO SECTION 9-7T-4 IN THE PARKS, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE ZONE; AND OTHER MATTERS
PROPERLY RELATING THERETO.
WHEREAS, it is reasonable and appropriate to amend the Mesquite Municipal Code from time to time; and
WHEREAS, the Nevada Legislature has granted to the governing body (City Council) authority to prepare and adopt a Master Plan, and to divide the City into
zoning districts and adopt zoning regulations; and
WHEREAS, the City’s authority to regulate the development of land is derived from Nevada Revised Statues, which sets forth the general administrative
regulations, and from time to time, it becomes necessary for the City to evaluate its policies and procedures for internal consistency and compliance with state law, and
WHEREAS, it was recently discovered that the City’s Zoning Regulations do not include a definition and zone classification for the land use activity: Funeral
Home & Interment Service.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MESQUITE AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: The City Council hereby approves and adopts the Development Code Amendment, including accompanying exhibits, and incorporates the same by
reference herein.
SECTION 2: Section 9-2-2 Terms Defined is hereby amended by adding the following definition:
Funeral Home and Interment Service: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of human
dead other than in cemeteries or religious assembly uses. This use includes mortuaries, which are facilities in which dead bodies are prepared for burial or cremation;
and it includes crematoria, which are establishments or structures in which the bodies of the dead are cremated.
SECTION 3: Section 9-7-6 Use Tables, Table 9-7:2 Use Matrix is hereby amended by adding Funeral Home Interment Service as a Conditional Use in the CR-1
Zone, a Permitted Use in the CR-2, CR-3, and IR-1 Zones, and as an Accessory Use in the PROS Zone
SECTION 4: Section 9-7M-3 is amended by adding Funeral Home and Interment Service to the list of Conditional Uses in the Neighborhood Commercial (CR-1)
Zone;
SECTION 5: Section 9-7N-2 is amended by adding Funeral Home and Interment
Service to the list of Permitted Uses in the General Commercial (CR-2) Zone;
SECTION 6: Section 9-7W-2 is amended by adding Funeral Home and Interment
Service to the list of Permitted Uses in the Commercial Central Business District (CR-3) Zone;
SECTION 7: Section 9-7P-2 is amended by adding Funeral Home and Interment
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 11/565
Service to the list of Permitted Uses in the Light Industrial (IR-1) Zone;
SECTION 8: Section 9-7T-4 is amended by adding Funeral Home and Interment
Service to the list of Accessory Uses in the Parks, Recreation and Open Space (PROS) Zone;
SECTION 9: SEVERABILITY. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable,the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall in no way affect remaining provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 10: REPEALER. All ordinances, parts of ordinances or chapters, sections or paragraphs contained in the Mesquite Municipal Code in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 11: EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days after its publication once by title in a newspaper qualified
pursuant to provisions of Chapter 238 of NRS, as amended from time to time.
SECTION 12: PUBLICATION. The City Clerk shall cause this ordinance to be published once immediately following its adoption, by title, in a newspaper
qualified pursuant to provisions of Chapter 238 ofNRS, as amended from time to time.
SECTION 13: A copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk, and notice of such filing shall be published once by title, in a
newspaper having general circulation in the City of Mesquite at least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of said Ordinance,
PASSED, ADOPTED, AND APPROVED this 23rd day of April, 2019.
By:
Brian Wursten, Mayor Pro-tem
ATTEST:
By:_____________________________
Tracy Beck, City Clerk
AYE: Annie Black
George Gault
Sandra Ramaker
NAY: None
ABSTAIN: None
ABSENT: George Rapson
PUBLICATION DATE: April 25, 2019
EFFECTIVE DATE: May 14, 2019
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 12/565
By:_________________________________
Robert Sweetin, City Attorney
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Mesquite, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 556, passed November 27, 2018. Ordinances
of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Municipal Code of the City of Mesquite.
This Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MESQUITE MUNICIPAL CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the City Council and
shall be kept up to date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to
refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the
section itself, when reference is made to this Code by title in any legal documents. (Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State
as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1991 Code; amd.
Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code. (1991 Code;
amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the Office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the Office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-1-5: SUPREMACY OF THE MESQUITE CITY CHARTER:
A. Effective July 1, 2017, any ordinance which unambiguously conflicts with the Mesquite City Charter shall be invalid and, once discovered, shall be
placed on the next available City Council agenda for repeal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 13/565
B. All reasonable effort shall be given to read all provisions of this Code in effect on July 1, 2017, unless such provisions are subsequently repealed or
amended, so as not to conflict with the City Charter. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this municipal code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this municipal
code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinance granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution
of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this municipal code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the municipal code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this municipal code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1991
Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a formal ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or anypenalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed to be discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of
this municipal code. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this municipal code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this municipal code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this municipal code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any
section of this municipal code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this municipal code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection", or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 14/565
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred either expressly or impliedly to do so.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, county of Clark, state of Nevada.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Mesquite".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of abusiness, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons
within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Mesquite".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such buildings orland, whether alone or with
others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write,
by his proper mark. (1991 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the municipal code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such section, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city the doing of any act is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever
in such code or ordinance the failure to do any act is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, if no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or any combination of such fine and imprisonment1. (Ord. 30, 12-31-1985)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 15/565
1-4-2: MISDEMEANOR PENALTY:
A. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than six (6) months, or by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both fine and imprisonment, unless the statute or ordinance in force at the time of commission of
such misdemeanor prescribes a different penalty.
B. In lieu of all or a part of the punishment which may be imposed pursuant to subsection A of this section, if the convicted person agrees, he may be
sentenced to perform a fixed period of work for the benefit of the community under the conditions prescribed in Nevada Revised Statutes section
176.087. (Ord. 30, 12-31-1985)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this municipal code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this municipal code where a duty is prescribed or
obligation imposed, or where any action which is of acontinuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this municipal code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this municipal code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this municipal code and there shall be
no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this municipal code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
Chapter 5
MAYOR
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE:
The Mayor shall be elected by the electors at large of the City and shall serve a term of four (4) years. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
1-5-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
Candidates for Mayor shall be qualified electors of the City, at least eighteen (18) years of age, and shall have resided in the City for one (1) year. (Ord.
518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
1-5-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Mayor shall have all powers and duties conferred upon the office by article III of the Mesquite City Charter. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
Chapter 6
CITY COUNCIL1
1-6-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE2:
The City Council shall have five (5) Council members and a Mayor elected from the City at large and representing the City at large, for terms of four (4)
years and until their successors have been elected and have taken office. (Ord. 215, 1-26-1999)
1-6-2: QUALIFICATIONS3:
A. No person shall be eligible for the Office of Council member or Mayor unless he is a qualified elector of the City, at least eighteen (18) years of age,
must not be a debtor to the City, and has been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately prior to the election in which he is a candidate.
He shall hold no other elective public office, but he may hold a commission as a notary public or be a member of the armed forces reserve. No
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 16/565
employee of the City or officer thereof, excluding City Council members, receiving compensation under the provisions of this Code or any City
ordinance, shall be a candidate for or eligible for the Office of Council member or Mayor without first resigning from City employment or City office.
B. If a Council member or the Mayor ceases to possess any of the qualifications enumerated in subsection A of this section, or is convicted of a felony, or
ceases to be a resident of the City, his office shall immediately become vacant. (Ord. 175, 12-27-1996; amd. Ord. 230, 8-24-1999, eff. 9-16-1999; Ord.
259, 12-10-2001)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular: Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at least once a month at a time and place as designated by the City Council. All meetings of
the City Council must be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 241.
B. Emergency: Emergency meetings may be called by the Mayor or a majority of the City Council. No ordinance may be passed at such emergency
meeting, and the agenda shall be limited to business as per the call to meet. In determining whether an emergency exists in order to hold a meeting
without the normal required minimum notice to the public, the Mayor and City Council will use the definition of "emergency" contained in Nevada
Revised Statutes 241, which is currently codified at Nevada Revised Statutes section 241.020(5).
C. Open Meetings: Meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 266.250 and pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 241. Meetings may be closed only to discuss personnel matters or as otherwise permitted by law.
D. Quorum, Voting: A majority of the City Council shall be required to constitute a quorum, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded on each measure.
(1991 Code; amd. Ord. 259, 12-10-2001)
1-6-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Council shall legislate by passing ordinances and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Creation of offices for the government of the City.
B. Licensing and regulation of businesses within the City.
C. Providing for fire and police protection, the control of animals, the abatement of nuisances, and the regulation of traffic and parking.
D. Creation of public works projects; maintenance of streets, sidewalks and public ways; regulation of roadways; contracting for utilities; granting
franchises; managing property and buildings; and condemning certain real property and buildings for public use.
E. Those powers and duties given to the City by virtue of any applicable provision of Nevada Revised Statutes. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 259, 12-10-2001)
1-6-5: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
A. Meetings:
1. Regular City Council Meetings: The City Council shall meet in regular session at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the second and fourth Tuesday of each
month. The City Council may, as it deems necessary, schedule a regular meeting on a date other than the second and fourth Tuesday of each
month, in accordance with article II, section 2.040 of the Mesquite City Charter and the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241. Pursuant
to the provisions of article II, section 2.040 of the Mesquite City Charter, when the business of the City Council may reasonably be consolidated into
one monthly meeting, the City Council may, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council, consolidate all business into a regular City Council meeting
to be held on either the second or fourth Tuesday of each month. Such a vote shall only have effect for no longer than a period of thirty (30) days.
2. Technical Review Meetings: Pursuant to article II, section 2.040(2) of the Mesquite City Charter, the City Council shall hold technical review meetings
at one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. on the first and third Tuesday of each month. The purpose of technical review meetings shall be to establish the
business to be heard for only the next relevant regular City Council meeting and other matters properly related thereto. The purpose is to question
staff and/or petitioner relative to an agenda item and receive answers and/or clarifications. There shall not be any discussion that would constitute
deliberations or establishment of a consensus of opinion for any agenda item. Council may vote to add any item of business to the relevant regular
City Council meeting agenda by majority vote. An item of business may only be removed from a regular City Council meeting agenda with the
consent of the petitioner of the item of business. The City Council may, as it deems necessary, cancel a technical review meeting when no
corresponding City Council meeting will be held.
3. Role Of Mayor: The Mayor shall preside over both technical review meetings and regular City Council meetings. The Mayor may decide in what
order to take business from the agenda. In the Mayor's absence, the Mayor Pro Tem shall fulfill the role of the Mayor. If both the Mayor Pro Tem and
the Mayor are absent, the City Council shall choose by majority vote a temporary Chair who shall fulfill the administrative duties of presiding over the
City Council meeting. Nothing in this provision shall either abridge or delegate the duties of the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem or the City Council as
provided in article III of the Mesquite City Charter, except as to the sole issue of fulfilling administrative duties and conducting and directing business
during a meeting. Any provision in this section referring to the Mayor, unless specifically stated otherwise, also refers to the Mayor Pro Tem in the
Mayor's absence, or if both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem are absent, the temporary Chair appointed pursuant to the provisions of this section.
4. Place Of Meetings: The City Council herewith designates as its Council Chambers, for the conduct of all regular meetings, the Council Chambers in
City Hall located at 10 East Mesquite Boulevard, Mesquite, Nevada, or such other place as the City Council may from time to time determine.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 17/565
5. Special Meetings: Special meetings of the City Council include any meeting other than its regular meetings of a quorum of the City Council not
exempted from the requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241. Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or a
majority of the City Council in compliance with article II, section 2.050 of the Mesquite City Charter and the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 241. The Mayor shall make any request for a special meeting to the City Clerk. A majority of the City Council shall make any request for a
special meeting by approval of an agenda item during a regular or special City Council meeting or technical review meeting pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 241. If waiting until a regular City Council meeting or technical review meeting to approve holding a special meeting would
contradict the need for holding the special meeting, the meeting may simply be noticed by the City Clerk upon direction from the Mayor, any Council
member, or the City Manager. Notice of any special meeting shall be made by agenda handled in the same manner as that of a regular meeting.
6. Adjourned Meetings: Any meeting of the City Council may be continued or adjourned from day to day by a call of the Mayor or Council member and
ratified by a majority vote, and in accordance with an agenda noticed pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241, but not beyond the next
scheduled regular meeting.
7. Executive Sessions: Executive sessions, closed meetings or non-public meetings may be held in accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes chapters 241 and 288.220.
B. Conduct Of Business:
1. Quorum: Three (3) Council members shall be in attendance to constitute a quorum, and be necessary for the transaction of business. If a quorum is
not present, those in attendance will be named and they shall adjourn to a later time.
2. Opening Of Business: For an item of business to be subject to discussion or action, the item must first be presented by the Mayor or other presiding
official at the meeting pursuant to the lawfully posted agenda.
3. Motion: Any Council member may at anytime once an item has been brought before the City Council for business, bring a motion to take action on
an item of business.
4. Form Of Motions: Motions may be brought in any form, and may either compel or constrain action.
5. Second Of Motion: Upon a second to any motion, the Mayor shall determine whether any other Council member wishes to continue discussion or
public comment on that item of business. If no Council member wishes to continue discussion or public comment, the Mayor shall call for a vote. If no
second is declared within a reasonable time of a motion, any discussion, debate or public comment previously being held before the motion was
made shall continue until such time that a motion is made and seconded.
6. Restatement Of Motions: When a motion has been made and debate has concluded, if requested by a Council member, the final motion shall be
restated by the Mayor or by his or her designee, to ensure an accurate and concise record prior to the vote. The City Clerk, or his or her designee,
shall be primarily charged with requests to clarify specific language related to the motion.
7. Division Of Questions: If the question contains two (2) or more separate propositions, the Mayor, by his own request or upon request of a Council
member shall, divide the same.
8. Approval Of Motions: All motions approved by the City Council require a quorum and a majority vote for approval of the quorum.
9. Failure Of Motions: A motion shall fail when it achieves no second, or does not obtain a majority vote required for approval. When a motion fails, the
debate, discussion or public comment related to that item shall continue unless otherwise ended by a majority vote of the Council.
10. Point Of Order: Any Council member may at any time raise a point of order objection as appropriate by stating the phrase "point of order". The
Council member shall be afforded the opportunity to explain his or her point of order objection to the Mayor. The Mayor shall rule on the point of
order. The Mayor may seek advice from the City Clerk in ruling upon any point of order. If the Mayor's ruling is against the Council member's call for
the point of order, a vote of the Council may be requested.
11. Consent Agenda: The consent agenda contains items considered to be routine and recommended for approval by staff. Consent agenda items will
be voted upon with one motion, accepting the recommendations as stated on the agenda item. An item may be pulled from the consent agenda at
any time by the Mayor, by the Mayor upon the request of a member of the public, by any Council member, by the City Manager, or by the City
Attorney. If a consent agenda item is pulled for discussion, it may be placed at any point on the agenda and will be voted upon as a separate item.
12. Public Hearings: Items specifically designated as public hearing items by law and other items directly associated with these items are placed in the
public hearing section of the agenda. These items are considered open upon introduction, staff will make comments, the applicant and the appellant,
if applicable, will give testimony, the Mayor and Council will have the opportunity to make comment and then members of the public will be invited to
give testimony, and the City Council will then deliberate and vote. The item is considered closed when voted on by City Council.
13. Unfinished Business: Items continued from previous meetings with the exception of public hearing items and their accompanying items are placed
in the unfinished business section of the agenda.
14. Introduction Of Bills: Bills that are being read by title, to be referred to the next City Council committee meeting for discussion, are placed in the
introduction of bills section of the agenda. Bills read in title are referred to the next regular City Council meeting.
15. Agenda Subjects And Structure: Unless otherwise required by these procedures, or subsequent amendments to these procedures, the structure
and subject headings for Council business may be determined by the Mayor. The Mayor may delegate any authority under this section to the City
Clerk.
16. Mayor/Council Member Comments: The Mayor and Council members may speak on any item under this section of the agenda. Mayor and Council
members may comment on matters including, without limitation, future agenda items, upcoming meeting dates and meeting procedures. Comments
made cannot be acted or deliberated upon during this time, but may be placed on a future meeting agenda for consideration by the City Council.
17. Remote Participation: A Council member may participate in a meeting by way of teleconference or similar communications equipment that allows
all Council members participating in the meeting to simultaneously hear each other. A Council member participating in a meeting by such means
shall be considered present. Any Council member participating remotely shall be audible to the public for all discussions and votes.
18. Parliamentary Authority: City Council meetings are held in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes, the Nevada Open Meeting Law, the Mesquite
City Charter, this Code and previously adopted rules of the City Council. Robert's Rules of Order may be utilized as a guide by the City Council as
long as the Robert's Rules of Order do not conflict with Nevada Revised Statutes, the Mesquite City Charter, this Code, or other adopted rules of the
City Council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 18/565
C. Duties Of The Presiding Officer And Meeting Decorum:
1. Presiding Officer: The Mayor, when present, shall preside as Chairman at all meetings of the City Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor
Pro Tem shall preside; in the absence of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the quorum of present Council members shall choose a presiding officer.
The presiding officer of any meeting of the City Council shall have the same right as any other member of the City Council to initiate a motion,
question or debate. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, and confine Council members in debate to the question under
discussion.
2. Council Vote: Unless a roll call vote is requested or necessitated due to a malfunction of the electronic vote system, the vote on any motion,
resolution or ordinance shall be cast electronically and displayed for public view.
3. Decorum Of The Dais: During meetings, all persons present shall assist in preserving order and decorum by limiting conversation and the use of
cellular devices that may delay or interrupt the proceedings.
D. General Rules And Agenda Process:
1. Agenda Items: Matters to be considered by the City Council and included on a specific meeting agenda will adhere to the City Clerk's Office
deadlines to ensure compliance with the Nevada Revised Statutes, the Mesquite City Charter and this Code and to provide public access to all
information coming before the City Council. All items to appear on a City Council agenda must first be reviewed by the City Manager, the City Clerk,
and the City Attorney, or their designees, before being placed on a meeting agenda.
2. Placing Items On The Agenda: Council members may request certain agenda items by either making a request during the Mayor/Council member
comment section of a City Council meeting agenda, by making request to the City Manager, the City Attorney or the City Clerk, or at technical review
meeting by way of a majority vote of Council members present at that meeting. Council members shall make requests for the preparation of
proposed ordinances to the City Attorney.
3. Agenda Packets: No later than five (5) calendar days preceding a regular meeting of the City Council, the City Clerk shall distribute to the City
Council an electronic agenda packet setting forth the matters to be considered at said meeting. The agenda packets shall be accompanied by
complete, pertinent information relating to the agenda items, such as resolutions, ordinances, and background information. The agenda packet shall
be available to the public in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 241 in the following manner: on the City of Mesquite website,
www.mesquitenv.gov and at the City Clerk's Office, 10 E. Mesquite Boulevard, Mesquite, Nevada 89027.
4. Bills:
a. All proposed ordinances shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney before they are placed on a City Council agenda in order to ensure
compliance with State and Federal laws and the Mesquite City Charter. Ordinances are introduced as bills under the introduction of bills section of
the agenda. The bill shall be read in title and referred to the following Council meeting scheduled not less than ten (10) days from the date the bill
is published by title in a newspaper qualified under Nevada Revised Statutes 238 to provide the public with notification that the City Council is
considering the adoption of an ordinance and to hold a public hearing. The City Clerk shall be responsible for having the ordinance properly
published.
b. If after introduction and publication the discussion, debate, public hearing or consideration of adoption of the bill is continued, the date of the
continued hearing must be within thirty (30) days of the bill publication. A bill not finally adopted within thirty (30) days must start the process over
and be read in title under introduction of bills at a City Council meeting. Once adopted, the ordinance is published in a qualified newspaper under
Nevada Revised Statutes 238 and, unless otherwise designated in the ordinance, becomes effective upon publication.
5. Withdrawals And Continuances: Requests for the withdrawal or continuance of an agenda item received by the City Clerk's Office prior to close of
business on a City Council meeting day will be listed and considered by City Council under acceptance of agenda section of the agenda. After the
close of business on a City Council meeting day, requests for the withdrawal or continuance of an agenda item must be presented by the applicant or
staff when that agenda item is called.
E. Additional Rules, Modification Of Rules: These rules of procedure may be added to, modified, amended, adopted, or temporarily suspended by the City
Council by majority vote at a duly noticed meeting. All permanent modifications or amendments to the rules of procedure should be made by
modification of this section.
F. Public Comment:
1. A minimum of two (2) periods of general public comments shall be provided: the first shall be before any meeting business is heard, however
comments expressed during this first period of comment should be restricted to items which are either not on the agenda, or do not provide for
specific public comment under another agenda item; and the second shall be after all Council business has concluded and shall be open to all
viewpoint comments, including agendized items.
2. Public comment shall always be provided on each agenda under each specific item of business.
3. The normal comment periods shall be three (3) minutes in length. The presiding officer may change the length of period for the specific item or
comment subject if warranted to maintain a reasonable meeting length. The presiding officer may extend an individual commenter's period to allow
the commenter to complete their viewpoint.
4. Any public comment shall be addressed to the Mayor, moderator, or Chair of the public body and shall be direct so as to form a viewpoint of an
issue.
5. Derogatory comments directed specifically at another public commenter or any non-public individuals, including City employees, shall not be
permitted.
6. The presiding officer shall not restrict or limit an individual's comment period unless a restriction in this section has been violated. (Ord. 535, 2-27-
2018, eff. 3-20-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 19/565
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 557 - APPOINTIVE OFFICERS. Go to new ordinance.
1-7-1: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
A. Appointment:
1. The Mayor shall appoint the City Manager and City Attorney, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
2. The City Manager shall appoint all other executive officers pursuant to article I, section 1.080 of the Mesquite City Charter. Such appointment shall
be subject to ratification of the City Council.
3. The City Manager shall appoint all other heads or directors of departments of the City, along with all subordinate officers and employees. (Ord. 518,
7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
B. Qualifications: Appointive officers of the City shall have such qualifications as Nevada Revised Statutes or the City Council by ordinance may prescribe,
and not be in default to the City. (Ord. 393, 1-8-2008, eff. 1-31-2008)
C. Oath And Bond: Appointive officers shall subscribe to the constitutional oath of office and must be bonded if required by Nevada Revised Statutes
section 266.420.
D. Duties: Duties of appointive officers are those imposed by Nevada Revised Statutes and as may be additionally defined by the City Council by
ordinance pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 266.460. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 230, 8-24-1999, eff. 9-16-1999; Ord. 259, 12-10-2001)
1-7-2: COMPENSATION, REIMBURSEMENT, AND BENEFITS:
A. Compensation To Be Set By Ordinance: Whereas, Mesquite City Charter article II, section 2.010(5) and article III, section 3.010(6)(b) requires
compensation for City elected officers to be set by ordinance, and the City Council recognizes the requirements for, and workload of, the City elected
officers, just compensation is both fair and necessary for the work done by City elected officers.
B. Amount Of Compensation: The City Council hereby sets the compensation for the City elected officers as follows: (Ord. 533, 2-27-2018, eff. 3-20-2018)
The following compensation shall be paid to City elected officers taking office July 1, 2011, or thereafter, in accordance with State law.
Mayor $15,000.00 per year
Council members 10,500.00 per year
(Ord. 444, 5-10-2011)
The following compensation established under this section shall take effect for all seats in 2021, in accordance with State law. The Mayor and members of
the City Council shall continue to receive the rate of pay currently established by ordinance until that time.
Mayor $18,000.00 annually
Council members 14,000.00 annually
C. Travel Allowance: Effective July 1, 2011, or thereafter, in accordance with State law, each elected City officer shall receive a vehicular travel allowance
of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month from the City for personal vehicle use pursuant to the City's current travel policies as amended from time to
time. This amount is to be considered total reimbursement for fuel, maintenance, repair, wear and tear, and liability insurance for personal vehicles
used.
D. Benefits: In addition to the salaries and reimbursement set forth in subsections B and C of this section, each elected and appointed City officer shall
receive all benefits for which he/she is eligible under the elected officers benefit package. (Ord. 533, 2-27-2018, eff. 3-20-2018)
1-7-3: ELECTED CITY OFFICERS:
A. Elected Officers Defined: The elected City officers are the Mayor and five (5) City Council members. (Ord. 235, 4-11-2000, eff. 5-4-2000)
B. Filling Of Vacancy: Any vacancy occurring in any elected office shall be filled pursuant to article I, section 1.060 of the Mesquite City Charter. (Ord. 518,
7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 20/565
C. Procedures For Filling Vacancy In Office Of Mayor Or City Council Member: Whenever a vacancy occurs in the Office of Mayor or City Council member,
the following procedures will apply:
1. As soon as possible after the vacancy occurs, the City Manager shall issue an announcement that a vacancy has occurred and invite legally
qualified persons to apply for the vacancy. The City Manager is further directed to prepare a list of qualified applicants for the vacancy and distribute
the same to the Mayor and City Council prior to the meeting where the decision will be made as to the method for filling the vacancy. The City
Council will determine whether the vacancy will be filled by the Mayor and City Council members or by special election.
2. If the City Council determines to fill the vacancy by the Mayor and City Council members ("the elected officials") then the following procedures will
apply:
a. The elected officials will discuss at the open meeting the qualifications of the candidate or candidates each wishes to be considered for election by
the elected officials;
b. Public comment will be heard before a motion to nominate a legally qualified person to fill the vacancy, but after the comments of the elected
officials;
c. At the conclusion of public comment, nominations may be made to fill the vacancy;
d. A nomination requires a second in order to be voted upon by the elected officials;
e. The first nominated and seconded legally qualified person receiving a majority of votes from those voting will be elected to fill the vacancy;
f. Nominating will be based on seniority in office. If two (2) or more of the elected officials have the same date of seniority, seniority among those
elected officials will be determined by alphabetical order of their last names. Each person called upon in seniority order by the Chair to nominate
as specified above may either nominate a legally qualified person to fill the vacancy or may pass. A legally qualified person nominated and
seconded must then be voted upon before a second candidate may be nominated. A person may not nominate another person to fill a vacancy
until every elected official has had the opportunity to nominate or pass as specified above. Subsequent nominations will repeat in the same order
as set forth herein until a successful nominee is elected to fill the vacancy.
D. Election To Term Of Less Than Four Years: If for any reason an election to an at large City Council seat is to a term of less than four (4) years, and if
other seats for four (4) year terms are on the same ballot, the person elected with the fewest number of votes will occupy the seat with the term of less
than four (4) years. (Ord. 259, 12-10-2001)
1-7-4: EXECUTIVE OFFICERS; TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION; SEVERANCE PAY:
A. Executive City Officers: All executive officers of the City are those so indicated in article I, section 1.080 of the Mesquite City Charter, to wit: City
Manager, City Attorney, Assistant City Manager or Deputy City Manager, City Clerk, Director of Finance, Chief of Police, and Fire Chief.
1. Unless otherwise dictated by employment contract, resolution, or ordinance, the City Manager and City Attorney serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
and City Council and may be removed by receiving four (4) votes upon a motion for removal, with all members of the City Council and the Mayor
voting.
2. Unless otherwise dictated by employment contract, resolution, or ordinance, all other executive officers serve at the pleasure of the City Manager
and may be removed by action of the City Manager and subsequent ratification of the City Council. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
B. Compensation For Appointive City Officers: Compensation for appointive City officers will be determined pursuant to the applicable provision of the City
Personnel Policy Manual.
C. Severance Pay: Effective July 1, 2000, unless a written employment agreement approved by the City Council provides for a longer term, any appointive
City officer who has served as a City officer for more than one (1) year will receive a lump sum payment equaling three (3) months' pay at the City
officer's current rate of pay when the officer is terminated or resigns if said appointed City officer is terminated by the City Council without cause or if
the City Council requests the City officer to resign and the City officer does so. The City will also make the full required payments for the City officer's
group insurance policies for health and dental coverage for three (3) months following termination or requested resignation. (Ord. 235, 4-11-2000, eff.
5-4-2000; amd. Ord. 259, 12-10-2001)
1-7-5: CITY MANAGER:
1-7-5-1: OFFICE OF CITY MANAGER:
The City Manager is the Chief Executive of the City of Mesquite and shall have all duties and powers granted to the Office of the City Manager by article
III, sections 3.020 and 3.030 of the Mesquite City Charter. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
1-7-5-2: TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR VACANCY; APPOINTMENT OF ACTING CITY MANAGER:
A. Temporary Absence Defined: For purposes of this section, a "temporary absence" is considered fourteen (14) days or less.
B. Authority Of Manager To Appoint An Acting Manager During Temporary Absence: In the event of a temporary absence by the Manager, the Manager
may appoint an acting Manager during said absence, subject to any limitations provided for in law. A person temporarily appointed pursuant to this
provision must presently be employed by the City and serving in a department head, director, or manager capacity.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 21/565
C. Authority To Appoint Acting Manager If Manager Incapacitated: If the Manager is incapacitated, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall be empowered to appoint an acting Manager.
D. Authority To Appoint Acting Manager Due To Suspension Or Administrative Leave: If the Manager is absent due to a suspension or placed on
administrative leave by the City Council, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of City Council, shall be empowered to appoint an acting Manager.
E. Authority To Appoint Acting Manager During Vacancy: During a vacancy of the Manager's position, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council shall appoint an acting Manager.
F. Responsibilities Of Acting Manager: The acting Manager shall exercise the full authority of the Manager during the temporary absence or vacancy of the
Manager's position. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
1-7-6: APPEAL FROM REPRISAL OR RETALIATORY ACTION AGAINST LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE
WHO DISCLOSES IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION:
A. Short Title And Purpose: The short title of this section shall be the WHISTLEBLOWER ACT. The purpose of this section is to protect all City government
employees who report improper governmental action from retaliation.
B. Whistleblower Defined: "Whistleblower" is defined as an officer or employee who reports or otherwise brings to the attention of the Human Resource
Office any information which, if true, would constitute one (1) of the following: a work related violation by a City officer or employee of any law or
regulation; fraud, waste or mismanagement of City assets or resources; gross abuse of authority; a specific and substantial danger to public health or
safety due to an act or omission of a City officer or employee; or use of a City office, position or resources for personal gain.
C. Whistleblower Identity: To the extent permitted by law, the identity of anyone reporting information to the Human Resource Office about an improper
governmental action shall be treated as confidential unless the employee waives his/her confidentiality in writing.
D. Retaliation Prohibited:
1. No City officer or employee of the City of Mesquite shall use or threaten to use any official authority or influence to restrain or prevent any other
person who is acting in good faith and upon reasonable belief as a whistleblower.
2. No City officer or employee of the City of Mesquite shall use or threaten to use any official authority or influence to cause any adverse employment
action as a reprisal against a City officer or employee who acts as a whistleblower in good faith and with reasonable belief that improper conduct has
occurred.
E. Administrative Complaint Of Retaliation: Any officer or employee who believes that he or she has been subject to an adverse employment action as a
result of being a whistleblower may file a complaint of retaliation to the City Human Resource Office within sixty (60) days after the date the alleged
reprisal or retaliatory action took place. The reprisal or retaliatory action must have occurred within two (2) years after the date the officer or employee
disclosed information concerning improper governmental action. The Human Resource Office shall designate an employee of that office to be the
Hearing Officer for such a complaint and shall thereupon investigate the complaint. If the Human Resource Office is named in the complaint, the
complaint shall be directed to the City Attorney for review and appointment of a Hearing Officer. Any reports regarding retaliation will be kept
confidential at the request of the complainant until such time when a hearing might be required or evidence presented pursuant to subsection I of this
section.
F. Retaliation Defined: "Retaliation" is defined as any adverse employment action, including, but not limited to, discharge, discipline or demotion.
G. Adverse Employment Action Defined: An adverse employment action requires a showing that the retaliatory action had a detrimental and substantial
effect on the terms, conditions, or privileges of a complainant's employment or required the complainant to work in a discriminatorily hostile or abusive
work environment. A change that is merely contrary to a complainant's interests or liking is insufficient.
H. City Defined: "City" is defined as the City of Mesquite, its agencies, departments, boards and commissions.
I. Burden Of Establishing Retaliation: In order to establish reprisal or retaliation, a complainant must demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that
the complainant's engagement in activity protected in subsection B of this section was a motivating factor for the adverse employment action. The
supervisor or manager may rebut a claim of reprisal or retaliation if he or she demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that he/she would
have taken the same employment action irrespective of the complainant's participation in protected activity.
J. Discipline: Any manager, supervisor or employee of the City of Mesquite who knowingly engages in conduct prohibited by this section shall be
disciplined, up to and including termination. (Ord. 487, 8-26-2014, eff. 9-16-2014)
Chapter 7A
ADVISORY BOARDS
1-7A-1: DEFINITION, ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 22/565
A. For purposes of this chapter, "board" includes any permanent or temporary commission, board, committee, council, or trust created pursuant to State
law, City ordinance, or City resolution.
1. The City Council may establish permanent or temporary boards to advise and make recommendations to the Council on various programs and
issues.
2. The provisions of this chapter apply only to members of boards appointed by the City Council who are not elected officials of the City. (Ord. 514, 3-
28-2017, eff. 4-19-2017)
1-7A-2: VIRGIN VALLEY COMMUNITY EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD:
A. Establishment: There is established, pursuant to this chapter, the Virgin Valley Community Education Advisory Board.
B. Purpose: Pursuant to Assembly Bill 394 passed and adopted in the 2015 biennial session of the Nevada State Legislature and R142-16 adopted by the
State Board of Education and made effective September 9, 2016, the purpose of the Community Education Advisory Board shall be to provide advice
and assistance to the organizational team of any local school precinct and the Board of Trustees of the Clark County School District. Further, the Virgin
Valley Community Education Advisory Board shall assist the Mesquite City Council in addressing the public education concerns in the Virgin Valley.
C. Membership: The Virgin Valley Community Education Advisory Board shall consist of at least five (5) members, four (4) of whom are parents of children
attending school full-time in the Virgin Valley.
1. Each school which services the City of Mesquite must be represented by at least one (1) parent of a child who attends the school that that parent-
Board Member represents. There shall be no requirement that any parent-Board Member be a resident of the City of Mesquite.
2. At least one (1) Board Member shall represent the Virgin Valley community at-large. It is not a requirement that this Board Member either be a parent
of a child enrolled in a Virgin Valley school or a resident of the City of Mesquite. However, such a member must be a resident of either the City of
Mesquite or Bunkerville Township.
3. The Mayor may take a seat on the Virgin Valley Community Education Advisory Board, or appoint any person in his or her stead.
4. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Virgin Valley Community Education Advisory Board from adding additional seats or members according to
the bylaws adopted under subsection D of this section.
D. Meetings; Bylaws: The Virgin Valley Community Education Advisory Board shall adopt bylaws establishing meeting times, membership, selection of
members, and procedural rules necessary for the efficient conduct of its business. The bylaws that exist at the time this chapter is passed shall be
effective until amended. (Ord. 514, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-19-2017)
Chapter 8
ELECTIONS AND DISTRICTS
1-8-1: GENERAL CITY ELECTIONS:
A. 2013 General City Election: For the 2013 election cycle, general city elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June.
B. 2015: An election cycle resulting in a general election will not take place in 2015.
C. 2016 General City Election And Thereafter: Commencing in 2016, general city elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of
November in each even numbered year. (Ord. 446, 9-13-2011, eff. 10-15-2011)
1-8-2: OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED1:
A. 2013 General City Election: In June of 2013, the following officers shall stand for election to serve a term of four (4) years plus seventeen (17) additional
months in accordance with subsection C2 of this section: the three (3) city council members whose current four (4) year terms end on June 30, 2013.
B. 2016 General City Election And Thereafter:
1. In November 2016, and every four (4) years thereafter, the following officers shall stand for election to serve for a term of four (4) years: the mayor;
and the two (2) city council members whose current four (4) year terms end on June 30, 2015, subject to the provisions of subsection C of this
section.
2. In November 2018, and every four (4) years thereafter, the following officers shall stand for election to serve for a term of four (4) years: the three (3)
city council members whose current four (4) year terms end on June 30, 2013, subject to the provisions of subsection C of this section.
C. Expiration Of Terms Of Office; Onetime Extensions To Terms Of Office:
1. Extensions Of Terms Of Office For Officers With Terms Expiring On June 30, 2015: The term of all elected officers expiring on June 30, 2015, shall
be extended to November 30, 2016.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 23/565
2. Extensions Of Terms Of Office For Officers With Terms Expiring On June 30, 2017: The term of all elected officers expiring on June 30, 2017, shall
be extended to November 30, 2018.
3. Terms Of Office Expiring After June 30, 2017: The term of all elected offices expiring after June 30, 2017, shall expire on the last day of November,
following the general election for that seat. (Ord. 446, 9-13-2011, eff. 10-15-2011)
1-8-3: POPULAR ELECTION OF MAYOR2:
All candidates for mayor shall be voted upon by the electors of the city at large. (Ord. 35, 8-28-1986)
1-8-4: ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS3:
Qualified electors of the city may vote in any municipal election for mayor or city council member. (Ord. 215, 1-26-1999)
1-8-5: CANDIDATES MUST FILE AFFIDAVIT OF CANDIDACY; FILING FEES:
A. Candidates for the offices of mayor and council member to be voted for at the primary election in the city shall file an affidavit of candidacy with the city
clerk the first Monday in March of the year in which the election is to be held nor later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the second Friday after the first
Monday in March. The city clerk shall charge and collect from each candidate, at the time of filing the affidavit of candidacy, a filing fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). All filing fees so collected by the city clerk shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city. (Ord. 491, 4-28-2015)
1-8-6: REGISTRY AGENT; TIMES AND PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION; PUBLISHING OF VOTER LISTS:
The Clark County registrar of voters is hereby designated ex officio registry agent for the city. The registry entries to be made by the Clark County registrar
of voters at the time of registering the names of qualified electors shall be the same as are required under Nevada Revised Statutes sections 293C.520
through 293C.545, except that reference to the political affiliation of the applicant shall not be required upon the registry card nor upon the sworn
statement embodied thereon. Not later than three (3) days before the day on which any regular or special city election is held, the Clark County registrar of
voters shall deliver to the city clerk, the official register for the city and the checklists for each voting district. The city clerk's office will be open for
registration of voters as required by Nevada Revised Statutes section 293C.527 as it now exists and as it changes from time to time. (Ord. 421, 2-10-2009,
eff. 3-5-2009)
1-8-7: APPLICABILITY OF STATE ELECTION LAWS; ELECTIONS UNDER COUNCIL CONTROL:
All elections held by the city shall be governed by the provisions of the election laws of this state. The conduct and carrying on of all city elections shall be
under the control of the city council, and they shall, by ordinance, provide for the holding of the same, appoint the necessary officers thereof, or contract
with the Clark County election department for conducting city elections under the direction of the city clerk, and do all other or further things required to
carry the same into effect. (Ord. 175, 12-27-1996)
1-8-8: QUALIFICATION, REGISTRATION OF VOTERS:
Every person who resides within the exterior boundaries of the city at the time of holding any city election, and whose name appears upon the official
register of voters in and for the city, shall have the right to vote at each city election, whether special or general, and for all officers to be voted for and on
all questions that may be submitted to the people at any such general or special city elections, except as otherwise provided, and nothing herein shall be
so construed as to deny or abridge the power of the city council to provide for a supplemental registration. (Ord. 35, 8-28-1986)
1-8-9: CITY CLERK DUTIES IN REFERENCE TO BALLOTS:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to provide printed ballots for every election held under this chapter, and to cause to be printed in such ballots the name
of each candidate whose name has been certified to and filed with him as provided in this chapter. Those names shall be arranged on such ballot in
accordance with applicable provisions of law. The city clerk shall provide for each district in the city at least five (5) ballots in excess of the number of
electors registered therein, which ballots shall be distributed to the respective election boards not more than one day prior to the day of election. (Ord. 35,
8-28-1986; amd. Ord. 175, 12-27-1996)
1-8-10: ABSENTEE VOTING:
Voting by absent electors shall be governed by the provisions of the general election laws of the state, as set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes sections
293C.305 through 293C.340, except that application for absent voter's ballots shall be made to the city clerk instead of the county clerk, at any time before
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the Tuesday preceding the election in which such absentee ballot is to be voted. (Ord. 421, 2-10-2009, eff. 3-5-2009)
1-8-11: ELECTION BOARDS:
A. Appointment; Publication Of Location, Hours And Election Board Of Each Polling Place: The city clerk shall designate one or more suitable places
within the city as a polling place or places and approve appointment of an election board for all polling places giving each election board officer a thirty
one (31) day notice of appointment. The number of election boards and poll workers will be determined in each city election by the city clerk and the
Clark County registrar of voters. An election notice shall be published in all newspapers of general circulation in the city setting forth the day on which
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 24/565
the election will be held, the hours when the polls will be open, which are hereby fixed from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and
the location of each polling place. This notice shall be published in each newspaper at least once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding the
day of any city election, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in at least three (3) conspicuous places in the city.
B. Powers; Compensation For Services: The respective election boards shall have authority to resolve all challenges in the manner now provided by the
general election laws of the state, as set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes section 293C.292, and may administer oaths for that purpose. The election
boards shall receive such compensation for their services as determined by the Clark County election department. (Ord. 215, 1-26-1999)
1-8-12: ELECTION RETURNS:
A. The election returns from any special or general city election shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall immediately place the same in a safe or vault,
and no person shall be permitted to handle, inspect or in any manner interfere with the same until canvassed by the mayor and city council.
B. The mayor and city council shall meet within five (5) days after any election and canvass the returns and declare the result. The election returns shall
then be sealed and kept by the city clerk for six (6) months and no person shall have access thereto except on order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, or by order of the city council.
C. The city clerk, under his hand and official seal, shall issue to each person declared to be elected a certificate of election. The officers so elected shall
qualify and enter upon the discharge of their respective duties on the first regular meeting in July. (Ord. 421, 2-10-2009, eff. 3-5-2009)
1-8-13: CONTEST OF ELECTION:
A contested election for any city office shall be determined according to the laws of the state regulating proceedings in contested elections in county
offices. (Ord. 35, 8-28-1986)
1-8-14: POLLING PLACES:
Polling places shall be designated by the city clerk as necessary. (Ord. 407, 8-26-2008, eff. 9-18-2008)
1-8-15: REGISTRAR OF VOTERS DESIGNATED TO CONDUCT CITY ELECTIONS:
The registrar of voters of Clark County shall, by interlocal agreement, conduct the special and general elections for the city. (Ord. 35, 8-28-1986)
1-8-16: QUALIFICATIONS FOR CANDIDACY FOR MAYOR, CITY COUNCIL MEMBER4:
Candidates for the offices of mayor and city council member must possess the following qualifications:
A. Must be an actual and bona fide resident of the city and have been for a period of at least one year preceding the election.
B. Must be a qualified elector, i.e., at least eighteen (18) years of age, a citizen of the United States, a resident of the state for thirty (30) days and have not
been denied the right to vote by a court of law or dishonorable discharge. (Ord. 35, 8-28-1986; amd. Ord. 175, 12-27-1996)
1-8-17: PRECINCTS:
The city shall be divided into precincts by the Clark County election department. (Ord. 215, 1-26-1999)
1-8-18: CITY LIMITS DESIGNATED:
A. City Limits: The following shall constitute the city limits:
Beginning at the northeast corner of Section 10, Township 13 South, Range 71 East Mount Diablo Base & Meridian and running thence west 2195.82
feet along the section line to the corner of Sections 9 and 10, T13S, R71E, thence N89°59'W, 5286.60 feet along the section line to the corner of
Sections 8 and 9, T13S, R71E, thence N89°54'W, 5278.68 feet along the section line to the corner of Sections 7 and 8, T13S, R71E, thence N89°58'W,
5265.48 feet to the northwest corner of Section 7, and the range line of Range 70 and 71, thence south 2640.00 feet along the range line to the east 1/4
corner of Section 12, Township 13 South, Range 70 East, Mount Diablo Base & Meridian, thence S89°57'W 5276.95 feet along the center section to
the west 1/4 corner of Section 12, T13S, R70E, thence S0°01'E, 5280.00 feet along the section lines to the 1/4 corner of Sections 13 and 14, T13S,
R70E, thence N89°57'W 5272.08 feet along the center of section line to the west 1/4 corner of Section 14, T13S, R70E, thence S0°01'E 2640.00 feet
along the section line to the southwest corner of Section 14, T13S, R70E, thence S0°01'E 5280.00 feet along the section line to the southwest corner
of Section 23, T13S, R70E, thence S0°01'E 3925.02 feet along the section line to T13S, R70E, thence S0°01'E 3925.02 feet along the section line to a
point plus or minus in the Virgin River, thence following the Virgin River as follows: N48°30'E 5800.00 feet, thence N66°00'E 5500.00 feet, thence
N79°30'E 6000.00 feet from Range 70 East into Range 71 East, thence N89°00'E 1800.00 feet, thence N73°00'E 10,500.00 feet, thence N86°00'E
1503.30 feet to the Nevada and Arizona State lines, thence N0°28'W 4089.52 feet along the east line of Section 15, T13S, R71E, and the State line to
the northeast corner of Section 15, T13S, R71E, thence N0°03'W 5281.98 feet along the section line and State line to the point of beginning.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 25/565
Containing 11.508 square miles. Together with all improvements thereon situate.
The tenements, property, inhabitants thereof, and such property are declared to be part of the city of Mesquite, Nevada.
Such property, together with the tenements and inhabitants thereof, shall be subject to all of the laws applicable to the city and entitled to all of the
benefits of the government of the city and is hereby annexed to and made a part of the district of the city, to which such property is contiguous.
B. Additions To City Limits: The city limits shall be enlarged to include:
Township 13 South, Range 71 East, M.D. Meridian, Nevada
Section 3; Lots 6 through 12, SW1/4 NW1/4, W1/2 SW1/4,
Section 4; Lots 5 and 12, SE1/4 NE1/4, E1/2 SE1/4
containing 516.45 acres, more or less adjusting the size of the city to contain 12.315 square miles.
The city limits are completely described in local government map, page 66, as recorded in the official records of the Clark County recorder's office, and
may be adjusted from time to time. Should any conflict arise between the legal description of the city and the official records and map of the city as
recorded in the official records and maps of the Clark County recorder's office, the official records and maps of the Clark County recorder's office will
prevail. (Ord. 215, 1-26-1999)
C. Additions To City Limits: The city limits shall be enlarged by 12,599.77 acres, to include the following area:
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT LAND, WITHIN CLARK COUNTY, NEVADA, LYING SOUTH OF THE THIRD STANDARD PARALLEL SOUTH, AND
BEING PORTIONS OF TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 71 EAST, TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 70 EAST, TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 69
EAST, TOWNSHIP 14 SOUTH, RANGE 70 EAST, AND TOWNSHIP 14 SOUTH, RANGE 69 EAST, MOUNT DIABLO BASE AND MERIDIAN AND
BEING MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS:
ALL OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 AND 11, THE WEST HALF (W1/2) OF THE SOUTH HALF (S1/2) OF THE NORTHEAST QUARTER
(NE1/4), THE WEST HALF (W1/2) OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER (SE1/4), THE SOUTH HALF (S1/2) OF THE NORTHWEST QUARTER (NW1/4)
AND THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER (SW1/4) OF SECTION 4, ALL OF SECTION 5 AND ALL OF SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 71
EAST, MOUNT DIABLO BASE AND MERIDIAN AS SHOWN ON THE GOVERNMENT LAND OFFICE OFFICIAL PLAT OF THE INDEPENDENT
RESURVEY WITH TRACT SEGREGATIONS APPROVED APRIL 17, 1935.
CONTAINS 2,150.94 ACRES
TOGETHER WITH:
ALL OF SECTIONS 1 THROUGH 3, ALL OF SECTIONS 10 AND 11, THE NORTH HALF (N1/2) OF SECTION 12, THE NORTH HALF (N1/2) OF
SECTION 14, ALL OF SECTION 15, THE EAST HALF (E1/2) OF SECTION 16, THE EAST HALF (E1/2) OF SECTION 21, ALL OF SECTION 22, THE
NORTHEAST QUARTER (NE1/4) AND THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER (SW1/4) OF SECTION 28, THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER (SE1/4) OF THE
SOUTHEAST QUARTER (SE1/4), THE EAST HALF (E1/2) OF THE NORTHEAST QUARTER (NE1/4) OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER (SE1/4) AND
THAT PORTION OF THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER (SW1/4) THAT LIES SOUTH OF THE NORTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF INTERSTATE 15 OF
SECTION 29, THAT PORTION OF THE NORTHWEST QUARTER (NW1/4) THAT LIES NORTH OF THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF
INTERSTATE 15 OF SECTION 34, TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 70 EAST, MOUNT DIABLO BASE AND MERIDIAN AS SHOWN ON THE
GOVERNMENT LAND OFFICE OFFICIAL PLAT OF THE INDEPENDENT RESURVEY WITH TRACT SEGREGATIONS APPROVED MAY 16, 1935.
THE NORTHWEST QUARTER (NW1/4), THE NORTH HALF (N1/2) OF THE NORTHEAST QUARTER (NE1/4), THE NORTHWEST QUARTER
(NW1/4) OF THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER (SW1/4) AND ALL OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18 AND 20 OF SECTION
27, THE NORTH HALF (N1/2) OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER (SE1/4), THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER (SW1/4) OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER
(SE1/4) AND ALL OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 1 AND 2 OF SECTION 28, ALL OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 10, 11, 13, 15 AND 17 OF SECTION 30, ALL
OF SECTION 31, THE SOUTH HALF (S1/2), THE SOUTH HALF (S1/2) OF THE NORTHWEST QUARTER (NW1/4), THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER
(SW1/4) OF THE NORTHEAST QUARTER (NE1/4) AND ALL OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 AND 13 OF SECTION 32, ALL
OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14 AND 16 OF SECTION 33, TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 70 EAST, MOUNT DIABLO
BASE AND MERIDIAN AS SHOWN ON THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT OFFICIAL SUPPLEMENTAL PLATS OF THE RESPECTIVE
SECTIONS APPROVED JULY 31, 2001.
CONTAINS 8,685.06 ACRES
TOGETHER WITH:
ALL OF GOVERNMENT LOTS 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13 AND 14 OF SECTION 25, ALL OF SECTION 36, TOWNSHIP 13 SOUTH, RANGE 69 EAST,
MOUNT DIABLO BASE AND MERIDIAN AS SHOWN ON THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT OFFICIAL PLATS OF THE INDEPENDENT
RESURVEY APPROVED MAY 31, 2001.
CONTAINS 803.77 ACRES
TOGETHER WITH:
THE NORTHERLY ONE (1.0) MILE OF THE EASTERLY ONE (1.0) MILE OF TOWNSHIP 14 SOUTH, RANGE 69 EAST, MOUNT DIABLO BASE AND
MERIDIAN THAT WAS SURVEYED BY W.H. MYRICK IN 1881 AND SUSPENDED BY THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT, STATE DIRECTOR
OF NEVADA ON APRIL 7, 2000.
CONTAINS 640 ACRES
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 26/565
TOGETHER WITH:
THE NORTHERLY ONE-HALF (N1/2) MILE OF THE WESTERLY ONE (1.0) MILE OF TOWNSHIP 14 SOUTH, RANGE 70 EAST, MOUNT DIABLO
BASE AND MERIDIAN AS SURVEYED BY W.H. MYRICK IN 1881 AND SUSPENDED BY THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT, STATE
DIRECTOR OF NEVADA ON APRIL 7, 2002.
CONTAINS 320 ACRES
Such property, together with the tenements and inhabitants thereof, if any, shall be subject to the laws of the city of Mesquite and are entitled to all of
the benefits of the government of the city and is hereby annexed to and made a part of the city, to which such property is contiguous as required by
law. The city limits are completely described in the official records of the Clark County recorder's office, and may be adjusted from time to time. Should
any conflict arise between the legal description of the city and the official records and map of the city as recorded in the official records and maps of the
Clark County recorder's office, the official records and maps of the Clark County recorder's office will prevail. (Ord. 283, 2-11-2003)
D. Additions To City Limits: The city limits of the city shall be enlarged by 52.76 acres, to include the following area:
035-00-001-010 all of government lot 1 located in the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of suspended section 7, township 14 south, range 70
east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian, Clark County, Nevada and being more particularly described as:
Beginning at the northwest corner of section 12, township 14 south, range 70 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian, said northwest corner being south
00°58'17" west 5,282.71 feet from the BLM Brass Cap Monument at the southwest corner of section 31, township 13 south, range 70 east as recorded
on the record of survey for Jerry Waters in file 46, page 18 of surveys in the official records of Clark County, Nevada and running;
Thence north 89°08'43" east 1,329.19 feet along the north line of said government lot 1;
Thence south 00°56'49" west 1,320.61 feet along the east line of said government lot 1;
Thence south 89°08'35" west 1,329.76 feet along the south line of said government lot 1;
Thence north 00°58'16" east 1,320.68 feet along the east line of said government lot 1 to the point of beginning.
Contains 40.29 acres
Together with:
034-00-001-008
034-00-001-042
034-00-001-010
Located in the northeast quarter of suspended section 12, township 14 south, range 69 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian, Clark County, Nevada
and being more particularly described as:
Beginning at the northeast corner of section 7, township 14 south, range 69 east, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian, said northeast corner being south
00°58'17" west 5,282.71 feet from the BLM Brass Cap Monument at the southwest corner of section 31, township 13 south, range 70 east as recorded
on the record of survey for Jerry Waters in file 46, page 18 of surveys in the official records of Clark County, Nevada and running;
Thence south 00°58'16" west 1,320.68 feet along the east line of said section 7;
Thence south 88°58'47" west 46.42 feet along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 7 to the center line of
State Route 170 as described in the judgment and final order of condemnation recorded March 13, 2008 as instrument number 20080313:0000090;
Thence north 30°09'29" west 362.27 feet along the center line of said State Route 170;
Thence northwesterly 291.79 feet along the arc of 1,190.00 foot radius curve to the right with a central angle of 14°02'57" and center bears north
59°50'31" east, along the center line of said State Route 170;
Thence northwesterly 689.66 feet along the arc of 1,190.00 foot radius curve to the left with a central angle of 33°12'20" and center bears south
73°53'28" west, along the center line of said State Route 170;
Thence north 49°18'52" west 233.02 feet along the center line of said State Route 170 to the north line of said section 12;
Thence north 88°58'18" east 909.51 feet along the north line of said section 12 to the point of beginning.
Contains 12.47 acres.
(Ord. 409, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
1-8-19: PRIMARY AND GENERAL ELECTIONS:
A. City primary or general elections shall comply with the notice requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes section 293C.175(2), as amended from time to
time.
1. City primary elections shall be held on the second Tuesday in June before the general election in each even numbered year pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes section 293.175, as amended from time to time.
2. City general elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even numbered year pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes section 293.12755, as amended from time to time.
B. All elections shall be held in conformity with article V of the Mesquite City Charter. (Ord. 518, 7-11-2017, eff. 8-2-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 27/565
Chapter 9
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ACTIONS AND PERMITS; TIME LIMITS
1-9-1: ZONING ORDINANCE:
The zoning actions, reviews, approvals and permits shall be assigned a time limit, notwithstanding any time limits presently incorporated in the zoning
ordinance, which are herewith deemed to be amended and replaced by this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to amend,
replace or substitute for time limits which are statutorily imposed pursuant to any applicable provision of the Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 117, 11-22-
1994)
1-9-2: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
The subdivision, plat, plan, actions, reviews, approvals and permits shall be assigned a time limit, notwithstanding any time limits presently incorporated in
the subdivision ordinance, which are herewith deemed to be amended and replaced by this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
deemed to amend, replace or substitute for time limits which are statutorily imposed pursuant to any applicable provision of the Nevada Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 117, 11-22-1994)
1-9-3: DATE FROM WHICH TIME LIMIT IS MEASURED:
A. Each time period shall run from the final action of the appropriate city official, officer, board, commission or the governing body with valid and legal
jurisdiction to take such action or to approve such plans or to issue such permits. Except as may be otherwise indicated herein, the date of final action
shall be the date such action was taken or such approval was granted or such permit was issued, as set forth on such action, approval or permit;
provided, however, that actions taken, approvals granted or permits issued by the governing body and not declared to be an emergency, shall be dated
as of the twentieth day after such action, approval or permit, pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 266.115.
B. In order to assure that all applicants for actions, approvals or permits are informed of the applicable timelimit, the date of final action and the expiration
date shall be shown on each such action, permit or approval; but provided, however, that the city's failure to include either the date of final action or the
expiration date shall not be deemed to be a waiver of such dates nor shall it be the basis of any action by the applicant to challenge the applicable
expiration date. The burden is on the applicant to know the date of issuance and the expiration date. If either or both of such dates are not shown, the
applicant may request, and the city shall promptly supply such date or dates.
C. All actions, approvals or permits shall expire on the expiration date unless a valid extension has been granted on or before the expiration date pursuant
to section 1-9-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 117, 11-22-1994)
1-9-4: EXTENSIONS OF TIME LIMITS:
A. There shall be no extensions of any time limits for actions, approvals or permits set forth herein, as of right. Any extensions must be expressly
requested by the applicant, in writing, and approved by the appropriate official, officer, board, commission or the governing body which originally took
the action, approved the plan or issued the permit.
B. A request for an extension of an expiration date shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to,
the following:
1. The current date of expiration;
2. The extension period requested, which shall be no longer than the original period of time granted; the city has the option of granting an extension for
less than the original period;
3. The reason(s) that the applicant has been unable to proceed within the period of the original expiration date.
C. Before granting an extension, the city official, officer, board, commission or the governing body shall determine whether any applicable changes in land
use regulations have occurred which would impose new requirements with respect to such action, approval or permit, if an extension were denied, and
the applicant were compelled to refile for an original action, approval or permit. If changes have occurred, the city official, officer, board, commission or
the governing body shall balance the burden imposed on the applicant if required to refile for an original action, approval or permit against the benefit
accruing to the city and the public by requiring the applicant to comply with the new regulation. (Ord. 117, 11-22-1994)
1-9-5: OMNIBUS CLAUSE:
If an action, approval, plat, plan or permit does not reference the expiration date, it shall be deemed to be six (6) months. (Ord. 117, 11-22-1994)
Chapter 10
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 28/565
As used in this chapter:
AGENCY: The city of Mesquite redevelopment agency.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW: A process for evaluating building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects in the downtown central business district.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE: The standing committee of the redevelopment agency responsible for reviewing building, remodeling or
rehabilitation projects within the redevelopment area and making recommendations to the redevelopment agency regarding such projects and which is
also referred to as the architectural advisory commission in the design standards.
BUILDING ASSISTANCE: Financial assistance given by the redevelopment agency to specific building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects within the
redevelopment area, subject to limits and conditions of financial assistance noted herein.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, Nevada.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Mesquite, Nevada.
DESIGN STANDARDS: The city of Mesquite design standards for development in the downtown central business district, and the redevelopment area,
dated June 12, 1995, as well as any subsequent amendments, deletions or additions thereto made by the redevelopment agency from time to time.
DOWNTOWN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: That certain area of the redevelopment area described in section 1-10-5 of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city of Mesquite, Nevada. (Ord. 138, 4-25-1995; amd. Ord. 210, 6-30-1998; Ord. 346, 6-27-
2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
1-10-2: FINDINGS, DECLARATIONS BY CITY COUNCIL CONCERNING FUNCTIONING OF AGENCY, PRELIMINARY AND
FINAL REDEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The city council finds and declares that:
A. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes sections 279.428 and 279.444, and by resolution 117, the city council:
1. Declared the need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city; and
2. Declared itself to be the agency in which are vested all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by Nevada Revised Statutes
sections 279.382 to 279.680, inclusive.
B. As authorized by Nevada Revised Statutes section 279.518, on February 28, 1995, the city council passed, approved and adopted a motion which was
memorialized in resolution 118, the contents of such resolution complying with the requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes section 279.520, whereby
a described redevelopment area within the city was designated and the city council serving as the planning commission was directed, as provided in
Nevada Revised Statutes section 279.524, to select one or more project areas comprising all or part of the described redevelopment area and to
formulate a preliminary plan for the redevelopment of each project area.
C. On February 28, 1995, the city council serving as the planning commission, in public session, selected and approved a redevelopment project area, as
described in section 1-10-5 of this chapter, and directed the formulation of a preliminary plan and project area description for approval and submission
to the planning commission and agency. The motion was memorialized in resolution 119.
D. The agency, on March 16, 1995, conducted a public meeting on such preliminary plan and the agency provided an opportunity for all interested persons
or public or private agencies to be heard and to submit alternative redevelopment plans for a project area. (No alternative redevelopment plans were
submitted, and the preliminary plan was submitted to the city council serving as the planning commission.)
E. The city council serving as the planning commission, on March 16, 1995, received the preliminary plan, and approved submitting the plan to the agency
for analyses.
F. The city council, on March 16, 1995, in regular session accepted the preliminary urban and industrial corridors redevelopment plan and project area
description and directed the agency to prepare a final downtown redevelopment plan.
G. The agency on March 28, 1995, presented to the city council serving as the planning commission, at a special joint public meeting called for such
purpose, the proposed city final urban and industrial corridors redevelopment plan. The planning commission accepted the plan then forwarded the
proposed city final redevelopment plan to the agency with its report finding conformity to the city master plan and its recommendation for approval.
H. The agency, at its meeting on March 28, 1995, accepted the planning commission's report and recommendation and approved the proposed city final
redevelopment plan and redevelopment project area describing and submitted same to the city council, including the items specified in Nevada
Revised Statutes sections 279.572, 279.574, 279.576 and 279.578.
I. The city council, at its regular meeting on March 28, 1995, approved the agency's final plan and moved to hold a final public hearing on the
redevelopment plan.
J. Complying with Nevada Revised Statutes section 279.580, the city council held public hearings on the adoption of the proposed city final downtown
redevelopment plan on April 25, 1995, and on May 1, 1995, published notice of such public hearings have been made in compliance with subsections 2
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 29/565
and 3 of Nevada Revised Statutes section 279.580. No person showed cause why the proposed plan should not be adopted. (Ord. 138, 4-25-1995)
1-10-3: CITY COUNCIL DETERMINATIONS; APPROVAL OF CITY FINAL URBAN AND INDUSTRIAL CORRIDORS
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The city council hereby:
A. Determines that:
1. The redevelopment area includes a blighted area, the redevelopment of which is necessary to effectuate the public purposes declared in Nevada
Revised Statutes sections 279.382 to 279.680 inclusive;
2. The redevelopment plan would redevelop the area in conformity with Nevada Revised Statutes sections 279.382 to 279.680, inclusive, and is in the
interest of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the community;
3. The redevelopment plan conforms to the city master plan;
4. The condemnation of real property, as provided for in the redevelopment plan, is necessary to the execution of the redevelopment plan and
adequate provisions have been made for payment for property to be acquired as provided by law;
5. Adequate permanent housing is or will be made available in the community for displaced occupants of the redevelopment area at rents comparable
to those in the community at the time of displacement, if the redevelopment plan may result in the temporary or permanent displacement of any
occupants of housing in the redevelopment area;
6. All noncontiguous areas of a redevelopment area are either blighted or necessary for effective redevelopment;
7. Inclusion of any lands, buildings or improvements which are not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare is necessary for the effective
redevelopment of the area of which they are a part; and
8. Adequate provisions have been made for the payment of the principal of and interest on any bonds which may be issued by the agency.
B. Approves and adopts the city final urban and industrial corridors redevelopment plan as presented by the agency as the official redevelopment plan for
the redevelopment area. The city final urban and industrial corridors plan, dated March 28, 1995, attached to ordinance 138, is kept on file in the office
of the city clerk and is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 138, 4-25-1995)
1-10-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF APPROVED REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA; CONSOLIDATION OF FILE:
A. The project area is established and given the name and number: City of Mesquite urban and industrial corridors redevelopment project no. 1, and shall
hereafter be referred to as an approved redevelopment project area.
B. All records or certified copies thereof in relation to the project area shall be consolidated into one final, designated by the name and number "city of
Mesquite urban and industrial corridors redevelopment project no. 1", and shall be preserved by the city clerk as public records. (Ord. 138, 4-25-1995)
1-10-5: BOUNDARIES OF REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA:
The boundaries of the redevelopment project area are described as follows:
A. Industrial corridor sector;
B. Commercial and multi-family;
C. Urban corridor sector;
D. Western development corridor.
For each sector, see the legal description attached to ordinance 138 on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 138, 4-25-1995)
1-10-6: DUTIES OF CITY CLERK; TRANSMITTAL OF ORDINANCE; FILING WITH COUNTY RECORDER:
The city clerk, on behalf of the city council, shall:
A. Transmit copies of this chapter to:
1. The agency;
2. The planning commission;
3. The public works department;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 30/565
4. The building safety and maintenance department of the city.
B. After the effective date hereof, file with the county recorder of Clark County, Nevada: a description of the land within the redevelopment project area;
and a statement that proceedings for the redevelopment of the project area have been instituted.
C. Within thirty (30) days after the adoption of this chapter and the redevelopment plan, which contains a provision for the division of taxes pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes section 279.676, transmit a copy of the description and statement recorded pursuant to subsection B of this section, a copy
of the ordinance adopting the plan and a map or plat indicating the boundaries of the redevelopment area to:
1. The auditor and tax assessor of Clark County in which the redevelopment area is located;
2. The officer who performs the functions of auditor or assessor for any taxing agency which, in levying or collecting its taxes, does not use the county
assessment roll or does not collect its taxes through the county; and
3. The governing body of each of the taxing agencies which levies taxes upon any property in the redevelopment area. (Ord. 138, 4-25-1995)
1-10-7: DUTIES OF CITY DEPARTMENTS:
On and after the effective date of this chapter, the building department of the city shall advise all applicants for building permits in the project area that the
site for which a building permit is sought for the construction of buildings or for other improvements is within a proposed redevelopment project area. (Ord.
346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
1-10-8: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Adoption: The city of Mesquite design standards for development in the downtown central business district ("design standards"), dated June 12, 1995,
are hereby adopted for the redevelopment area, and any subsequent amendments, deletions or additions thereto made by the redevelopment agency
from time to time. (Ord. 378, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
B. Compliance Required: All proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects within the downtown central business district must, at a minimum,
comply with the basic design standards contained in the design standards as they exist when the project is presented for approval. The redevelopment
agency may require basic design standards for the entire redevelopment area. Proposed projects in the redevelopment area, but outside the downtown
central business district, may choose to voluntarily comply with the design standards specifically applicable to the downtown central business district
and may request financial assistance from the redevelopment agency for such projects. As with financial assistance requests for proposed projects
within the downtown central business district, the redevelopment agency may grant or deny such requests. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-9: AUTHORITY OF REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY TO ADOPT, MODIFY OR DELETE DESIGN STANDARDS:
The redevelopment agency is hereby given the authority to adopt, modify or delete provisions of the design standards related to building or remodeling
projects within the redevelopment area and its downtown central business district. The redevelopment agency may adopt different or more stringent
design and materials requirements for the downtown central business district than for the remainder of the redevelopment area. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-10: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
A. Established: The architectural review committee to the redevelopment agency is hereby created. The redevelopment agency is authorized to select
members to serve on the architectural review committee, determine the length and number of terms of office of its members, adopt procedures and
bylaws for operation of the committee and establish the duties of the committee. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
B. Selection Of Members, Terms: The architectural review committee must consist of at least three (3) and no more than seven (7) members. At least
three (3) committee members must be in attendance at a committee meeting to constitute a quorum and conduct business. All members of the
committee must be residents of the city. The Mesquite zoning official will act as secretary to the architectural review committee and will be responsible
for keeping minutes of committee meetings and reporting the actions and recommendations of the committee to the redevelopment agency. (Ord. 346,
6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
C. Duties: The redevelopment agency may perform the duties of the architectural review committee if the committee is unable to meet due to lack of
members or failure to obtain a quorum in order to conduct business.
D. Requirement Of Architectural Review: The architectural review committee must comply with the requirements of the Nevada open meeting law. (Ord.
210, 6-30-1998)
E. Compliance With Basic Design Standards Required: Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, all building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects
proposed within the downtown central business district must be reviewed by the architectural review committee prior to review by the Mesquite building
department, and planning and redevelopment or approval by the redevelopment agency. In reviewing any proposed building remodeling or
rehabilitation project, the architectural review committee must apply the design standards in effect at that time. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
F. Review Of Projects; Approval Of Special Features And Materials: The committee will review all proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects
within the downtown central business district to ensure each proposed project complies, at a minimum, with the basic design standards in effect at that
time. The applicant may also request approval of the committee for inclusion of proposed special features or materials in the project. The committee
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 31/565
may also suggest to the applicant and the redevelopment agency that the project should contain one or more special features or special materials.
(Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-11: FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION:
A. Types Of Incentive Programs: Subject to available funding, the redevelopment agency may grant financial assistance for projects in the redevelopment
district as follows:
1. Building, remodeling, and rehabilitation projects up to ninety nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($99,999.00) for projects and up to thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for fees;
2. Facade rehabilitation projects up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); and
3. Sign replacement projects up to fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).
The programs give funding priority to redevelopment parcels within the downtown central business district. The design of all projects proposed within
the downtown central business district shall be reviewed by the architectural review committee (ARC), prior to any action by the redevelopment
agency.
Projects shall comply with the program rules, criteria and application procedures specifically developed to administer these incentives, as amended
from time to time. Unless reauthorized by the city council, these programs shall expire on June 30, 2015.
B. Private Investment Partnership: To support a partnership with private investment, the redevelopment agency may reimburse a percentage of the cost of
eligible improvements or fees as follows:
1. Projects within the downtown central business district may receive grants for seventy five percent (75%) of eligible improvements and fees actually
incurred.
2. All other projects may receive grants for fifty percent (50%) of eligible improvements and fees actually incurred.
3. Eligible improvements and fees will be reimbursed within thirty (30) days of the certificate of occupancy being issued, or final inspection of the sign,
on the condition that receipts and documentation of expenses have been submitted per the program rules and application procedures. (Ord. 423, 4-
14-2009, eff. 5-7-2009)
C. Recommendation For Financial Assistance:
1. The redevelopment director or zoning official may approve or deny financial assistance by the redevelopment agency for funding in the amounts
specified above. The administrative decision shall consider the program criteria. Applicants may appeal administrative decisions to the
redevelopment agency board.
a. Financial assistance may only be recommended for a proposed project when the proposed project is found to benefit the redevelopment area, or
the immediate neighborhood in which the redevelopment area is located per Nevada Revised Statutes 279.486.
b. A grant committee shall be established to review applications and provide recommendations to the redevelopment director or zoning official. The
grant committee may include representatives from the banking community, the city manager's office, the city attorney's office, and other city
departments such as planning and redevelopment, finance, and economic development.
c. Based on the grant committee's recommendations, the redevelopment director or zoning official may approve financial assistance by the
redevelopment agency for funding up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Any requests fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or greater shall be
approved by the redevelopment agency board. (If a business and/or property owner has multiple requests over time, when the cumulative total of
all the requests is greater than $50,000.00, all further requests shall be approved by the board.)
2. When considering financial assistance on a downtown central business district redevelopment property, the redevelopment director, zoning official,
or the redevelopment agency board may consider the increased costs of complying with the downtown design standards, the increased cost of land
and labor in the downtown area, the inclusion of exceptional design features, and the extent to which the proposed improvements increase the visual
quality of the downtown area. (Ord. 457, 7-10-2012, eff. 8-1-2012)
D. Eligible Improvements And Fees: Projects shall comply with the eligible improvements and fees outlined in the program rules, specifically developed to
administer these incentives, and as amended from time to time. Costs incurred prior to the execution of the grant will not be eligible for reimbursement.
E. Appeal To Redevelopment Agency: An applicant for financial assistance may appeal the redevelopment director or zoning official's recommendation for
financial assistance or for denial of financial assistance to the redevelopment agency board. The written appeal must be filed with the city clerk within
fifteen (15) days after the date of the final decision. The redevelopment agency board may affirm, modify, or reverse the administrative decision, per
subsection 9-4-9B of this code.
F. Applications For Projects Outside Redevelopment Area: The redevelopment agency may consider applications for projects outside the scope mentioned
above, if they are found to meet the objectives of the redevelopment agency and Nevada Revised Statutes 279.486. (Ord. 423, 4-14-2009, eff. 5-7-
2009)
1-10-12: TIME LIMITS:
A. Building Permit: The applicant must obtain a building permit from the building department no later than six (6) months after funding is approved for the
proposed project by the redevelopment agency. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 32/565
B. Completing Project: Any construction, remodeling or rehabilitation project approved for financial assistance by the redevelopment agency must be
completed within one year of the issuance of the building permit unless the agency requires a different time for completion when the project is
approved for financial participation or if the redevelopment agency has granted an extension of the time to complete the project. Any application for
extension of time to complete a project must be made prior to the original time for completion of the project expires. If an applicant does not complete a
project within the time allotted and has not received an extension for completion of the project prior to the original time for completion of the project
expires, the commitment of funds by the redevelopment agency for financial assistance will automatically be vacated and the zoning official will place
the matter back on the next scheduled meeting of the redevelopment agency, subject to the requirements of the Nevada open meeting law, so that the
previously committed funds may be reallocated to another project by the redevelopment agency. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
1-10-13: RELEASE OF COMMITTED FUNDS:
When a project has been approved for construction, remodeling or rehabilitation financial assistance, the applicant may release any commitment of
financial assistance at any time before completion of the project and choose to build the project pursuant to the basic design standards then in effect for
the downtown central business district. Any such release will be submitted by the applicant to the zoning official in a form acceptable to the zoning official.
Once a waiver of funds is received by the zoning official, any commitment of financial assistance will automatically be vacated and the zoning official will
place the matter on the next scheduled meeting of the redevelopment agency, subject to the requirements of the Nevada open meeting law, so that the
previously committed funds may be reallocated by the agency. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
1-10-14: PAYMENT OF COMMITTED FUNDS:
No payment of financial assistance will be made to the applicant until the certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building department. The zoning
official may approve payment of committed funds to the applicant when the certificate of occupancy is issued so long as the project was completed with all
of the special features which were the basis of the agency's proposed financial assistance. If any of the special features or materials which were the basis
of the agency's commitment of financial assistance were not completed or used in the project, payment of any committed financial assistance cannot be
made until the matter is reconsidered by the redevelopment agency. In such event, the zoning official will place the matter on the next scheduled meeting
of the redevelopment agency, subject to the requirements of the Nevada open meeting law, for reconsideration of the financial assistance previously
committed to the project. When the matter comes back before the redevelopment agency because of the failure of the applicant to complete one or more
special features which were the basis of the agency's financial assistance, the agency may either affirm the award of financial assistance previously made,
reduce the amount previously awarded, or vacate the prior award of financial assistance entirely. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
1-10-15: APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING REMODELING OR REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE:
An application for financial assistance to a proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation project within the downtown central business district must be
made on a form prepared by planning and redevelopment and approved by the redevelopment agency. That form must contain the following information:
(Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
A. A drawing or rendering and site plan showing the exterior of the proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation project satisfactory to show the basic
design of the project and any proposed special features and showing the dimensions of the lot and the structure in foot measurement;
B. In a remodeling or rehabilitation project, the applicant is required to submit a plan indicating the gross square feet of interior space and showing the
exterior dimensions of the structure in foot measurement so that the building department may prepare a permit valuation report for the entire structure,
including any space added as a result of the remodel; (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
C. Any other reasonable requirement placed on the applicant by the architectural review committee, planning and redevelopment, the Mesquite building
requirements or the redevelopment agency; (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
D. A copy of the permit valuation report prepared by the building department;
E. A statement specifying the nature of the project, such as a professional office building, retail sales building, etc. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-16: OWNERSHIP INTEREST REQUIRED:
An applicant for building assistance must have a vested ownership interest in the subject property. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-17: WHEN APPLICATION FOR BUILDING ASSISTANCE MAY BE MADE:
A. An applicant seeking financial assistance from the redevelopment agency for a proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation project in the downtown
central business district may apply for building, remodeling or rehabilitation financial assistance up to the date a building permit is issued for the project
by the building department.
B. Every application for building, remodeling or rehabilitation financial assistance must be reviewed by the architectural review committee prior to coming
before the redevelopment agency for consideration unless the redevelopment agency grants a request for an expedited hearing before the agency as
provided herein.
C. Every application for building, remodeling or rehabilitation financial assistance must be in compliance with the requirements of section 1-10-10 of this
chapter before it will be scheduled for a hearing by the redevelopment agency.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 33/565
D. An applicant for building, remodeling or rehabilitation financial assistance may request a hearing before the redevelopment agency to determine:
1. The availability of redevelopment agency funds for building, remodeling or rehabilitation financial assistance; and
2. Whether the agency will provide financial participation for a proposed project, subject to the limitations and conditions of financial assistance set forth
herein. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-18: REQUEST FOR EXPEDITED HEARING BEFORE REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY:
A. An applicant may request a hearing before the redevelopment agency for a proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation project within the downtown
central business district before the project is reviewed by the architectural review committee if:
1. Waiting to have the project reviewed by the architectural review committee before review by the redevelopment agency would pose a severe
personal or business hardship; and
2. The applicant is seeking no financial assistance for the project from the redevelopment agency.
B. All building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects in the downtown central business district must comply with the basic design requirements in effect for
the downtown central business district at the time a building permit is requested for the project.
C. The redevelopment agency may entertain an applicant's request for an expedited hearing before the redevelopment agency and grant or deny the relief
requested or, alternatively, may refer the proposed project to the architectural review committee for review prior to redevelopment agency action. (Ord.
210, 6-30-1998)
1-10-19: ACTION OF REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY ON APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE:
Subject to the limitations imposed by sections 1-10-11 through 1-10-14 of this chapter, the redevelopment agency may grant or deny an application for
financial assistance for a proposed building, remodeling or rehabilitation project in the redevelopment area. (Ord. 210, 6-30-1998)
Chapter 11
PERSONNEL POLICIES
1-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be titled and shall be known as the PERSONNEL POLICIES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to provide for the administration of the personnel management affairs of the City. The purpose of this chapter is also to enable the
City Manager to adopt personnel policies for administration of personnel of the City, to be known as the Mesquite Personnel Policies (hereinafter referred
to as the "personnel policies") and to authorize the City Manager to revise the personnel policies from time to time. (Ord. 512, 3-14-2017, eff. 4-5-2017)
1-11-3: APPLICATION:
A. This chapter shall apply to all employees of the City, except as provided in section 1-11-4 of this chapter. This chapter shall not be construed to
abrogate any rights guaranteed to City employees by Nevada Revised Statutes 288.
B. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any collective bargaining agreement, or between this chapter and the requirements of any State or
Federal law, the terms of the collective bargaining unit or the applicable law shall apply.
C. The City Council has the right at any time to amend or modify this chapter or to repeal it, so long as consistent with State law. No provision of this
chapter shall be deemed to have created any contractual or vested right in any employee; to grant any benefit or right which is a mandatory subject of
bargaining pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 288 to a represented employee; or to limit the power of the City Council to amend, modify or to repeal
this chapter. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning is shown to be clearly intended, the terms below shall have the following meanings as used in this chapter:
COUNCIL MEMBERS: Any reference in the Mesquite personnel policies ordinance or the Mesquite Personnel Policies Manual to the words "City
Councilman" is changed to the words "City Council Member".
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 34/565
DEPARTMENT HEAD: A City employee who has been designated by the City Manager or the City Council to be the head of a department established by
the City Council; also the Chief of Police, Fire and Rescue Chief, City Clerk, City Treasurer, Finance Director, City Attorney and Municipal Court Judge.
DISCIPLINARY ACTION: A personnel action such as a written reprimand, a suspension, a demotion or a discharge from employment for reasons which
relate to an employee's employment or conduct, and which has been or may be imposed on an employee by an officer for whom the employee is assigned
to work, by a department head, by the city manager, or by the city council where provided by law. Verbal warnings, counseling, written statements of
performance expectations, including related notes, and performance appraisals shall not be considered disciplinary actions, although any of these may be
considered subsequently in determining whether to take any disciplinary action and in determining the type and extent of disciplinary action to be taken.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the city; provided, the term "employee", as used herein, does not include and does not apply to any of the following:
A. Elective officers.
B. Department heads, as that term is used in ordinances which establish the various departments.
C. Members of appointive city boards, city commissions and city committees.
D. Persons engaged under contract to provide any service to the city.
E. Volunteer personnel.
F. Persons hired from time to time for casual or temporary work, including, but not limited to, those employed to perform seasonal work or to meet the
immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as part time ambulance personnel who are not regularly scheduled for work at least twenty
(20) hours per week or who are called on an as needed basis or who are paid on a trip or event basis rate.
OFFICER: The city attorney, municipal court judge, city clerk, city treasurer, finance director, city manager, police chief, and fire and rescue chief.
PERSONNEL POLICIES: Those policies, guidelines and procedures adopted by this chapter and thereafter revised, added to or deleted by resolution of
the city council pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 473, 6-25-2013, eff. 7-15-2013)
1-11-5: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager is authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter and the personnel policies implemented in accordance with this chapter. (Ord.
212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-6: FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES:
All employment actions, including recruitment and selection of employees, shall be in accordance with this chapter and the personnel policies and shall be
based upon job related preparation, achievements and fitness for the job based upon job related qualifications. No employee or prospective employee
shall be discriminated against on the basis of sex, age, race, religion, national origin, disability or on any basis prohibited by any federal, state or city law.
(Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-7: ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL POLICIES:
A. Policy Subjects: The personnel policies and procedures adopted to carry out and effectuate this chapter shall implement, administer, maintain and deal
with the following subjects:
1. Employee relations.
2. A position classification plan.
3. A compensation plan.
4. Benefits and insurance for employees.
5. Reimbursable travel expenses of employees.
6. Leave plans for employees.
7. Hiring, including recruitment, selection and appointment procedures for employees.
8. The introductory period of employment.
9. Change in the position or class of employees.
10. Definitions of the status of employees.
11. Performance appraisal systems for probationary employees and for employees who have completed probation and performance reviews.
12. Disciplinary actions and appeal procedures.
13. Transfer, demotion, layoff, suspension, discharge or resignation from employment and reinstatement of employees.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 35/565
14. Separation of employees from employment.
15. Maintenance of personnel forms and records.
16. Dispute resolution and appeals procedure.
17. Other standards, policies or procedures which the City Council finds necessary or appropriate to carry out this chapter.
18. Hiring and terminations of department heads and the City Manager. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
B. Administration: The personnel policies adopted by this chapter and thereafter by action of the City Manager in accordance with this chapter shall be
administered by the City Manager who is authorized to develop and adopt written procedures, forms, directives and interpretive memoranda consistent
with the personnel policies and this chapter and to take other necessary administrative actions, including, but not limited to, the hiring and termination
of employees and department heads, consistent with such policies and this chapter. (Ord. 512, 3-14-2017, eff. 4-5-2017)
C. Adoption Of Personnel Policies: The City's initial personnel policies, on file in the Office of the City Clerk, are incorporated herein by reference. The
personnel policies are approved and adopted and are effective on the effective date of ordinance 212. The step system incorporated in the personnel
policies will apply to employees hired after the effective date of ordinance 212. Employees hired before the effective date of ordinance 212 will be
subject to the step system in effect prior to the effective date of ordinance 212. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
D. Subsequent Revision Of Mesquite Personnel Policies: The personnel policies which are approved and adopted by this chapter may be revised from
time to time when such revision is necessary or advisable. Provisions may be added, deleted or amended by the City Manager without necessity of a
new ordinance being adopted to implement such revisions, notwithstanding the City Council may override any such action of the City Manager by way
of ordinance, which ordinance, unless otherwise stated, shall preempt the City Manager's authority on that subject matter. (Ord. 512, 3-14-2017, eff. 4-
5-2017)
1-11-8: MODIFICATION OF WAGE AND SALARY CLASSIFICATIONS:
Wages and salary ranges and position classifications in budget documents shall be subject to periodic review by the City Council. After any such review,
any position classification and/or wages and salary range may be changed by the City Council. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-9: APPOINTMENTS AND SUPERVISION:
A. All appointments to City employment shall be in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes, this Code and the City Personnel Policies Manual.
B. The City Manager shall have the authority to appoint all department heads, except the Chief of Police, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer, Finance
Director, Fire and Rescue Chief, and the Municipal Court Judge. The City Manager shall have the authority to supervise and administer all City
department heads and employees except the City Attorney.
C. Department heads, with the advice and consent of the City Manager, may appoint, discipline and recommend to the City Manager the termination of
City employees and casual employees. (Ord. 473, 6-25-2013, eff. 7-15-2013)
1-11-10: INTRODUCTORY PERIOD:
All new employees and all promoted employees shall be appointed or promoted subject to an introductory period. The length of the introductory period
shall be established at the time of appointment or promotion consistent with personnel policies but shall be a period no shorter than six (6) months nor
longer than two (2) years; provided, in any case the department head or City officer may extend the introductory period for additional six (6) month periods,
not to exceed two (2) years, if the department head or City officer finds that extension of the introductory period is necessary to fully evaluate the
employee's suitability for the position.
An employee serving an introductory period, excluding an introductory period being served by a promoted employee, is an at will employee and such
employee may be removed at any time with or without cause. A promoted employee who fails his/her introductory period for reasons which would not
otherwise be cause for termination may be returned to his/her former position if it remains vacant and funded or to a position in his/her former classification
if such position is available. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-11: STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:
A. Performance: Employees must be courteous and must be efficient and effective in the performance of their duties and employees must establish and
maintain effective working relationships with the public, subordinates, supervisors and coworkers.
B. Conduct: The personnel policies may list examples of conduct which would be specific cause for disciplinary action. Such conduct would be any which
would or could have the effect of bringing discredit to the City or of interfering with an employee's ability to perform job responsibilities or which is
contrary to the good of the City. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the City to remove from employment any City officer or employee.
C. Selling And Peddling: Peddling, solicitation and sales for charitable or other purposes shall be allowed among or by employees during working hours
only according to policies and/or guidelines which shall be adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 36/565
1-11-12: IMPLEMENTATION:
The adoption of this chapter shall not change the status of any employee currently serving an introductory period. The introductory period of each
employee shall continue without loss of service time accrued toward regular employee status. All employees who elect to continue in city employment after
the effective date of ordinance 212 shall be subject to all the terms and conditions of this chapter, except as specifically provided for herein. Persons filling
any of the categories listed in section 1-11-4 of this chapter under the definition of "employee" who continue to provide services to or for the city after the
effective date of ordinance 212 shall have no right to continued employment by the city except as may be specifically provided for by this chapter, the
personnel policies adopted in accordance with this chapter, by statute, or by contract. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-13: DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURES:
A. The personnel policies shall provide review procedures which may be initiated by an employee to resolve disputes which he/she sees to exist and to
arise out of an application: 1) of this chapter; 2) of the personnel policies; or 3) of the city's compensation plan. The dispute resolution procedure
provided for herein specifically does not apply to disputes arising out of disciplinary action nor to claims of discrimination or harassment on the basis of
sex, age, race, religion, national origin, disability or other protected class as defined by state and federal law if there is an alternative administrative
process available.
B. The personnel policies may provide for one or more steps or appeals in such review procedure and may provide for instances in which steps or appeals
may be omitted. The personnel policies may provide time limitations and require that any request for review be made by the employee within a
reasonable time and may otherwise provide for prompt and efficient management of such appeals.
C. No matter may be reviewed under the procedure provided for in this chapter if the matter may be disputed under a procedure provided for in a collective
bargaining agreement.
D. The personnel policies may provide for resolution of certain disputes by the city manager, city officer or department head pursuant to this section;
however, any such resolution shall be subject to review and written confirmation by the city manager. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-14: DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS AND APPEALS:
A. An employee is subject to disciplinary action when, in the opinion of the city manager, a city officer or the employee's department head, disciplinary
action is necessary for the good of the city.
B. No officer, department head or employee of the city has authority to grant or to offer any employee any job security or job protection which is not
provided for that employee by city ordinance or by action of the city council.
C. The city may impose upon any employee any disciplinary action or form of discipline which the city manager, a city officer or the employee's department
head finds appropriate given the conduct of the employee. In determining such discipline, the responsible person shall consider the employee's
behavior involved, the employee's past employment record, the length of service of the employee and surrounding circumstances as well as the good
of the city. The responsible person shall give such weight to each of the factors as he/she finds appropriate in exercise of his/her discretion. Employees
may be given time to correct problems of conduct before the employee discharges; however, regardless of the circumstances, the city may discharge
any employee at any time, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the policies adopted consistent herewith. There shall be no requirement
that any specific number or sequence of disciplinary actions or warnings be imposed prior to suspension, demotion or discharge.
D. Prior to final decision to dismiss or suspend any employee, the person responsible for such decision shall offer to meet with the employee and listen to
his/her point of view as to the reasons for such possible discharge or suspension. The responsible person shall also consider such written statements
or responses which the employee submits prior to making a final decision. The employee shall be notified of the decision in writing. Absent
extraordinary or emergency circumstances, the employee will be given the opportunity to request and receive a pretermination hearing before the city
manager prior to the actual dismissal of the employee. Pending the completion of the pretermination hearing and the decision by the city manager to
dismiss the employee or to not dismiss the employee, the employee will be placed on administrative leave with or without pay.
E. The personnel policies shall provide for appeals of disciplinary actions. In the case of a proposed termination of employment, the appeal shall be to the
city manager. The decision of the city manager, along with the basis thereof, shall be provided to the employee in writing. Such appeal hearing shall not
be subject to the technical rules of evidence. If an employee was dismissed from employment and was not given the opportunity to request and receive
a pretermination hearing before the city manager prior to dismissal, the appeal shall be to an individual other than the person making the disciplinary
decision to dismiss the employee.
F. An employee who has been dismissed from city employment after employment of twelve (12) or more months, other than a department head, city
manager or city administrator, may request a hearing before the city council to challenge the reasonableness of dismissal pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes section 268.405. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-15: LAYOFF AND REINSTATEMENT:
The personnel policies shall provide for layoff and reinstatement of employees conforming to the following:
A. Layoffs may occur as a result of lack of work, lack of funds, material change in duties or organization, the interests of economy and efficiency, or other
causes as determined to be for the good of the city by the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 37/565
B. The order of layoffs among positions within departments shall be first casual workers, then employees serving a probation period, and then all other
employees. Exceptions to this sequence may be made to retain persons with qualifications significant to a particular department.
C. Within the third category identified in subsection B of this section, the order in which employees in a department will be laid off shall be determined by
the city, in its sole discretion, based on employee job knowledge, skill and other qualifications, attendance, safety, performance and disciplinary
records, the existing and anticipated future needs of the department and the good of the city. When two (2) employees are equally qualified under such
factors, the employee with the most time served since the current hire date shall be retained. (Ord. 212, 10-13-1998)
1-11-16: FINGERPRINT BASED BACKGROUND CHECKS:
All applicants applying for employment with the city of Mesquite are required to provide the city of Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting
shall be completed at the Mesquite police department. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of
the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal
records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct
national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city of Mesquite, which shall render a
fitness determination regarding the applicant. This section is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(b) and public law 92-544. (Ord.
404, 7-22-2008, eff. 8-14-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 561 - RESIDENCY. Go to new ordinance.
1-11-17: RESIDENCY:
A. Required For Employment; Proof Of Compliance; Termination:
1. Definitions:
FULL TIME RESIDENT: A resident whose principal place of residence is located within Clark County, Nevada, and within a fifteen (15) mile radius of
the city of Mesquite, and who primarily resides in that principal place of residence twelve (12) months out of the year.
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE: An employee employed full time by the city, or a full time equivalent employee, or a part time employee who is not a
seasonal employee.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF RESIDENCE: The primary location an employee and his or her family resides and live out the common activities of life. This
may be determined by reviewing relevant facts and circumstances by the city manager. Relevant factors may include, but are not limited to: the place
of abode of family members; the address listed on federal tax returns, a driver's license, automobile registration, and voter registration cards; the
employee's mailing address for bills and correspondence; the location of banking institutions; location of religious organizations and recreational
and/or social clubs with which the employee is affiliated.
SEASONAL EMPLOYEE: An employee employed for a specific purpose, for no longer than three (3) months, with no expectation of continued
employment beyond the short time period or specific purpose for which the employee was hired.
2. Maintain Place Of Residence: Absent the existence of a collective bargaining agreement to the contrary, every permanent employee of the city,
within ninety (90) days of the date of initial employment, or within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof, or within ninety (90) days after the
expiration of a collective bargaining agreement to the contrary, whichever may be applicable, shall establish and maintain a principal place of
residence within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the city of Mesquite. Such residency shall be, without exception, full time. This provision shall apply
without regard to any required probationary period.
3. Proof Of Residency: Employees shall provide three (3) of the following four (4) items to the human resources department or the city manager within
the allotted time frame for compliance with this section:
a. A utility bill.
b. Vehicle registration.
c. Driver's license.
d. Voter registration.
4. Inconclusive Documents: Documents provided pursuant to subsection A3 of this section may be considered in determining an employee's principal
place of residency, but are not conclusive.
5. Lacking Documents: An employee who does not own a vehicle, is ineligible to obtain a driver's license or is not eligible to vote, may petition the city
manager to provide only a utility bill and a driver's license or Nevada department of motor vehicles issued identification card (or federal equivalent)
which shows upon the face thereof the employee's address under subsection A3 of this section. The granting of such a petition shall be at the sole
discretion of the city manager.
6. Termination: An employee who fails to comply with the provisions of this section is subject to immediate termination.
7. Employee Responsible For Proof: The burden of proving principal place of residency shall be on the employee at all relevant times. The city shall
have no obligation to demonstrate nonresidency prior to termination for violation of this section.
8. Mesquite Fire Department: No part of this section shall apply to reserve employees of the Mesquite fire department.
9. Nonapplicable: Employees hired before July 1, 2013, that have established residency outside the fifteen (15) mile radius of the city limits will not be
required to comply with the requirements of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 38/565
10. Applicable: This section shall apply to any employee hired before July 1, 2013, who resides within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the city of Mesquite
at the time this ordinance takes effect.
11. False Information: Providing false information to the city pursuant to this section shall be a misdemeanor and the employee shall be subject to
immediate termination and prosecution. (Ord. 494, 6-23-2015)
Chapter 12
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
1-12-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be entitled and shall be known as the EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 353, 5-1-2007, eff. 5-24-2007)
1-12-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to provide for the safety and well being of the citizens of Mesquite, Nevada, in the event of a natural or manmade disaster. (Ord.
213, 11-10-1998)
1-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:
DISASTER: A state of injury or damage resulting from an emergency of sufficient severity and magnitude as to be beyond the ability of local government
or private relief agencies to alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering caused thereby.
EMERGENCY: The occurrence of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any war, natural or manmade disaster,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, explosion, landslide, avalanche, epidemic, air contamination, radioactive fallout, hazardous
substance and oil spill, riot or other civil disturbances.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: Means and includes measures necessary to provide for mobilization, organization and direction of the civilian populace
and necessary support agencies to prevent or minimize the effects of any natural or manmade disaster or emergency situation as well as the effects of
subversive activities directed against the populace, community, industrial plants, facilities or other installations.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS: The planning, preparation for, and carrying out of all essential functions necessary to prevent, minimize and recover from
the effects of a disaster or emergency. (Ord. 213, 11-10-1998)
1-12-4: CREATION OF POSITION OF DIRECTOR:
The position of director of emergency management is hereby created. Such officer shall be appointed by the city council. Initially, the duties of this position
will be performed by one or more city employees in the Mesquite fire department at the direction of the fire chief. Should the position require the
appointment of a full time employee in the future, the city manager may request the city council to fill such a full time position. The city council will approve
the salary of such full time employee if and when it approves the full time position. (Ord. 353, 5-1-2007, eff. 5-24-2007)
1-12-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The director of emergency management is empowered to:
A. Represent the city on all matters pertaining to emergency management;
B. Prepare appropriate emergency operation plans for the city in support of and consistent with any other city, county, state or federal emergency plans;
C. Implement policy decisions regarding emergency management;
D. Act as director for all emergency management and civil defense efforts of the city during periods of emergency;
E. Obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking and needed for protection of life and property of people and to bind the city for value thereof and, if
required, immediately requisition same; and
F. Test the emergency operations organization at drills and to otherwise train and prepare the organization to effect the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 353,
5-1-2007, eff. 5-24-2007)
1-12-6: UNLAWFUL ACTS DESIGNATED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 39/565
It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both,
during an emergency or disaster:
A. To wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay emergency management personnel in the enforcement of any lawful rule, regulation ororder issued pursuant to this
chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed on him or her by this chapter or other provision of law; and
B. To wear, carry or display, without authority, any mark, identification or uniform specified for emergency management use without the permission of the
director of emergency management or emergency management personnel. (Ord. 353, 5-1-2007, eff. 5-24-2007)
Chapter 13
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words that are used in this chapter shall have the meanings that are ascribed to them in this section:
DISPOSITION: The final action that has been recommended for a record by the records retention schedule that has been approved for the office that
produces or generates the record.
OFFICE: Any office, department, board, commission, committee, agency or any other division of the city.
PUBLIC RECORD: Any paper, correspondence, form, book, photograph, film, sound recording, map, drawing or other document, regardless of its physical
form or characteristics, that has been made by any office or official or received by it in connection with the transaction of public business. The term does
not include published books and pamphlets, books and pamphlets that have been printed by a government printer, worksheets that are used to collect or
compile data after such data has been included in a record, answer pads for telephones or other informal notes, stenographers' notes after the information
that is contained therein has been transcribed, unused forms, except unused ballots, brochures, newsletters, magazines, newspapers, except those
portions of newspapers that are retained as evidence of publication, scrapbooks and property that have been left or deposited with an office which would
otherwise be defined as a record except that the ownership for such property does not reside with the city.
RECORD SERIES: Documents, volumes or folders that are arranged under a single filing system or are kept together as a unit because they relate to a
particular subject, result from the same activity or have a particular form.
RECORDS CENTER: An area for housing inactive or semiactive records which do not receive sufficient use to warrant their retention in the office in which
they were initially kept.
RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE: An itemized list of record series,with the corresponding time periods for which they must be kept, including the
location and final disposition thereof.
VITAL RECORDS: Those records that would be essential for the reconstruction for the function and operation of a department in order for it to conduct
business following a disaster. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
1-13-2: CITY CLERK'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
The city clerk will be responsible for developing and implementing a records management program for the city. In that capacity, the city clerk shall:
A. Establish guidelines and procedures for making an inventory for the retaining of the public records of the city in accordance with approved records
retention schedules that have been established by the state of Nevada library of archival records;
B. Establish a records center for storing inactive public records of the city pending their disposition in accordance with approved records retention
schedules;
C. Provide services to the various offices for public records that require permanent retention, records that have a minimum retention of seven (7) years
and vital records. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
1-13-3: RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION:
A records management committee is hereby established and shall be composed of:
A. The city manager or designee;
B. The city attorney or designee;
C. The city clerk or designee;
D. The city financial director or designee;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 40/565
E. The information systems division manager or designee.
An advisory committee shall also be established to attend all records management committee meetings and advise the records management
committee of city departmental concerns or requests as well as advise the city departments of implementation of policies set. The records advisory
committee shall be composed of a designated employee representing each city department. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
1-13-4: RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES:
The records management committee shall:
A. Establish standards, procedures and techniques for the effective management of records;
B. Comply with the "Nevada State Library And Archives Manual", Nevada state library and archives, and when necessary establish standards for the
preparation of schedules providing for the retention of records of continuing value and for the prompt and orderly disposition of records which no longer
possess sufficient administrative, legal, fiscal or research value to warrant their further retention;
C. Establish a program for the management of forms, fees, and files;
D. Establish a program for the protection of records essential for the continuation or reestablishment of governmental operation in the event of natural or
other disaster;
E. Make continuing surveys of current practices for the management of records and recommend improvements in those practices, including the use of
space, equipment and supplies to create, maintain and store records;
F. Approve or modify all other records retention schedules before they are submitted to the city council for their approval with the exception of the state of
Nevada library archival records retention schedule as is adopted as part of this code;
G. Provide general guidance and assistance with respect to improvements of the records management process. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
1-13-5: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS:
The director of each department of the city shall:
A. Appoint an employee from his/her department to be that department's controller of records, and who will hold a seat on the records advisory committee.
Their main function will be to oversee the proper handling, filing and reporting of all retention records for that department as set forth by the records
management committee;
B. Conduct an inventory of all of the public records that exist within that department for disposition in accordance with procedures that are prescribed by
the city clerk;
C. Prepare a records retention schedule for public records within that department;
D. Sign authorizations for destruction of obsolete records from that department. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
1-13-6: PUBLIC RECORDS CUSTODY AND CONTROL:
A. The right to the custody and control of public records that have been transferred to the records center shall remain with the transferring office;
B. The right to the custody and control of public records that have been transferred to the city archives passes to the city clerk at the time that such records
are accepted for the city archives. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
1-13-7: DISPOSAL OF RECORDS; RETENTION PERIODS:
A. A record may be disposed of only in accordance with the records retention schedule that has been approved for records of that type;
B. The respective retention periods that are established in the Nevada administrative code shall be the minimum periods for which the records of the city,
other than judicial records and other documents of the municipal court must be retained;
C. Proposed changes for the retention management of the public records of any office, other than judicial and police records and other documents of the
municipal court, shall be submitted to the city clerk. The city clerk shall then submit the proposed changes to the records management committee for its
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 41/565
approval and, after such changes have received the approval of the records management committee, the city clerk shall submit the same to the city
council for its approval. Such changes shall become effective upon their approval by the city council;
D. The disposition of judicial and other documents of the municipal court shall be governed by a records retention schedule that is approved by the judge
of the municipal court by a court rule that is adopted in accordance with the rules of the Nevada supreme court. Such schedule shall become effective
upon its approval by the judge of the municipal court and shall establish a system of records management for the municipal court to be implemented by
the court administrator;
E. The disposition of police, fire and city attorney confidential records and other documents held by each department shall be governed by that department
according to the laws of the state of Nevada. (Ord. 351, 8-8-2006, eff. 8-30-2006)
Chapter 14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-14-1: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR PRISONERS SERVING INTERMITTENT SENTENCE:
A. Fee Established: When the Mesquite municipal court grants the application of a defendant to serve his sentence on an intermittent basis, the prisoner
serving such sentence must pay twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day served. A prisoner serving such a sentence shall pay toward the fee
according to his or her ability to pay.
B. Collection And Disposition Of Fee: The fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be collected by the Mesquite police department,
deposited with the city treasurer, and distributed for the purposes of offsetting costs related to the housing and care of prisoners in the Mesquite
detention center.
C. Failure To Pay Fee; Judgment: The city council may apply to the court for a judgment and execution thereon in the event a prisoner fails to pay the
administrative fee. The failure of a prisoner to pay the fee may not be enforced as contempt of court.
D. Change In Defendant's Financial Position: A defendant may petition the court to modify or vacate any fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
section on the grounds that the defendant's ability to pay has changed. The court shall so inform the defendant when the judgment is rendered. (Ord.
481, 5-27-2014, eff. 6-16-2014)
Title 2
BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS
2-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk in the Mesquite City Hall, being marked and designated as the
business license regulations ordinance, together with all tables of contents, definitions and fee schedules is hereby designated as the Business Code of
the City of Mesquite, and by designation and reference is hereby adopted as this chapter. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. The words and terms used herein shall be given their usual and ordinary meanings.
B. When a name or title is used, it shall include the designee of such office or officer or agency which has contracted with the City to perform the
designated function. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-3: LICENSE AND FEE REQUIRED:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to commence, carry on, engage in or continue (including the making of deliveries of goods, wares and
merchandise sold elsewhere) in the City, any business, trade, occupation or employment upon which a License Tax is imposed by the terms and
provisions of licensing ordinances or regulations for which a License Tax is required to be procured by the terms of licensing ordinances or regulations
without first paying such License Tax and procuring such license as hereinafter provided.
B. Nonapplicability: The License Tax imposed by this title shall not be deemed or construed as applying to any person engaged in any of the professions or
occupations herein enumerated solely as an employee of any other person conducting, managing or carrying on any such business unless specifically
so provided herein.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 42/565
C. Responsibility For Obtaining License: It shall be the responsibility of a person engaging in business within the City to voluntarily apply for and maintain
in full force and effect a valid license. The agents or other representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this City shall be personally
responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the businesses they represent with the terms of this title.
D. Wrongful Acquisition Of License: Any license required hereunder that is obtained by deceit, fraud or misrepresentation or other crime is null and void.
E. License Terms:
1. Annual licenses shall be issued in accordance with this title within the area covered by licensing ordinances. Licenses, other than annual licenses,
may also be issued as permitted by the provisions of this Code.
2. All license terms when payable annually, as used in this title, do not necessarily mean a year commencing January 1, but shall mean a period of
twelve (12) months. No license fee for less than a full year shall be accepted by the business license official upon any application for an annual
license.
3. In a case where the annual license fee is at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), the business license official may, in his or her discretion and for
good cause shown, permit semiannual payments of the annual license fee. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
F. Authorization And Classification Of License: A license shall authorize a party to transact the business described in such license at a particular location.
1. Separate licenses shall be obtained for each branch, establishment, or separate place of business.
2. Separate licenses shall be obtained for each type of business operated, even if under the same owner and in the same location.
a. This provision shall not apply if the licensee operates multiple business types that are all required by this title to pay a gross revenue license fee
and are: 1) in the same location and 2) under the same business name. In such cases, the licensee shall be required to apply for and obtain one
gross revenue license. (Ord. 541, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
G. Display Of License: Every person having a license under the provisions of this title and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business shall
prominently display the permanent license in said place of business for which it is issued and it shall be retained by the licensee as long as the
business is in operation at the licensed address under the same name.
H. Amendment Of Business License Fees By Resolution: The City Council, for good cause, may establish, modify or eliminate any annual business
license fee by resolution. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
A. Application Forms; Preparation And Contents: The business license official shall be the collector of City license fees and it shall be the duty of the
business license official to adopt all forms and prescribe the information required therein as to all matters relevant to the issuance of the license. It shall
be the duty of the business license official to prepare and have printed adequate numbers of application forms for licenses. The application form shall
include:
1. The name of the person, persons or other business entity to whom the license is to be issued, together with the location for which the license is
sought.
2. Business mailing address, telephone number, e-mail address.
3. Owner's name, residence address and telephone number.
4. The kind of business authorized to be carried on under the license.
5. The date when the license begins.
6. An affidavit stating whether there has been any change in ownership in the business of the applicant during the preceding calendar year, and if there
has been any change, that such change was made in compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes 104.
7. If the applicant was engaged in business under a fictitious name, an affidavit that the applicant has complied with the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes 602.
8. Where the License Tax depends upon the receipts or amount of the business which the applicant, or the firm of which he is a member, or for which
he is attorney, or the association or corporation of which he is president, secretary or managing agent, will do, the applicant shall state under oath the
amount of business which the business did do in the next preceding period for which the license may be issued. The application form may include
any number of additional questions as determined by the business license official.
B. Application Filled Out And Returned: Each applicant for a business license shall fill out in full an application form and shall present the same to the
business license official, who shall determine the amount of License Tax due and payable. In certain specified instances an advance, nonrefundable
deposit toward the actual cost of investigation is also required.
C. Receipt Of Application; License Statements: Upon the receipt of a complete application form, a license shall be filled out in full and shall state thereon:
1. To whom the license is issued, together with the location for which the license is valid.
2. The kind of business authorized to be carried on under the license.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 43/565
3. The date the license begins and ends.
The signature of the business license official shall be affixed upon the face of each license in order for it to be valid.
D. Delivery Of License And Receipt:
1. The business license official, upon payment of the License Tax due, and any outstanding payments due for the actual costs of specified
investigations, shall deliver a business license and receipt for the money paid to the purchaser thereof.
2. The business license official shall demand that all persons and other business entities required to procure a business license take out and pay for
the same. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-5: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
A. Payment Due; Notification; Affidavit Concerning Change Of Ownership Or Location:
1. All businesses required to have a license shall be notified, before the due date, of each license fee required; provided, however, that the failure to
notify any lawful business shall not be held to waive the payment of a business license; and provided, further, that the actual receipt of such notice is
in no case required.
2. Any business licensed by the City and where there has been no change of ownership or location, is required only to pay the applicable license fee
and is not required to make application for a new license; however, the licensee is required to furnish to the business license official the following
information:
a. An affidavit stating whether there has been any change in ownership in the business of the applicant during the preceding calendar year, and if
there has been any change, that such change was made in compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 104.
b. If the applicant was engaged in business under a fictitious name, an affidavit that the applicant has complied with the provisions of Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 602.
c. Where the license fee depends upon a licensee's receipts or amount of business, the licensee shall provide, at the City's request, receipts or
documentation of the amount of business performed during the preceding license period.
B. Nonpayment; Liability; Debt To City: The license fee imposed herein by the City Council shall be deemed a debt due the City from and against any
person who commences, carries on, engages in or conducts any business, occupation, trade or employment for which a license is hereby required to
be produced without first having paid such license fee and procured a license. Such person shall be liable in a civil action in the name of the City as
plaintiff, in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the recovery of the amount of license fee imposed, and for the costs of the suit. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
C. Delinquency; Reinstatement; Special Fees; Underestimates:
1. All licenses, other than gambling and liquor licenses, are delinquent if not paid by the due date and ten percent (10%) of the fee shall be assessed
as a penalty charge. If payment is made after fifteen (15) days after the due date and before thirty (30) days after the due date, twenty five percent
(25%) of the license fee shall be assessed as a penalty charge. All licenses for which the fees have not been paid within thirty (30) days after the due
date are automatically revoked. Any such license shall not be reinstated until the twenty five percent (25%) penalty fee and a twenty five percent
(25%) reinstatement fee shall have been paid. (Ord. 541, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2. In all cases where a material underestimate of sales has been made by the licensee, the licensee making such material underestimate, or the
company represented, in addition to paying the City the sums to which it was entitled under this Code, shall also be required to pay a sum double
otherwise required for the next period for which the license may be issued. The business license official or their designee shall have the power and
authority to enter any store, building, or any other place in which such business is being conducted at any time during business hours and have
access to the books of such business for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of sales made. The information received from the licenses under
the provisions of this section shall be confidential and available only to those City officials concerned in such matter.
D. Processing Fee: Unless a different processing fee is provided for in this title, a thirty five dollar ($35.00) nonrefundable processing fee will be charged
for each application filed for a new business license, a change of business ownership, change of business name, change of business address or a
business related permit provided for in this title. Processing of such applications and/or permits shall not commence until the City has received the
processing fee. This processing fee is in addition to any other fee that may be required. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-6: INVESTIGATION COSTS:
Costs directly taxable to the license applicant include:
A. Cost of taking and processing fingerprints and photographs.
B. All costs directly attributable to the collection and review of criminal history information by the City or its designated agent, and the report and
recommendation.
C. Costs of background investigation and reference interviews.
D. Cost of financial investigation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 44/565
E. Cost of report information. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-7: OWNERSHIP CHANGE; FEE:
A. All new business owners must apply for a business license and shall be guaranteed the same rate as the previous owner, if the nature of the business
remains the same. The licensee must meet all new business license requirements prior to being issued a City of Mesquite business license as set forth
in section 2-1-4 of this chapter. No previously paid license fees will be applied to the account of the new business owner. (Ord. 541, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-
18-2018)
2-1-8: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS:
No business license shall be issued by the business license official to applicants therefor in accordance with this title unless the applicant shall have a
fixed place of business, in a proper zone in accordance with the City zoning ordinance, and shall actually carry on and conduct such business from the
address for which the license shall have been issued. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-9: CONDUCTING BUSINESS AT LOCATION OTHER THAN LICENSED:
In the event a licensee shall conduct his or her business at a location other than the place for which the license was issued or shall fail to conduct said
business at the place for which the license shall have been issued, the business license official shall revoke such license forthwith and no new license
shall be issued to such licensee without approval first having been obtained. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-10: CONDITIONAL BUSINESS LICENSE:
A. Definitions:
BUSINESS: Any business or industrial activity either for profit or not for profit.
CONDITIONAL BUSINESS LICENSE: A conditional business license shall, for all purposes, act as a business license, except that it shall only last until
either the non-conforming business activity ceases for a period of three (3) or more consecutive days once such activity has commenced, or a change
is made to the ownership of the business entity that originally petitioned and received the conditional business license.
B. Procedure: A party whose proposed business is either not covered by this title, or the existence of which would violate a provision of this title may
petition the City Council for a conditional business license in the following manner:
1. Receive notification from the Director of Development Services, or his or her official designee, that the proposed business does not fall within this
title, or alternatively, would violate a provision of this title if permitted;
2. Notify the Director of Development Services, or his or her official designee, that the party wishes to seek a conditional business license;
3. The Director of Development Services shall place the party on the next available City Council agenda unless the party requests a later date;
4. The party shall petition the City Council at a City Council meeting for a conditional business license;
5. A conditional business license shall be effective five (5) days after the vote, pending any veto. If a veto is overridden, the conditional business
license shall be effective immediately.
C. Standard For Granting A Conditional Business License: The City Council may, by simple majority vote, grant a conditional business license to any
business within its absolute discretion where it would not pose harm to the health, safety, welfare or morals of the community.
D. Remediation: Upon granting a conditional business license, the Director of Development Services or the Director's designee may, within ninety (90)
days, present a proposed amendment to this Code, which would incorporate the business type or provide reasonable amendments so as to avoid the
need for similar conditional business license. The City Council may approve or deny such a recommendation.
E. Relinquishment Of Conditional Business License: The recipient of a conditional business license may relinquish the license once the City Council
approves an ordinance or amendment pursuant to subsection D of this section and the recipient chooses to be regulated by the newly passed
Municipal Code regulation instead of the pre-existing conditional business license. A conditional business license remains valid while a recipient
applies for a business license under the provisions of this section.
F. Fast Track Revocation Of Conditional Business License: The City Council may, at their sole discretion, and by being petitioned by an interested party,
both revoke a conditional business license and approve a business license under an approved City Code once an applicable Code or Code
amendment has been approved. Such revocation and approval may occur by way of resolution directing the City Manager and Director of Development
Services to make any required clerical adjustments, or by any other appropriate means.
G. Fees: Any licensing fees shall be negotiated between the City Council and the applicant on a case by case basis. The ultimate authority on setting
conditional business license fees shall rest with the City Council. (Ord. 516, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
2-1-11: SEMIANNUAL GROSS SALES; GUIDE FOR NEW BUSINESS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 45/565
A. All businesses regulated under the semiannual gross sales type license shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to commence business in the
City of Mesquite. In six (6) months, when the semiannual gross fee is once again due, the business shall pay the fee set forth in section 2-1-12, "Gross
Sales; Schedule Of Fees", of this chapter for its level of gross revenues. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
B. The business license official and any other officer designated by the business license official shall have the power and authority to enter any store,
building or other place in which such business is being conducted at any time during the business hours and have access to the books of such
business for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of sales made. The information received from the licensee under the provisions of this section
shall be confidential and available only to those officials concerned in such matters.
C. Where the amount of sales or gross receipts made during the preceding period shall be in excess of the estimate for such period, the licensee shall be
indebted to the City for any deficiency in fee paid for such period and liable therefor to the City in a civil action. No license hereunder shall be issued to
such licensee for any subsequent period unless and until such deficiency is paid, and when so paid, shall constitute an additional fee for any license
issued hereunder for such subsequent period and be deemed in full payment of such deficiency. In estimating gross business for a subsequent renewal
of a business license, the immediately preceding six (6) months' business shall be used as a basis for such estimate.
D. It is unlawful for a licensee to fail to keep adequate records of gross sales. "Adequate records" means original copies of all sales invoices and credit
slips for a period of three (3) years prior to the date of audit, together with a monthly sales summary in a cash receipt journal or similar record for the
same period of time.
Any allowable deductions from gross sales must be reflected in a monthly summary and must be substantiated by original documentation.
Failure of a licensee to maintain adequate sales records will result in a disallowance of exemptions and is grounds for suspension or revocation of
licensee's business license. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-12: GROSS SALES; SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Any person who, at a fixed place of business in the City, provides any sales oriented services designated within this section, or sells goods, wares or
merchandise, whether on commission or otherwise, or operates any of the following businesses must obtain a license from the business license official for
each branch of his or her business:
Advertising samples.
Airlines, airline ticket locations.
Alarm systems.
Amusement parks.
Animal dealer. A person who, for compensation or profit, buys, sells, breeds, grades or imports animals for resale.
Animal retailer. A person who acquires pets for resale.
Antiques.
Appliance sales.
Arts/handicraft supplies.
Automobile and airplane parts.
Automobile (new and used) leasing for a term of more than three (3) months, operators of used car lots containing only cars capable of being moved under
their own power; provided, that the person operating an automobile sales agency (new car dealer) may, under his or her license for such agency, conduct
a used car department solely in connection with such automobile sales agency (new car dealer) for the sale of used cars taken in trade by him or her for
new cars and the fee schedule enumerated in this section shall apply to the combined gross semiannual sales of such new and used cars. Transient
automobile sales are limited to one sale per year, per business and said sale shall not exceed two (2) consecutive days.
Automobile painting.
Automobile sales agency (new and used car dealer). (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
Automobile services, garage, automobile repair, mobile or fixed carwash, structural or mobile towing. (Ord. 541, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
Bakery.
Bicycle repair shop.
Boat sales and service.
Book/video sales or rental.
Brick, concrete, blacksmith shop.
Building supply.
Business machines.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 46/565
Cabinet shop.
Cement and concrete products.
Cinder or adobe block manufacturing.
Clothing stores.
Cold storage plant.
Commercial artist.
Computer software.
Cosmetics.
Dairy.
Dealers in motor fuel, gas, oil not used on highway.
Dental laboratory.
Drapery and upholstery.
Drugstore, drugs or medicines.
Dry cleaner.
Electrical supplies.
Equipment sales and rental.
Exterminators.
Eyewear products.
Fabric shop.
Film production.
Five and ten stores.
Florist.
Furniture sales, repair and refinish.
General repair shop.
Gift novelties.
Glass and mirror sales.
Golf course.
Gravel products.
Grocery/food products.
Hardware.
Hearing aids.
Hospital.
Ice cream.
Ice plant.
Janitorial supplies.
Jewelry.
Jewelry repair shop.
Laboratories.
Laundry and laundromat.
Leather goods.
Linen supply.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 47/565
Locksmith sales.
Lumber.
Machine shops.
Mail order.
Marble/granite sales.
Medical supplies.
Merchandise/department stores.
Miscellaneous sales.
Mobile food vendors.
Motor repair shops.
Music instrument sales.
Music lessons.
Newspapers/newsstands.
Nurseries/landscaping, nursery where plants, flowers, ferns, trees or other plants are cultivated, grown or propagated for the purpose of sale.
Paint shop or sales.
Paper supplies.
Patent medicine agency.
Pet shop.
Photo shop; photo equipment repair.
Piano sales and repair.
Plumbing/heating supplies.
Printer/print shop.
Radio/television/rental/repair/sales.
Receptive operators.
Record shops.
Refrigerator sales and service.
Restaurants.
Retail sales, general.
Saw shops.
Sewing machine sales/service.
Shoe sales, shoe making/repair.
Sign painting.
Skating rinks.
Soft drinks.
Sporting goods.
Swimming pools.
Tailoring/dressmaking.
Trailer sales/repair/rebuild.
Variety stores.
Wares or precious metals.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 48/565
Water softeners.
Welding and ironworks.
Wholesale oil.
The above mentioned licensees must pay semiannually therefor an amount of money to be determined by the amount of gross semiannual sales or
revenue and made at the rates as follows:
Semiannual Gross Semiannual Fees
$0.00 - $12,000.00 $ 25.00
$12,001.00 - $18,000.00 30.00
$18,001.00 - $24,000.00 42.00
$24,001.00 - $30,000.00 54.00
$30,001.00 - $45,000.00 66.00
$45,001.00 - $90,000.00 78.00
$90,001.00 - $135,000.00 90.00
$135,001.00 - $180,000.00 100.00
$180,001.00 - $240,000.00 120.00
$240,001.00 - $300,000.00 167.00
$300,001.00 - $360,000.00 200.00
$360,001.00 - $420,000.00 230.00
$420,001.00 - $480,000.00 270.00
$480,001.00 - $540,000.00 300.00
$540,001.00 - $600,000.00 350.00
$600,001.00 - $660,000.00 370.00
$660,001.00 - $720,000.00 400.00
$720,001.00 - $780,000.00 440.00
$780,001.00 - $840,000.00 470.00
$840,001.00 - $900,000.00 500.00
$900,001.00 - $960,000.00 540.00
$960,001.00 - $1,020,000.00 570.00
$1,020,001.00 - $1,080,000.00 600.00
$1,080,001.00 - $1,140,000.00 640.00
$1,140,001.00 - $1,200,000.00 670.00
$1,200,001.00 and over 0.0005555%
A. Gross Revenues: "Gross revenues", as used in connection with the determination of license fees, means:
1. The total amount of the sale price of all goods sold, originating in the City and regardless of destination.
2. The total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service, or employment, of whatever nature it may be, whether or not such
service, act, or employment is performed as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, for which a charge is made or
credit allowed, including all receipts, cash, credits, bartered products or services of any kind.
3. The total amount charged or received for manufactured goods originating in the City and regardless of destination; includes the cost of goods sold,
plus the value added during manufacturing as it would reflect in the price or fair market value of the finished goods.
All such totals are to be calculated without any deduction for the cost of the property sold, cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid
or payable, or any other expense whatsoever.
B. Not Included In Gross Revenues: "Gross revenues", as used in connection with the determination of license fees shall not include:
1. Properly documented cash discounts allowed or taken on sales or services; all taxes; all allowances for bad debts; and all revenues derived from
business operations covered by another City business license or licenses.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 49/565
C. Multiple Businesses: Any person operating, conducting and carrying on several different classes or types of businesses at a fixed place of business in
the City shall pay a fee for each type of business. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-1-13: SPECIFIC FEES AND REGULATIONS ENUMERATED:
The rates of license fees for businesses, trades, occupations and employment hereinafter named in this section are hereby fixed and the same shall be
paid to the business license official by any person engaged in or carrying on the same in the City. Unless otherwise so stated, the following fees shall be
paid annually:
Abstract or title company, $550.00.
Accountant, certified public, $200.00; independent public accountant, $150.00.
A. For the purpose of this section, an "independent public accountant" means a person who does bookkeeping or accounting work for 2 or more
persons or who prepares or assists in preparing Income Tax returns for 2 or more persons.
Adult care facilities, nonmedical services, $150.00; medical services, $300.00.
A. All requirements for State licensing must be met before the City will license a business for the care of adults.
Advertising business or advertising counsel, $150.00.
Advertising space, leasing, selling, or maintaining, billboard and/or electrical signs, $500.00. Any form of business leasing, selling or maintaining outdoor
advertising space whether on billboard or electrical signs.
Aesthetician, see Cosmetological establishment.
Ambulance services, each vehicle, $300.00.
Amusements:
A. Entertainer, $150.00, a person or business that provides entertainment services.
1. Bowling alley: Every person who operates a bowling alley within the City shall pay the sum of $100.00 for the first alley in such establishment,
and $35.00 for each additional alley.
B. Carnival: See Traveling shows or circuses.
C. Coin operated amusement machines: Any establishment maintaining and conducting therein coin operated amusement machines or any type of
mechanical game or device, not intended or played for gambling purposes, but for use by the patrons of such establishment for amusement only,
shall pay $50.00 for each machine, mechanical game or device. Any person owning a coin operated amusement machine and seeking to place said
coin operated amusement machine in any place of business within the City shall be responsible to secure from the business license official a
gummed license for each such machine. It shall be the responsibility of such licensee to install such gummed license on each machine before
placing it in an establishment for use by the public. The gummed license shall be issued to the person owning and operating said machine or
machines and shall permit the machine to be placed in any place of business not so prohibited by ordinance or regulation within the City during the
permitted period. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the machine or machines to secure from the business license official new licenses for
each machine placed on location. This category includes but is not limited to billiard tables, jukeboxes, or other mechanical games or devices.
D. Merry-go-round, $100.00 for each day.
E. Tennis, racquetball or handball courts: For each business which imposes a fee for the use of playing courts by the general public, the fee shall be
$50.00 for the first court, plus $20.00 for each individual court.
F. Traveling shows or circuses: A proprietor, lessee or manager of any traveling show, skating rink, circus, or carnival intending to exhibit in the open
air or under a tent or in any public hall, clubroom, assembly hall or theater where movable scenery and theatrical appliances are used for any
performance or exhibition shall pay to the business license official the sum of $100.00 as a license fee for the privilege of showing and exhibiting
such traveling shows, traveling skating rink, circus, or carnival for each day; and upon payment thereof, the business license official shall issue a
license for the day or number of days so paid for.
Animal operator, $100.00, any person or business, unless specifically listed in section 2-1-12 of this chapter or this section, who engages in providing
services for animals such as grooming, walking, training or pet sitting or operates a profit or nonprofit animal shelter, a cattery, kennel or commercial
establishment engaged in the business of selling animals.
Apartment houses, transient and permanent:
A. To be licensed as an "apartment house, transient", the apartment complex shall comply with the definition of "apartment house" in the Building
Code and be electrically wired with metallic sheathed cable.
B. Any apartment house electrically wired with nonmetallic sheathed cable shall be licensed as an "apartment house, permanent" and shall not rent
apartments for terms of less than 1 month. Every person engaged in the business of keeping or conducting an apartment in the City shall pay for and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 50/565
obtain a license to carry on such business as per schedule as follows:
Apartments
Less than 5 No license
5 to 8 $ 100.00
9 to 18 160.00
19 to 38 250.00
39 to 78 500.00
79 to 158 1,000.00
159 to 318 1,500.00
Above 318 $1,500.00 plus $15.00 for each additional apartment
Arborist, $150.00. Prior to receiving an arborist license, applicants shall furnish proof to the City that the applicant maintains liability insurance of at least
$1,000,000.00.
Architect, $200.00.
Armored cars, for each car, $100.00 yearly.
Arts and crafts shows, $20.00 per show, not to exceed 3 days and thereafter $5.00 per booth per day. Each booth must be operated and managed by the
artist making, creating or painting the work displayed or sold, or by said artist's agent or representative as evidenced by a power of attorney. No goods
shall be displayed or sold which have been previously sold or owned by any person other than the creator, painter or maker thereof. "Arts and crafts" are
defined to be the handiwork of a human being in plastic material or color to render something beautiful in visible form, or something useful or ornamental to
please the eye and gratify the taste, which is not manufactured in a plant or factory, and must contain the signature or mark of the artist selling or
displaying same.
Astrologer:
A. $350.00 annually for every person who carries on the practice, teaching or professes to practice the business of astrology and demands or
receives a fee for the exercise of said business, directly or indirectly or incidental to the conduct of any other business, either as a gift, donation or
otherwise, or gives an exhibition thereof at any place where an admission fee is charged.
B. Application for a license to practice astrology shall be made to the business license official accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation and
fingerprinting fee of $145.00 to conduct a thorough investigation of the applicant's qualifications. No person shall be issued a license to practice
astrology unless such person meets all the qualifications provided for below:
1. In addition to completing a regular application, each applicant for an astrologer license shall present themselves to the Police Department for
fingerprinting and furnish the Police or Business License Agency any other information necessary to conduct an investigation of such applicant's
character and reputation. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct State and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data,
the City Police Agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada Department of Public Safety to conduct State criminal records
checks. The Nevada Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the State and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the City Police Agency.
Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Agency shall prepare and submit to the business license official a report containing findings and a
recommendation of approval or disapproval of the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and
Public Law 92-544.
2. The applicant shall be 21 years of age or older.
3. The applicant shall pass, as a minimum, a professional level examination prepared by the American Federation of Astrologers, Inc.
4. The applicant shall subscribe to a Code of Ethics based on one published by the American Federation Of Astrologers, 6 Library Court, SE,
Washington, D.C. 20003.
C. After the completion of the investigation, the application shall be submitted to the business license official for review. Upon review of the
application and findings of the applicant, the business license official shall either approve or deny the license.
1. Denial: Any license application made pursuant to the provisions of this title may be denied for good cause by the business license official. Good
cause for denial of a license shall include, but not be limited to:
a. The license application is incomplete so as to not contain all information required by this title;
b. All license or investigation fees are not paid;
c. False or fraudulent statements in the application for the license;
d. Failure to obtain a license or permit as required by this title and compliance with requirements of all other departments or divisions prior to
engaging in business;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 51/565
e. The applicant, or any of its principals, does not qualify for a license;
f. False, fraudulent or misleading statements made to the business license official;
g. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation;
h. The applicant or any of its principals has been convicted of an act that constitutes a crime which involves moral turpitude or involves any local,
State or Federal law or regulation which relates to the same or a similar business, or has been convicted of having solicited, encouraged,
caused or procured another to commit such a violation. For purposes of this subsection, a crime involving moral turpitude is one that necessarily
involves any of the following: an intent to defraud; intentional dishonesty for personal gain; intentional causing of serious injury to another
person; the sale of narcotics or possession of narcotics with intent to sell; or a sexual offense as described in Nevada Revised Statutes
179D.097;
i. The applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft or fraud or any felony.
2. Notice Of Denial: Upon determination of the licensing official to deny an applicant's completed application the City shall cause written notice to
be sent to the applicant by the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial, the
documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon 5 business
days' notice to the City, and the date upon which the denial of the license shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant shall have 10
business days from the receipt of the notice of denial to appeal the same to the City Council. The denial shall remain effective unless and until the
order is rescinded by the City Council.
D. Any license issued to practice astrology may be suspended, revoked or other disciplinary action taken with the standards and requirements of this
section.
Attorneys, see Law firm.
Auctions/auctioneer, $250.00, to be paid by the auctioneer.
A. Applications for auctioneer licenses shall state thereon the place of business intended to be occupied, if any, or the place of such auction; and
shall give the names of any employees who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license.
B. A nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of $145.00 shall accompany the application. Each applicant for an auction/auctioneer license
shall present themselves to the Police Department for fingerprinting and furnish the police or Business License Agency any other information
necessary to conduct an investigation of such applicant's character and reputation. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct State and national
criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the City Police Agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada
Department of Public Safety to conduct State criminal records checks. The Nevada Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this
fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the State and national criminal
checks will be disseminated to the City Police Agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Agency shall prepare and submit to the
business license official a report containing findings and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the applicant. This provision is enacted
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and Public Law 92-544.
C. After the completion of the investigation, the application shall be submitted to the business license official for review. Upon review of the
application and findings of the applicant, the business license official shall either approve or deny the license.
1. Denial: Any license application made pursuant to the provisions of this title may be denied for good cause by the business license official. Good
cause for denial of a license shall include, but not be limited to:
a. The license application is incomplete so as to not contain all information required by this title;
b. All license or investigation fees are not paid;
c. False or fraudulent statements in the application for the license;
d. Failure to obtain a license or permit as required by this title and compliance with requirements of all other departments or divisions prior to
engaging in business;
e. The applicant, or any of its principals, does not qualify for a license;
f. False, fraudulent or misleading statements made to the business license official;
g. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation;
h. The applicant or any of its principals has been convicted of an act that constitutes a crime which involves moral turpitude or involves any local,
State or Federal law or regulation which relates to the same or a similar business, or has been convicted of having solicited, encouraged,
caused or procured another to commit such a violation. For purposes of this subsection, a crime involving moral turpitude is one that necessarily
involves any of the following: an intent to defraud; intentional dishonesty for personal gain; intentional causing of serious injury to another
person; the sale of narcotics or possession of narcotics with intent to sell; or a sexual offense as described in Nevada Revised Statutes
179D.097;
i. The applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft or fraud or any felony.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 52/565
2. Notice Of Denial: Upon determination of the licensing official to deny an applicant's completed application the City shall cause written notice to
be sent to the applicant by the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial, the
documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon 5 business
days' notice to the City, and the date upon which the denial of the license shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant shall have 10
business days from the receipt of the notice of denial to appeal the same to the City Council. The denial shall remain effective unless and until the
order is rescinded by the City Council.
D. The employer shall be liable for any violation of the City ordinances committed by his employees in conducting an auction.
E. Nothing in this section shall be held to apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or
process, or by virtue of any power of authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed.
Automobile repossession agency, $150.00.
Automobile, transient sales (new or used), $250.00. Automobile transient sales are limited to 2 sales events per year, per business, and said sale shall not
exceed 2 days.
Bail bond broker or bail bond brokerage business, after a State license has been acquired, $200.00.
Banks and bankers, except national banks, $600.00.
Barbershops, see Cosmetological establishment.
Beauticians, see Cosmetological establishment.
Body piercing/ear piercing, $150.00.
Bookstores and adult bookstores:
A. License Required: No person shall perform the services of, or conduct, manage or engage in the business of, selling books, magazines,
periodicals, news publications, films, tapes or discs without first obtaining a license from the City Council. Licensed grocery stores, drugstores,
convenience stores and gift shops with a newsstand selling periodicals, magazines and newspapers incidental to food and drug items are exempted
from the provisions of this section, provided it does not sell or offer for sale books, magazines, periodicals, news publications, films, tapes or discs
which are obscene or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
B. Definitions:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment which will or does derive 51 percent or more of its gross sales of books, magazines, films, tapes, discs,
and other periodicals from the sale of books, magazines, films, tapes and discs and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a
segment or section thereof devoted exclusively to the sale or display of such material.
BOOKSTORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films, tapes and discs and other
periodicals for sale, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted exclusively to the sale or display of such material.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: 1. Less than completely and opaquely covered: a) human genitals, pubic region; b) buttock; c) female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: 1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
C. Fee: All applicants for a license to operate an "adult bookstore", as identified herein, shall pay an initial license fee of $5,000.00. Bookstores and
adult bookstores will pay license fees in accordance with the gross fee schedule in section 2-1-12 of this chapter. Additionally, adult bookstores shall
also pay a $1,000.00 annual fee for renewing such a license.
D. Recordkeeping: For the purpose of ensuring the proper zoning of adult bookstores, all bookstores shall keep a record of the sales of all books,
magazines, films, tapes, discs and other periodicals. The records so required shall categorize such sales as either adult or non-adult. Sales are
classified as adult if the particular book, magazine, film, tape, disc or other periodical is distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and the record shall include the sales price of each such
adult or non-adult item. The sales records shall be maintained for a period of 12 months from the date of sale for purposes of auditing by the
business license official or designee.
E. License Suspension And Revocation: The City Council, upon notice and hearing, may suspend the license of a bookstore which fails to comply
with or violates any provision of this chapter or the zoning ordinance until such time as the licensee may correct the items of noncompliance or
violation. Unrecorded sales of a bookstore which holds itself out to the public through signs or advertising as an adult bookstore shall be presumed to
have been of matter distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, and if the unrecorded sales exceed more than 50 percent of gross sales of books, magazines, films, tapes or discs, the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 53/565
establishment shall be deemed an adult use within the meaning of the zoning ordinance for adult uses.
Broadcasting/television/radio/internet, $500.00.
A. This provision does not apply to entities that also provide public utilities as outlined in chapter 15, "Public Utilities", of this title. Entities that also
provide public utilities as outlined in chapter 15 of this title will be required to pay the public utility fee only.
Business services, $150.00, any person or business, unless specifically listed in section 2-1-12 of this chapter or this section, who engages in providing
one or more general business services that is performed internally to a business, including billing, mailing, printing, customer service evaluations,
processing of claims or other paperwork, holding company or other support services such as telephone answering, bookkeeping or similar miscellaneous
support services. This category does not include management companies.
Cemeteries, $200.00.
Check cashing service, for each business providing a check cashing service for either a fee or percentage, $300.00.
Childcare services: Nonmedical services, $150.00; medical services, $300.00.
A. Childcare facilities caring for over 5 children are subject to State regulations and State licensing. All requirements for State licensing must be met
before the City will license a childcare facility.
B. A business that provides services to both children and adults shall not be required to pay more than 1 fee.
Chiropodist, $200.00.
Chiropractor, $200.00.
Civil engineers, $200.00.
Collection agency, or mercantile agency, $150.00.
Concert/rock promoter, $300.00.
Construction services, $150.00, any person or business, not covered by section 2-1-12 of this chapter or this section, who provides accessory construction
services that do not require a contractor license but are outside the scope of a property maintenance license, i.e., inspection services.
Consulting service, $150.00. A "consultant" is defined as a person who provides professional or technical service for a fee.
Contractor, as licensed, defined and classified by Nevada Revised Statutes section 624.020 and by the Nevada State Contractor's Board current rules and
regulations, $250.00 per year. No license shall be issued hereunder to any contractor who is required to hold a license issued by the State Contractor's
Board, unless such contractor is the holder of a valid and existing State license. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 268.095, a person who is licensed
as a contractor pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 624 shall not be required to obtain more than 1 license to engage in the business of
contracting or pay more than 1 license fee related to engaging in the business of contracting, regardless of the number of classifications or
subclassifications of licensing for which the person is licensed pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 624.
A. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person in the employ of the Federal, City, State or County governments, including any political
subdivisions thereof, with wages as the sole compensation; provided, however, that the work performed by such person is confined solely to the
premises owned by him or her respectively; nor to the owners of property, building or improving structures thereon for the occupancy of such owner
and not intended for sale or lease; nor to the sale and installation of any finished products, materials or articles of merchandise, which are not
actually fabricated into and do not become a permanent fixed part of the structure; nor to any construction, alteration, improvement or repair of
personal property.
Convention hall, $100.00.
Cosmetic tattooing, $150.00.
Cosmetological establishment, which is any cosmetological establishment that is licensed or required to be licensed by the State pursuant to the
provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 644 and that provides cosmetology services to the general public. The fee shall be $100.00 annually for
the first professional plus $25.00 per each licensed cosmetologist working inside the facility, updated annually.
Credit bureau, $150.00. A business that provides information based on an individual's borrowing, bill paying habits and provides consumer credit
information.
Credit union, $200.00.
Dance hall/teenager dance hall/dance studio, $100.00.
Delivery service, $200.00.
Dentist, $300.00 for the first professional within the establishment and $200.00 for each additional professional working within the establishment.
Designers or decorators, $150.00.
Detective, private, $150.00.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 54/565
Door to door solicitors and peddlers1, $500.00 annually for each business engaged in door to door solicitation and/or peddling. Additionally, for each
person engaging in door to door solicitation and/or peddling, $100.00 annually.
Drugless practitioner, $200.00; provided, however, that this shall not apply to persons who treat the sick through prayer or spiritual means.
Electrologists, see Cosmetological establishment.
Electronic maintenance, $100.00, including computer repair or similar services.
Employment agency, or intelligence office, $150.00, and the applicant shall first obtain a State license.
Escort service, $650.00.
Express or transfer and warehouse or storage business, or either, $100.00 for each vehicle and a fee based on the square footage or warehouse floor
area as follows:
Square Feet Fees
Under 200,000 $ 300.00
Between 200,000 and 500,000 400.00
Between 500,001 and 750,000 700.00
Between 750,001 and 1,000,000 900.00
Between 1,000,001 and 2,000,000 1,000.00
2,000,001 or more 1,400.00
A. If any portion of the business involves the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise the business shall pay a gross revenue fee in addition to the set
business license fee above.
Field testing, $150.00. A business involved in experimenting, researching, or trials conducted under actual use conditions, instead of under controlled
conditions in a laboratory.
Finance company, $600.00. For the purpose of this section, a "finance company" means any person other than banks, who makes a business of loaning to
others for profit and who holds himself out to the general public as such.
Funeral and undertaking establishment, $200.00.
Graphic design, $150.00.
Hairdressers, see Cosmetological establishment.
Handbills, upon the approval of the business license official, for each person distributing handbills, $50.00.
Health club, $150.00.
Horse riding facility, $100.00.
Hotels and motels2:
A. For each resort hotel, timeshare project, motel, lodging house, rooming house, auto court or tourist camp, the fee shall be $50.00 for 5 to 8 rooms,
$10.00 per room for 9 to 300 rooms, where total rooms are more than 300 rooms, $2,970.00, plus $5.00 per room for each room in addition to the
first over 300 rooms.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, a "resort hotel" is defined as an establishment renting rooms to temporary or transient guests or a timeshare
program having a casino containing not less than 3 games. All other hotels shall be deemed to be commercial as distinguished from resort hotels. It
shall be immaterial as to whether or not the rooms and the casino are separately operated and/or owned. If the rooms and casino are maintained
upon the same premises, whether separately owned and operated or not, the combination of rooms and casino shall be deemed to be 1
establishment and the 1 percent rate shall apply.
C. For the purpose of this section, an "auto court" or "tourist court" is defined as a place, other than a regular hotel or apartment house, where
sleeping accommodations in small buildings are rented to the general public, and whenever more than 3 cabins or small buildings situated in close
proximity to each other are owned or operated by the same person and are rented to the general public, either by the day, month or year, and
whether to transients or permanent residents of the City, the same shall be considered to be a tourist camp or auto court.
Independent massage therapist, $200.00.
Instruction or education, $100.00, any person or business who provides instruction or training to individuals or a group for a specific skill, i.e., personal
training, defense training, etc.
Insurance agency, $200.00 for the first agent plus an additional $100.00 for each agent.
Insurance agent, $200.00.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 55/565
Investment or commercial leasing, $150.00, any person or business that commits money or capital to an endeavor with the expectation of obtaining
additional profit. This includes the leasing of office or building space for commercial use.
Law firm, $300.00 for the first attorney, plus an additional $100.00 for each attorney.
Liquor license fees: See section 2-4-23 of this title.
Locksmiths and safe mechanics:
A. $150.00 for each "locksmith" and "safe mechanic", as defined by Nevada Revised Statutes 655. In addition to completing a regular application,
each applicant for a locksmith's or safe mechanic's license shall present themselves to the Police Department for fingerprinting and furnish the police
or agency any other information necessary to conduct an investigation of such applicant's character and reputation. In all cases where the applicant
for a locksmith's or safe mechanic's license is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, the business license official shall determine who of the
members, principal officers, directors, stockholders, and/or managers shall present themselves to the City Police Agency for fingerprinting.
Fingerprint data will be used to conduct State and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the City Police Agency is
authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada Department of Public Safety to conduct State criminal records checks. The Nevada
Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct national criminal
records checks. The results of the State and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the City Police Agency. Upon completion of the
investigation, the Police Agency shall prepare and submit to the business license official a report containing findings and a recommendation of
approval or disapproval of the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and Public Law 92-544.
B. After the completion of the investigation, the application shall be submitted to the business license official for review. Upon review of the
application and findings of the applicant, the business license official shall either approve or deny the license.
1. Denial: Any license application made pursuant to the provisions of this title may be denied for good cause by the business license official. Good
cause for denial of a license shall include, but not be limited to:
a. The license application is incomplete so as to not contain all information required by this title;
b. All license or investigation fees are not paid;
c. False or fraudulent statements in the application for the license;
d. Failure to obtain a license or permit as required by this title and compliance with requirements of all other departments or divisions prior to
engaging in business;
e. The applicant, or any of its principals, does not qualify for a license;
f. False, fraudulent or misleading statements made to the business license official;
g. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation;
h. The applicant or any of its principals has been convicted of an act that constitutes a crime which involves moral turpitude or involves any local,
State or Federal law or regulation which relates to the same or a similar business, or has been convicted of having solicited, encouraged,
caused or procured another to commit such a violation. For purposes of this subsection, a crime involving moral turpitude is one that necessarily
involves any of the following: an intent to defraud; intentional dishonesty for personal gain; intentional causing of serious injury to another
person; the sale of narcotics or possession of narcotics with intent to sell; or a sexual offense as described in Nevada Revised Statutes
179D.097;
i. The applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft or fraud or any felony.
2. Notice Of Denial: Upon determination of the licensing official to deny an applicant's completed application the City shall cause written notice to
be sent to the applicant by the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial, the
documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon 5 business
days' notice to the City, and the date upon which the denial of the license shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant shall have 10
business days from the receipt of the notice of denial to appeal the same to the City Council. The denial shall remain effective unless and until the
order is rescinded by the City Council.
C. In the event the applicant is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, all members of the firm, partnership or association and all officers,
directors, stockholders and managers of the corporation shall complete an application, be fingerprinted by the Police Agency and receive approval by
the business license official.
D. A nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of $145.00 shall be charged each person required to complete an application. All
nonapplicants required to be fingerprinted pursuant to this section shall provide a nonrefundable $45.00 fingerprinting fee.
Marriage/family counselor, $150.00.
Massage establishment3, $500.00.
Message center or telephone answering service, $100.00.
Mining, milling and manufacturing: Unless otherwise specified in the gross fee section of this chapter4, for each factory, plant and industry engaged in
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 56/565
mining or manufacturing, the fee shall be as follows:
Employees Fee
0 - 10 $ 150.00
11 - 25 300.00
26 - 50 500.00
51 - 100 900.00
More than 100 1,200.00
Mobile home park:
Mobile Homes Fee
1 - 18 $100.00
19 - 30 125.00
31 - 50 175.00
51 - 80 200.00
81 or more 250.00
Mobile home setup and repair, $100.00.
Modeling agency, $100.00.
Mortgage agent, $150.00.
Mortgage and investment, $600.00.
Nonprofit. Must provide proof of nonprofit registration with Nevada Secretary of State, but no fees will be charged.
Nursing home or rest home, $500.00.
Optometrist: For each traveling optometrist or oculist, who does not hold and exhibit an existing license from the State to practice as such, the fee shall be
$100.00 per day. For each optometrist or oculist holding such a license, $250.00.
Osteopath, $300.00.
Parking lots: Any business renting or leasing parking spaces for any reason on a short or long term basis.
Parking Lot Spaces Fee
1 - 4 $ 20.00
5 - 15 60.00
16 - 35 100.00
36 - 50 150.00
Over 50 250.00
Pawnbroker5, $1,000.00. Pawnbrokers accepting motor vehicles as pledged property or in any manner allowing the use of motor vehicles as collateral for
a loan shall obtain a separate automobile pawnbroker license and pay a separate license fee in the amount of $500.00.
Peddlers, see Door to door solicitors and peddlers.
Personal services, $150.00, any person or business that provides a personal service, including, but not limited to reminder service, errand service,
registration service, personal chef/cook and/or shopping service that is not specifically listed in section 2-1-12 of this chapter or this section.
Photographer, $100.00.
Physician/surgeon, $300.00 for the first professional within the establishment and $200.00 for each additional professional working within the
establishment.
Polygraph operator, $150.00.
Private process server, $100.00.
Promoter, $200.00.
Property maintenance, $100.00, including, but not limited to, construction cleanup, handyman, janitorial or maid services, landscape gardening, pool or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 57/565
spa cleaning, power washing, tree trimming or window cleaning, house sitting, monitoring, home security, etc. This does not include activities requiring a
contractor's license pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 624 and all activities in this category must meet the requirements listed under Nevada
Revised Statutes 624.
Property management firm, $200.00. Any business that manages, administers, rents or leases residential or commercial property according to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 635.
Psychiatrist, $300.00 for the first professional within the establishment and $200.00 for each additional professional working within the establishment.
Psychic arts, $350.00.
Publisher, $100.00.
Real estate appraisal, $150.00.
Real estate broker, $150.00.
Real estate developer:
A. Any person engaging in the business of a real estate developer within the City shall obtain from the business license official a business license
and shall pay $500.00 annually.
B. For the purposes of this section, a "real estate developer" is defined as the owner, or the principal agent of an inactive owner, of subdivided land
who offers it for sale in any offering or disposition other than the following:
1. An offer or sale by a purchaser of any subdivision, lot, parcel or unit thereof for his or her own account in a single or isolated transaction.
2. An offer or sale of subdivided land if each lot, parcel or unit being offered or disposed of in any subdivision is 5 acres or more in size.
3. An offer or sale to any person who is engaged in the business of the construction of residential, commercial or industrial buildings for disposition.
4. An offer or sale by any person licensed in the State to construct residential buildings and where such land being offered or disposed of is to
include a residential building when disposition is completed.
5. An offer or sale pursuant to the order of any court of this State.
6. An offer or sale by any government agency.
7. An offer or disposition of any evidence of indebtedness secured by way of any mortgage or deed of trust of real estate; issued by an investment
trust regulated under the laws of this State.
8. An offer or sale of cemetery lots.
C. For the purpose of this section, "subdivided land" is defined as any land or tract of land in another state or in this State from which a sale is
attempted, which is divided or proposed to be divided into 50 or more lots, parcels, units or interest, for the purpose of sale as part of a common
promotional plan and where any subdivision, if offered by a single developer or group of developers acting in concert, and such land is contiguous or
is known, designated or advertised as a common unit or by a common name.
Real estate salesperson, $150.00.
Rent a car agency, $200.00.
Repossession agency, $150.00.
Room reservations, $100.00.
Salvaging, $150.00.
Sanitation, $100.00.
School or trade college, $100.00.
Science practitioners:
A. $350.00 for every person who carries on, practices or professes to practice the business of psychic art, psychic science, palmistry, phrenology, life
reading, fortune telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy,
and demands or receives a fee for the exercise or exhibition of his or her respective art, directly or indirectly, or incidental to the conduct of any other
business, either as a gift, donation or otherwise, or who gives an exhibition thereof at any place where an admission fee is charged.
B. Each applicant for a license under subsection A of this occupation shall pay to the business license official the sum of $145.00, which sum shall
be a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee. Each applicant for a license under subsection A of this occupation shall present themselves
to the Police Department for fingerprinting and furnish the police or agency any other information necessary to conduct an investigation of such
applicant's character and reputation. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct State and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the
fingerprint data, the City Police Agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada Department of Public Safety to conduct State
criminal records checks. The Nevada Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the State and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the City Police
Agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Agency shall prepare and submit to the business license official a report containing findings
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 58/565
and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a)
and Public Law 92-544.
C. After the completion of the investigation, the application shall be submitted to the business license official for review. Upon review of the
application and findings of the applicant, the business license official shall either approve or deny the license.
1. Denial: Any license application made pursuant to the provisions of this title may be denied for good cause by the business license official. Good
cause for denial of a license shall include, but not be limited to:
a. The license application is incomplete so as to not contain all information required by this title;
b. All license or investigation fees are not paid;
c. False or fraudulent statements in the application for the license;
d. Failure to obtain a license or permit as required by this title and compliance with requirements of all other departments or divisions prior to
engaging in business;
e. The applicant, or any of its principals, does not qualify for a license;
f. False, fraudulent or misleading statements made to the business license official;
g. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation;
h. The applicant or any of its principals has been convicted of an act that constitutes a crime which involves moral turpitude or involves any local,
State or Federal law or regulation which relates to the same or a similar business, or has been convicted of having solicited, encouraged,
caused or procured another to commit such a violation. For purposes of this subsection, a crime involving moral turpitude is one that necessarily
involves any of the following: an intent to defraud; intentional dishonesty for personal gain; intentional causing of serious injury to another
person; the sale of narcotics or possession of narcotics with intent to sell; or a sexual offense as described in Nevada Revised Statutes
179D.097;
i. The applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft or fraud or any felony.
2. Notice Of Denial: Upon determination of the licensing official to deny an applicant's completed application the City shall cause written notice to
be sent to the applicant by the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial, the
documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon 5 business
days' notice to the City, and the date upon which the denial of the license shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant shall have 10
business days from the receipt of the notice of denial to appeal the same to the City Council. The denial shall remain effective unless and until the
order is rescinded by the City Council.
D. No employee or other person shall assist the licensee in any audience or reading, nor shall any mechanical device of any description whatsoever
be used by the licensee in the conduct of any interview, audience or reading.
E. This section shall not be construed to apply to doctors, dentists or other medical practitioners licensed by the appropriate board under the Nevada
Revised Statutes or to persons employed by such doctors, dentists or other medical practitioners acting under their direction and control who use
hypnotism as an aid in treatment or as a supplementary form of treatment in the course of their profession.
F. This section shall not be construed to apply to astrologers licensed under this chapter.
Secondhand dealer6, $450.00.
Security guard service, $150.00.
Shooting gallery, $100.00.
Signs - electrical, see Advertising space, leasing, selling, or maintaining billboard and/or electrical signs.
Solicitors, see Door to door solicitors and peddlers.
Stenographer, typist service business, $100.00.
Swap meet, flea market:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "flea market sale" or "swap meet" shall mean and include all offerings of sales of goods, merchandise
or property by a group of individual vendors or dealers at one specified location at a specified time.
B. Application: The application shall specify the place in or on which such sale or meet is to be conducted. The applicant shall submit a written
statement from the property owner of the place giving permission for the conduct of such sale or, if the place is City owned, the approval of the
business license official shall be required.
C. Inspection For Public Safety: No license shall be issued until public safety representatives of the City have inspected the premises to be used for
such sale or meet.
D. Conditional Use Permit: If the applicant intends to conduct such "flea market sales" or "swap meets" on a regular basis, a conditional use permit
shall be required in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 59/565
E. Fee: The following amounts are established as a charge for a license under the provisions of this section: $100.00 per day; and $7.50 per day or
portion of a day per booth, both payable to the business license official at the time of the application.
Tattoo, $150.00. A business that places indelible marks and figures upon the body by inserting pigment under the skin or by the production of scars.
Telephone answering bureau, $50.00.
Timesharing location with acquisition booth and sales presentation room, $300.00.
Tobacco dealer, retail, $100.00 for each tobacco location within the City, payable for the current billing cycle, and when application for license is made
subsequent to the current billing period, the license which is issued thereon shall be issued for the then current billing period. No license fee for less than a
full semiannual period shall be accepted upon any application. Cigarette sales only at a market, service station, convenience store, etc., shall be licensed
at the fee of $100.00.
Tours/guiding, $150.00
Transportation oriented companies, $500.00 including but not limited to taxicabs, charter buses, limousine services, town car services, etc.
Travel agency or bureau, $100.00. A "travel agent" is defined as one acting as the agent of or representing a prospective user in procuring travel or
accommodation facilities and services which are owned and operated by third persons. "Travel agent" does not include tour or junket promoters who solicit
room users or sell or distribute vacation certificates.
Trucking business engaged in the business of delivering goods for resale into the City, $70.00 per vehicle, annually.
Vacation certificates, sellers of, and servicers, $250.00.
Vacation home rental:
A. For each vacation home rental, the fee shall be $50.00.
B. For the purposes of this section, a "vacation home rental" shall mean a privately owned residential dwelling, such as, but not limited to, a singlefamily
detached or multiple-family attached unit, apartment house, condominium, cooperative apartment, duplex, or any portion of such dwellings,
rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period of not less than 2 days and not more than 27 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of
calendar days as full days.
Valet parking service, $100.00. Any business that offers a valet parking service.
Veterinarians/veterinarian hospital/veterinarian clinic, $250.00. Unless otherwise indicated, means any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in
this State or any personnel employed in Nevada by a governmental agency to practice veterinary medicine. "Veterinary hospital" means any establishment
operated by a licensed veterinarian that provides clinical facilities and houses animals for dental, medical or surgical treatment. A veterinary hospital may
have adjacent to it or in connection with it, or as an integral part of it pens, stalls, cages, or kennels for quarantine or observation, in a completely enclosed
building. "Veterinary clinic" means any establishment operated by a licensed veterinarian to provide dental, medical, or surgical treatment, care and
grooming for animals on an outpatient basis.
Wedding chapels, $200.00. (Ord. 540, 6-13-2018; amd. Ord. 541, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-1-14: POLICY AND PROCEDURE; SHOW CAUSE; LICENSE SUSPENSION, LIMITATION, REVOCATION:
A. Investigation, Warnings, And Reporting Of Violations To City Council:
1. The business license official is responsible for the enforcement of business license regulations and ordinances and the investigations thereof. The
business license official or his or her designee shall have authority to enforce compliance with the provisions of this title through the issuance of
warnings to individuals and/or entities for violations of the provisions of this title. Violations of this title which the business license official deems
necessary for additional disciplinary action shall be reported to the City Council for appropriate action.
B. Business Licensing Department To Cooperate With Other Regulatory Agencies:
1. The Business License Department ("department") shall cooperate with other public agencies concerned with the regulation and control of business
licenses, and to that end may exchange with such agencies any and all types of confidential information. When dealing with any gaming matter, the
department may immediately inform the State gaming agencies of any investigation, hearing or other actions that the department, or its members or
agents may take.
2. The department may enter into an agreement with the State gaming agencies such that duplication of effort shall be kept to a minimum; provided,
however, that if the apparent violation is of such a character that action should be taken and if the State gaming agencies fail, refuse or decline to
assume control of the investigation and hearing, then the department shall promptly investigate.
3. The department may enter into an agreement(s) with Liquor and Gaming Boards in the incorporated and unincorporated cities and towns of Clark
County so that overall regulation and control may be more effectively maintained.
C. Complaint Against License; Determination By City Attorney: In addition to any action taken by the business license official or his or her designee, upon
the report by the business license official of a violation charging a licensee with the commission of any act which may be cause for additional
disciplinary action, the City Attorney, or his deputy, shall determine the legal sufficiency of the evidence. If necessary, the business license official may
request the City Attorney and/or Chief of Police to make further investigation of the alleged violation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 60/565
D. Complaint Service:
1. Upon a finding by the City Attorney that there is sufficient evidence of a violation of the regulations or ordinances, or of a threat or hazard to the
public health, safety, morals or welfare, he shall draft a written complaint which shall set forth in ordinary and concise language the violation(s) with
which the licensee or affected person (respondent) is charged. The complaint shall specify the statute, regulation or ordinance which the respondent
is alleged to have violated, or the hazard or threat to the public health, safety, morals, welfare or good order and shall be signed by the business
license official.
2. Upon the issuance of the complaint by the city attorney, the city council shall forthwith review it and determine by vote of the majority of the members
present whether to impose any additional suspension, limitation, revocation or disciplinary action.
3. The complaint shall direct the respondent, within ten (10) days after service thereof upon him or her, to appear by filing with the city clerk, his verified
answer to the complaint. The answer shall state whether or not the respondent requests a hearing, and shall admit or deny the facts alleged in the
complaint and raise all legal and factual issues the respondent desires the city council to consider. The complaint shall notify the respondent that
failure to file an answer shall result in disciplinary action against him or her by default. Service of the complaint shall be made upon the respondent
as provided by the Nevada rules of civil procedure for the service of process in civil actions. Proof of service shall be filed with the city clerk.
4. The city attorney shall thereafter be in charge of presenting the evidence to the city council.
5. Upon the filing of an answer, the mayor shall fix a time and place for hearing and give the respondent not less than fifteen (15) days' notice. The city
clerk shall give notice of such hearing date and time to the respondent and the city attorney by depositing in the United States certified mail a true
copy of the notice enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully paid, addressed to the respondent and his attorney, if any, and the city
attorney at the address shown on the pleadings.
E. Form Of Answer; Filing Deadline:
1. The answer of the complaint shall be signed and verified by the respondent, or his or her agent, served upon the city attorney which prepared the
complaint, and filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after service upon respondent of the complaint. The complaint and answer shall form the
pleadings for the hearing.
2. The answer shall read substantially as follows:
BEFORE THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MESQUITE, COUNTY OF CLARK, STATE OF NEVADA, In the Matter of:
Disciplinary Action Against
)
A.B.
)
ANSWER
)
)
To the Members of the City Council:
(1) The respondent does not request a hearing. (Note: If a hearing is desired, omit word "not".)
(2) The Respondent admits the following facts set forth in the complaint:
(3) The Respondent denies the following facts set forth in the complaint:
(4) The Respondent believes the following defenses and explanations should be considered by the City Council:
(5) The Respondent raises the following legal defenses:
LICENSEE
3. Upon the filing of an answer, the respondent shall be entitled to a hearing on the merits upon the issues denied by the answer.
F. Failure Of Licensee To Answer Charges Deemed Admission Of Guilt:
1. Failure of the respondent to answer within the time specified shall be deemed an admission by him or her of the commission of the act or acts
charged in the complaint. Thereupon, the city council shall forthwith impose disciplinary action, as the case may be, and shall give notice of such
disciplinary action by mailing a true copy thereof by United States certified mail in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully prepaid, addressed to
the respondent at his latest address of record.
2. Failure to file an answer within the time designated shall further constitute a waiver of respondent's right to a hearing and to judicial review of any
decision or order, but the city council, in its discretion, may nevertheless order a hearing. All affirmative defenses must be specifically stated and
unless objection is taken in the answer, all objections to the form of complaint are waived.
G. Subpoena And Compensation Of Witnesses: At any time prior to a hearing or during a hearing before the city council, the council shall issue subpoenas
and subpoenas duces tecum at the request of a party. All witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than parties, officers or employees of the
state of Nevada or any political subdivision thereof, shall receive fees and mileage in the same amounts and under the same circumstances as
provided by law for witnesses in civil actions in the Nevada 8th judicial district court. Such fees shall be paid by the party at whose request the witness
is subpoenaed and the city council may, in its discretion, award as costs the amount of all expenses of witnesses to the prevailing party.
H. Witness; Affidavit; Service: The testimony of any material witness residing within or without the state of Nevada may be taken by deposition in the
manner provided by the Nevada rules of civil procedure. Affidavits may be received in evidence at any hearing of the city council in accordance with the
following:
1. The party wishing to use such affidavit shall, not less than four (4) days prior to the day set for the hearing, serve upon the opposing party or
counsel, either personally or by certified mail, a copy of the affidavit which he proposes to introduce in evidence together with a notice as provided in
subsection H3 of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 61/565
2. Unless the opposing party, within two (2) days after such service, mails or delivers to the proponent a request to cross examine affiant, his right to
cross examine such affiant is waived and the affidavit, if introduced in evidence, shall be given the same effect as if the affiant had testified orally. If
an opportunity to cross examine an affiant is not afforded after the request is made in accordance herewith, the affidavit may be introduced in
evidence, but shall be given only the same effect as other hearsay evidence.
3. The notice referred to in subsection H1 of this section shall be substantially in the following form:
The accompanying affidavit of (name of affiant) will be introduced as evidence at the hearing set for the day of , 20 .
(name of affiant) will not be called to testify orally and you will not be entitled to question him or her unless you notify the undersigned that you
wish to cross-examine him or her. To be effective your request must be mailed or delivered to the undersigned on or before two (2) days from the
date of this notice and the enclosed affidavit are served upon you.
(Party or Counsel)
(Address)
I. Hearing Procedure; Record: The following procedures shall apply at all hearings of the city council:
1. A quorum of the city council shall be present at every hearing, and they shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of the hearing and shall
enforce all decisions with respect thereto.
2. No member of the city council who did not hear the evidence shall vote on the decision.
3. The proceedings at the hearing shall be reported either stenographically and/or by audio recorder.
4. Oral evidence shall be taken upon oath or affirmation administered by the city clerk.
5. Every party to a hearing shall have the right:
a. To call and examine witnesses; and
b. To introduce exhibits relevant to the issues of the case, including the transcript of testimony at an investigative hearing conducted by, or on behalf
of, the city manager or city council; and
c. To cross examine opposing witnesses on matters relative to the issues of the case, even though the matter was not covered in a direct
examination; and
d. To impeach any witness regardless of which party called him or her to testify; and
e. To offer rebuttal evidence.
6. If the licensee does not testify in his own behalf, he may be called and examined as if under cross examination.
7. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted and
shall be sufficient to support a finding if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in
a civil action.
8. The parties or their counsel may, by written stipulation, agree that certain specified evidence may be admitted even though such evidence might
otherwise be subject to objection.
J. Judicial Notice; Evidence Admissible:
1. The city council may take official notice of any generally accepted information or technical or scientific matter within the area of business licensee
conduct and control and of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state.
2. The parties shall be informed of any information, matter or fact so noticed, and shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute such
information, matter or fact by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authorities, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the city
council.
K. Amendment; Filing Of Amended Pleadings: The city council may, in its discretion, before submission of the case for decision, permit the filing of
amended or supplemental pleadings and shall notify all parties thereof, and provide a reasonable opportunity for objections thereto.
L. Misconduct During Hearing; Referral To District Court; Contempt: If any person in proceedings before the city council disobeys or resists any lawful
order or refuses to respond to a subpoena, or refuses to take the oath or affirmation as a witness or thereafter refuses to be examined, or is guilty of
misconduct during the hearing or near the place thereof so as to obstruct the proceedings, the city council may, in addition to remedies available to it,
certify the facts to the district court. The court shall thereupon issue an order directing the person to appear before the court and show cause why he
should not be punished for contempt. The court order and a copy of the statement of the city council shall be served on the person cited to appear.
Thereafter the court shall have jurisdiction of the matter; and the proceedings shall be had, the same penalties may be imposed, and the person
charged may purge themselves of the contempt as in the trial of a civil action before a district court.
M. Written Decision Of City Council; Majority Vote Necessary: After the hearing of a contested matter, the city council shall render a written decision on the
merits which shall contain a determination of the issues presented and the disciplinary action to be imposed, if any, and shall thereafter make and enter
its written order in conformity with such decision. The affirmative votes of a majority of the city council hearing the evidence shall be required to impose
any disciplinary action. Copies of the decision and order shall be served on the parties personally or sent to them by certified mail. The decision shall
become and remain effective upon such service, unless the city council shall otherwise order.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 62/565
N. Aggrieved Party; Petition For Rehearing: Within ten (10) days after service of an order of the city council, any party aggrieved may petition for a
rehearing. Such petition shall not be granted except upon a showing that there is additional evidence which is material, necessary and reasonably
calculated to change the decision of the city council. The petition shall be supported by an affidavit of the moving party or his or her counsel showing
with particularity the materiality and necessity of the additional evidence and the reason why it was not introduced at the hearing. Upon rehearing,
rebuttal evidence to the additional evidence shall be permitted. After rehearing, the city council may modify its decision and order as the additional
evidence may warrant.
O. Judicial Review: Any person aggrieved by final decision or order of the city council made after hearing or rehearing as heretofore provided, and whether
or not a petition for rehearing was filed, may obtain a judicial review of questions of law thereof in the Nevada 8th judicial district court.
1. The judicial review shall be instituted by filing a petition within twenty (20) days after the effective date of the final decision or order. A petition for
review may not be filed while a petition for rehearing is pending before the city council. The petition for review shall set forth the order or decision
appealed from, and shall set forth the specific rulings on questions of law which the petition contends constitutes error.
2. Copies of the petition shall be served upon the city council and all other parties of record, or their counsel of record, either personally or by certified
mail.
3. The filing of the petition shall not stay enforcement of the decision or order of the city council, but the city council itself may grant a stay upon such
terms and conditions as it deems proper, upon timely filed motion.
4. Upon written request of petitioner and upon payment of such reasonable costs and fees as the city council may prescribe, the complete record on
review, or such parts thereof as are designated by the petitioner, shall be prepared by the city council or designated city employee.
5. The complete record on review shall include copies of all pleadings in the case, all notices and interim orders issued by the city council in connection
with the case, all stipulations, the decision and the order appealed from, a transcript of all testimony, evidence and proceedings at the hearing, the
exhibits admitted or rejected, and any other papers in the case.
6. A copy of any document may be used in lieu of an original. The record on review may be shortened by stipulation of all parties to the review
proceedings. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-1-15: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A. Penalty: Except as otherwise specified, every person violating any of the provisions of licensing ordinances or regulations shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in
the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs.
B. License Revocation: In addition to the penalties named in subsection A of this section, any person convicted of wilfully violating any of the provisions of
this title shall be subject to having his or its license to do business within the city revoked by the city council.
C. Authority To Issue Citations: The business license official and his or her designees are authorized to prepare, sign and serve misdemeanor citations,
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 171, to enforce the provisions of licensing ordinances, and shall diligently prosecute the violation thereof. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
Chapter 2
TAXES
ARTICLE A. ROOM TAX
2-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
RESORT HOTEL: An establishment renting rooms to temporary or transient guests or a timeshare project having a casino containing not less than three
(3) games. All other hotels and timeshare projects shall be deemed to be commercial as distinguished from resort hotels. It shall be immaterial whether or
not the rooms and the casino are separately owned and/or operated.
TRANSIENT LODGING: Any facility, structure, or portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by a person or persons
who pay rent for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, resort hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, lodging house, timeshare project,
vacation home, vacation trailer parks, apartment house, recreational vehicle park/campground, or other similar structure or facility, or portion thereof.
A. This does not include medical or educational establishments; any facility where individuals are detained and housed under legal restraint such as a
jail or orphanage; establishments or housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or education purposes by an organization exempt
from property taxes under state laws; any room within a private dwelling or a single-family unit if the permanent or principal owner also resides in and
occupies the dwelling; any unit within a timeshare project occupied by an owner, or the nonpaying guests of an owner, of a timeshare in a timeshare
project, or in the timeshare plan of which the timeshare project is a part, who has the right to use or occupy a unit, pursuant to: 1) timeshare
instrument; or 2) a timeshare exchange program.
VACATION RENTAL: A privately owned residential dwelling, such as, but not limited to, a single-family detached or multiple-family attached unit,
apartment house, condominium, cooperative apartment, duplex, or any portion of such dwellings, rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period
of not less than two (2) days and not more than twenty seven (27) consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days. (Ord. 509,
1-10-2017, eff. 1-15-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 63/565
2-2A-2:TAX IMPOSED:
The following tax is effective January 15, 2017:
Convention And
Visitors Authority
Convention And Visitors
Authority Expansion
Nevada
Department Of
Taxation
Transportation
District
Clark County
School
District
State
Education
City Of
Mesquite
Combined
Transient
Lodging Tax
Resort
hotel
4% 0.5% 0.375% 1% 1.625% 3% 2% 12.5%
Transient
lodging
4% 0.5% 0.375% 1% 1.625% 3% 2% 12.5%
Vacation
rental
4% 0.5% 0.375% 1% 1.625% 3% 2% 12.5%
A. Such tax shall be limited to room rentals received from temporary or transient guests. Twenty eight (28) days of continuous occupancy or rental of any
transient lodging shall constitute permanent occupancy. Occupants of such room rentals would be considered resident guests and are not subject to
payment of the room tax from and after twenty eight (28) days' continued residence. (Ord. 509, 1-10-2017, eff. 1-15-2017)
2-2A-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
A. Due Monthly: The license tax fixed and imposed in section 2-2A-2 of this article shall be paid monthly by operators of the business designated. Payment
shall be due and payable the first day of the calendar month or fraction thereof and will be delinquent after the tenth of the month. Such tax shall be
paid to the city manager, or his designee.
B. Delinquency In Payment:
1. Interest Charged: Any operator of the business designated herein failing to pay such tax within the time prescribed by this article shall pay, in
addition to such tax, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount thereof, plus interest on the amount of such tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per
month, or fraction thereof, from the first of the month in which such tax became due and payable until the date of payment.
2. Collection: Whenever any operator shall be delinquent in the payment of any obligation imposed hereunder, the city shall collect all sums due the city
from such operator by appropriate legal action. The cost of collection shall be paid by the operator. (Ord. 509, 1-10-2017, eff. 1-15-2017)
2-2A-4: GUEST TO ABSORB TAX:
No operator shall advertise that the tax or surcharge herein provided will be absorbed by the operator or that the operator will directly or indirectly fail to
collect the tax from paying guests in addition to the regular rental charge. (Ord. 509, 1-10-2017, eff. 1-15-2017)
2-2A-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The city manager, with the consent and approval of the city council, is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this article and is authorized and
empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to the administration thereof. (Ord. 509, 1-10-2017, eff. 1-15-2017)
ARTICLE B. GAMING TAX
2-2B-1: IMPOSITION OF LICENSE TAXES:
Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 268.460, commencing on the effective date of incorporation of the city, there hereby is fixed and imposed on
operators of gaming within the city, license taxes for revenues, in addition to license taxes heretofore and hereafter fixed and imposed1, computed
according to the following schedule:
Casinos having 6 or more games, $40 .00
per game per quarter
Casinos having 2 to 51/2 games, 25 .00
per game per quarter
Casinos having less than 2 games, 10 .00
per game per quarter
(In determining the number of games, craps, roulette, black jack, bingo games, race and sports books and wire betting service, each shall be considered a
full game. All other games shall be considered 1/2 game each at 1/2 of the game charge.)
Slot machines, if more than 12 within $ 2 .50
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 64/565
one establishment, each slot machine
per quarter
Slot machines, if 12 or less in one 1 .00
establishment, each slot machine
per quarter
(Ord. 45, 6-23-1988)
2-2B-2: RATIFICATION AND AUTHORIZATION:
All action heretofore taken by the city council, the city and the officers thereof, in the imposition, levy and collection of the license taxes on operators of
gaming and certain hotels, motels and short term rental facilities (the "license taxes") by article A of this chapter, the gaming ordinances2 and this article
(collectively, the "license tax ordinances") and by the authority in the sale and issuance of securities payable therefrom, is hereby ratified, approved and
confirmed to the extent not inconsistent herewith and the bonds are hereby authorized to be issued. (Ord. 45, 6-23-1988)
2-2B-3: ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE TAXES:
The proceeds of the license taxes, except license taxes in the amount of two percent (2%), five percent (5%) and five percent (5%) levied by ordinance 8,
subsections 2-2A-1A, B and C, respectively, of this chapter (pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes sections 268.095 and 268.096 through 268.0964) are
hereby assigned to the county for pledge by the authority in the name and on behalf of the county to the payment of the bonds or any obligations refunding
them, and otherwise the proceeds of the license taxes are hereby made available as provided in the June 1, 1988 bond resolution, and as provided by the
recreation act, the bond act, and otherwise provided by law, subject to assignments of license tax proceeds by the city councils of the cities of Boulder City,
Henderson, Las Vegas and North Las Vegas, and by the board of county commissioners of the county. (Ord. 45, 6-23-1988)
2-2B-4: AGREEMENT TO JUNE 1, 1988 BOND RESOLUTION:
The city consents to and agrees to be bound by the provisions of the June 1, 1988 bond resolution to the extent it appertains to the city, including, without
limitation, the provisions concerning the license taxes levied by the city. (Ord. 45, 6-23-1988)
2-2B-5: FILING OF ARTICLE:
A certified copy of this article shall be filed forthwith with the secretary of the authority. (Ord. 45, 6-23-1988)
2-2B-6: ARTICLE IRREPEALABLE:
This article shall be and remain irrepealable (and it shall not be amended or supplemented in any manner which may materially and adversely affect the
security for the payment of the bonds or any bonds refunding them) commencing the laterof the date the bonds are issued or the effective date of this
article until the bonds or any bonds refunding them and the interest on the bonds or such refunding bonds shall be fully paid, canceled and discharged, or
until provision shall be made therefor in the manner provided in the June 1, 1988 bond resolution. Nothing herein shall be deemed to be an assignment or
pledge of other than the proceeds of the license taxes in the respective percentages specified in the license tax ordinances. (Ord. 45, 6-23-1988)
Chapter 3
GAMBLING
ARTICLE A. GAMBLING LICENSES
2-3A-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
A. It is found and declared that the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city require the regulation and control of all persons
engaged in, associated with, in control of, or having the right to any portion of the profits of the business of gambling games and devices. All such
"persons", as defined in section 2-3A-2 of this article, shall be licensed or controlled so as to protect the public health, safety, morals, good order and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city and to assist the gaming industry to foster its stability and growth. It is further found and declared that the
right to obtain such license is a privilege and that the operation of such gambling facility, when authorized by such license, is a privileged business
subject to regulations, and that the license may be revoked for cause. The burden of proving qualification to receive or retain any license or finding of
suitability is on the applicant.
B. The city council believes that the gaming industry is vitally important to the economy of the city and the general welfare of the inhabitants thereof and
that the continued growth and success of the gaming industry is dependent upon public confidence and trust that licensed gaming is conducted
honestly and competitively and that the gaming industry is free from criminal and corruptive elements. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
C. These regulations define business license department procedure and regulate gaming operations within the jurisdiction of the city council, but do not in
any degree limit the general power of the city council to grant or deny applications for licenses and to impose conditions, limitations and restrictions
upon a license or to restrict, revoke or suspend a license for cause after hearing, or to immediately suspend or limit a license in any emergency. These
regulations are to be liberally interpreted so as to grant the city council broad final discretion in all licensing matters. (Ord. 42, 10-22-1987)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 65/565
2-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in the gaming provisions contained in this chapter, the words and terms defined in this section have the meanings ascribed to them unless a
different meaning clearly appears in the context. Any word or term not defined in this section which appears in this chapter shall have the definition
ascribed by the Nevada gaming control act and statutes ancillary thereto, and as defined by the regulations of the Nevada gaming commission, unless a
different meaning clearly appears in the context.
APPLICANT: Any person who has applied for or is about to apply for a city gaming license or finding of suitability.
APPLICATION: A written request containing complete and accurate information required by the applicable ordinance for the issuance of a city gaming
license, finding of suitability, or for approval for any act or transaction for which city council approval is required or permitted by the city gaming ordinances.
CITY: The incorporated city of Mesquite, Nevada.
CONDITION: The action of the city council resulting from a disciplinary hearing whereby terms are imposed upon the licensee with which it must comply in
order to avoid a license revocation or suspension.
CONTROL: The direct or indirect possession of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of an entity whether through the
ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise.
CONVICTED: A finding of guilt as an adult offender by a jury or trial court, whether said finding is appealed or not. A person so convicted shall be deemed
convicted until such finding is overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction or by pardon.
DISCIPLINARY ACTION: Action taken by the city council to suspend, restrict, limit, condition, revoke or impose other sanctions upon a gaming license or
licensee.
ESTABLISHMENT: Only that portion of any building or premises wherein or whereon any gaming is conducted or where slot machines are located for play.
FINDING OF SUITABILITY: After investigation, a person is found to comply with the requirements of this chapter which are prerequisite to involvement
with a gaming license. This chapter authorizes the city council to require that certain persons who are directly or indirectly involved with gaming licensees
be found suitable for such involvement so long as that relationship continues. A finding of suitability relates only to the specific involvement for which it is
made. If the nature of the involvement changes from that for which the applicant has been found suitable, or if, in the judgment of the city council, new
information concerning the applicant's suitability has become available, he may be required to submit himself to a new determination of suitability to the
city council.
GAME OR GAMBLING GAME: Any wager, pari-mutuel pool or any banking or percentage game played with cards, dice or any mechanical or electrical
device or machine for money, property, checks, credit or any representative of value, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, faro, monte,
roulette, keno, bingo, fan tan, panguingui, solo, whist, baccarat, big six, chuck a luck, pai gow, wheel of fortune, chemin de fer, dai shu, twenty one, seven
and a half, big injun, klondike, craps, poker or slot machine.
GAMING CREDIT INSTRUMENT: A marker, IOU, check, hold check or other similar instrument evidencing the granting of gaming credit by a licensee to a
patron.
GAMING LICENSE: Any license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter which authorizes the person named therein to engage in gaming.
GAMING OR GAMBLING: To deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain or expose for play any game.
LICENSEE: Any person to whom a valid gaming license has been issued.
LIVE GAME: All games or gambling games conducted by a dealer, save and except for mechanical, electronic or electrical gaming devices and slot
machines.
MINOR: For the purpose of this chapter, a natural person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
OPERATION: The conduct of gaming.
OPERATOR: Any person who operates, leases, rents, places or installs for a fixed amount or percentage, or for any consideration whatsoever or however
determined, any slot machine, but does not, however, include any person owning or leasing by "capital lease", as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes
section 463.01045, any slot machine which is installed in a place of business or operated by such person.
PERSON: Includes any association, corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business association, as well as a natural person.
PREMISES: The tract of land on which a gaming establishment is located and all buildings, restaurants, hotel or motel structures, recreational facilities,
shops, arcades, support and maintenance rooms and parking lots which are connected and operated in such an integral manner as to form a part of the
same operation or complex as the gaming establishment, whether under separate leases or not.
QUARTER OR CALENDAR QUARTER: A period of three (3) consecutive months commencing on the first days of January, April, July or October, in any
year.
RESORT HOTEL AND CASINO: A building or complex of buildings or other structures kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a
hotel or motel wherein food is served, in which four hundred (400) or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations, and which has a minimum of the
following amenities, all of which are directly connected and operated in such a manner as to form a part of the same operation or complex:
A. One main bar with at least thirty (30) seats wherein alcoholic liquors are dispensed by the drink to customers at such bar; and
B. One service bar wherein alcoholic liquors are prepared for service only at tables and not direct to customers at such bar; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 66/565
C. One facility with at least twenty five (25) seats wherein live entertainment is provided by at least one professional entertainer (musician or variety
artist) for at least six (6) hours per day, six (6) days per week; and
D. Three (3) separate restaurants: 1) a coffee shop open for service to the public twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, which is
used, kept, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where meals are served and which has a seating capacity of more than
sixty (60) persons at one time at tables; 2) a buffet; and 3) a fine dining/gourmet room; and
E. A recreational facility comprised of a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the resort parcel, which includes at least three (3) of the following:
1. Four (4) regulation tennis courts with locker rooms and attendant facilities; or
2. One regular swimming pool with dimensions of not less than twenty feet (20') in width, thirty five feet (35') in length, and six feet (6') in depth; or
3. One regular golf course consisting of at least eighteen (18) holes comprising at least one hundred (100) acres; or
4. One gymnasium with dimensions of at least forty feet (40') in width, sixty feet (60') in length, and twenty feet (20') in height, and equipped with
exercise equipment;
5. A bowling alley with at least twenty four (24) lanes; or
6. A movie theater with at least four (4) screens; or
7. A water park on a minimum of five (5) acres; or
8. Park areas with elements such as picnic areas, playgrounds, and jogging paths; or
9. Skating rinks at least fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet; or
10. Spas; or
11. A minimum of five (5) retail shops; or
12. Recreational vehicle parks; or
13. In addition to the above listed amenities, an applicant may suggest another amenity not listed above, subject to approval by the city council.
F. Valet parking available to guests; and
G. Convention center/meeting space; and
H. A resort hotel and casino of up to six hundred seventy five (675) rooms must have a minimum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of casino floor
space, or sixty (60) square feet of casino floor space per room, whichever is greater. A resort hotel and casino with over six hundred seventy five
(675) rooms must have a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet of casino floor space or fifty (50) square feet of casino floor space per
room whichever is greater; and
I. Valet parking; and
J. A swimming pool of at least thirty feet by fifty feet (30' x 50') in size.
Any resort hotel licensed and operating at the time ordinance 263 becomes legally effective shall not be required to conform to the additional
requirements imposed by ordinance 263 unless and until the premises are not licensed for gaming for over eighteen (18) consecutive months, and
thereafter the premises shall be deemed nonconforming and must comply with the additional requirements imposed by ordinance 263. Any resort
hotel constructed and opened prior to the time ordinance 263 becomes legally effective, but is currently closed, shall be deemed to conform to the
additional requirements imposed by ordinance 263 if it shares two (2) or more of the amenities listed in subsection E of this definition and the
convention area described in subsection G of this definition with one or more licensed resort hotels and within eighteen (18) months of its reopening
presents plans for the construction of at least one additional amenity upon or contiguous to its property. It shall not be required to comply with
subsection H of this definition or have at least four hundred (400) rooms.
RESTRICT: In regard to city council action for violation of law, to limit the number and/or types of games which may be operated, the hours and days
games may be operated, and any other limitation or confinement placed upon a licensee's operation.
SLOT MACHINE: A. Any electronic, mechanical, electrical or other device, contrivance or machine which, upon insertion of a coin, token or similar object
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 67/565
therein, or upon payment of any consideration whatsoever, is available for play or operation, the play or operation of which, whether by reason of the skill
of the operator or application of the element of chance, or both, may deliver or entitle the person playing or operating the machine to receive cash,
premiums, merchandise, tokens or anything of value whatsoever, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machine or in any other manner
whatsoever.
B. If a machine has multiple capacities, the director of business activity shall make a determination, consistent with the determination made by the state
gaming control board, whether the machine constitutes two (2) or more slot machines for the purpose of this chapter based on the number of payout
devices, coin receptacles or slots, handles or other devices for multiple players, or means of determining winners.
SLOT OPERATOR: A licensee engaged in the business of placing slot machines upon the business premises of another under any agreement whereby
consideration is paid or is payable for the placement of such slot machines, whether the consideration is measured by a percentage of revenue derived
from such machines or by a fixed fee or otherwise.
SPORTS POOL: The business of accepting wagers on sporting events by any system or method of wagering other than the system known as the parimutuel
method of wagering.
WAGER: Two (2) or more contracting parties, having mutual rights in respect to the money or other thing wagered or "staked", where each of the parties
necessarily risks something, and has a chance to make something upon the happening or not happening of an uncertain event, where the parties have no
interest in the event except that arising from the possibility of such gain or loss. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 42, 10-22-1987; Ord 49, 3-23-1989; Ord.
263, 1-16-2002)
2-3A-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
A. License Required:
1. It is unlawful for any person to deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain or expose for play within the city any gambling game, slot machine, race
book or sports pool; or to receive, directly or indirectly, any compensation or reward or any percentage or share of the money or property played, for
keeping, running or carrying on any gambling game, slot machine, race book or sports pool, without first having procured a license as herein
provided.
2. Except for those persons engaged in the manufacture or distribution of gaming equipment, and those persons required to be found suitable pursuant
to Nevada Revised Statutes 463A, any person required to be licensed or to be found suitable by the Nevada gaming commission in connection with
any gaming activity taking place within the city shall apply for licensing or finding of suitability to the city, as herein provided, within thirty (30) days
after the application to the state gaming control board.
3. If a person required by this section to submit an application fails to do so within the required time and the city council makes a finding of unsuitability
for that reason, the gaming licensee with whom the person is associated shall immediately terminate its association with that person.
B. Posting License; Failure As Grounds For Revocation: All licenses issued for gambling games, devices and slot machines of every character and
description shall be posted in a conspicuous place where such gambling games, devices and slot machines are installed, in order that they may be
readily available for inspection by authorized state and city officials. A failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall constitute grounds
for revocation of any such license not so posted.
C. Agreement To Conform To Law: Acceptance of a city gaming license or renewal thereof by a licensee constitutes an agreement on the part of such
licensee to be bound by all of the regulations of the city council as the same now are or may hereafter be amended or promulgated. It is the
responsibility of the licensee to keep himself informed of the content of all such regulations, and ignorance thereof will not excuse violations.
D. License Nontransferable:
1. No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable by the licensee to any other person, and a license shall be valid only for
the particular establishment described thereon and for the designated number and type of slot machines, games or devices for which it is issued.
Unless otherwise specifically provided by state law, the license is not an asset of the licensed entity and may not be inherited, sold, assigned,
maintained or operated by a trustee or receiver unless approved by appropriate state and city licensing agencies.
2. A gaming license, even though issued to a corporation or other entity, is personal to the disclosed and investigated owners, stockholders and
managers. No person may hold an ownership interest in, or share in the revenue from a licensed gaming establishment or operation until licensed or
found suitable as provided in this article. Any sale or transfer of ownership of a licensed entity, or granting of any right to all or a portion of the profits
derived from a gaming operation to any person which is not approved as provided herein, is grounds for suspension, restriction or revocation of any
and all gaming licenses which that entity may hold.
E. Exemptions From Provisions: Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit social games played in private homes or residences. (Ord. 5, 8-16-
1984)
2-3A-4: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION; INFORMATION; RESTRICTIONS:
A. License Information: An applicant may apply for any one or more gaming licenses consistent with the requirements and conditions of this article. The
applicant shall provide on the initial or renewal application a complete description of the games, devices and/or slot machines which the applicant
desires to operate and the establishment wherein the gaming will take place. That information shall be entered on the license prior to issuance. The
license issued by the city council shall entitle the licensee and employees thereof to carry on, conduct and operate only the specific type and class of
slot machines, games or devices for which the license is issued, and for the period of time and at the location stated thereon. (Ord. 317, 3-22-2005)
B. Classifications: Gaming licenses are classified as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 68/565
1. Unrestricted Live Game License: One which permits the operation of an unrestricted number of live games, but such license is limited to resort
hotels.
2. Class A Slot Machine License: One which permits the operation of a total of fifteen (15) or fewer slot machines incidental to the primary business at
the establishment wherein the slot machines are to be located (nonresort hotels, supermarkets, department stores, theaters, restaurants, bars,
taverns, etc.), regardless of ownership of the slot machines must be an "A" occupancy, with a minimum building size of three thousand (3,000)
square feet of interior commercial floor space. A reduction may be made to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of interior commercial floor
space in unusual circumstances only after review and approval by the building department, licensing department, planning department, and any
other departments as necessary. However, any establishment operating under a class B slot machine and restricted live game license prior to
January 1, 1990, in which more slot machines were installed than that allowed under a class A slot machine license, regardless of whether the
licensee is the operator of the primary business or not, or were operating live gaming under a class B license, shall not be required to conform to the
requirements of this section, unless and until the premises are not licensed for gaming for over eighteen (18) consecutive months, and thereafter that
the premises shall be deemed nonconforming and must comply with the provisions of this section.
An applicant for a class A slot machine license may submit an affidavit signed by the business owner and applicant stating whether or not the owner,
lessor or operator of the establishment in which the machines or devices will be installed receives a flat fee rental or a percentage of the return from
such machines.
3. Class B Slot Machine License: One which permits the operation of a total of five (5) or fewer slot machines incidental to the primary business at the
establishment wherein the slot machines are to be located and where the business premises is: a) less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of
interior commercial floor space; or b) if the business is a restaurant, bar or tavern with an occupant load of less than fifty (50) patrons at one time.
4. Class C Slot Machine License: One which permits the operation of an unrestricted number of slot machines, but such license is limited to resort
hotels.
5. Operator License: One which permits an "operator", as defined in section 2-3A-2 of this article, to operate, lease, rent, place or install any slot
machine at a business establishment owned or operated by another person.
6. Bingo License: One which permits the playing of bingo. A separate license is required for the game of bingo and may only be issued to resort hotels.
No bingo licensee shall offer any prize, inducement, token or any other form of consideration for the playing of bingo other than cash prize money.
7. Sports Book License: One which permits a gaming establishment to accent wagers on sporting events by any system or method of wagering.
8. Race Book License: One which permits a gaming establishment to accept wagers on racing events by any system or method of wagering. (Ord. 429,
8-25-2009, eff. 9-17-2009)
C. Flat Rate Rental: A license shall not be required of a location owner who rents or leases out space for fifteen (15) or fewer machines on a flat rental
basis and who does not participate in the profits nor exercises supervision or control over the operation of the slot machines.
D. License Issuance Restricted To Certain Hotels And Motels:
1. No new application for a class C slot machine license, or for any live game license, shall be granted except to a resort hotel, as defined in section 2-
3A-2 of this article.
2. In the event a class C slot machine or live game licensee does not commence business within sixty (60) days without specific approval of the city
council, such license shall be limited, conditioned, suspended or revoked as provided in article B of this chapter, unless the licensee cannot
commence operating said facilities or discontinues the availability of such facilities to the public due to remodeling, labor disputes or reasons beyond
its control, then said licensee shall petition the city council, which, for good cause shown, may grant additional sixty (60) day extensions; not to
exceed, however, a total period of one year including said initial sixty (60) day period. (Ord. 317, 3-22-2005)
2-3A-5: LICENSE LIMITS:
A. The number of gaming licenses is limited as follows: unrestricted live games license, which permits the operation of an unrestricted number of live
games and is limited to resort hotels, and class C slot machine license, which permits the operation of an unrestricted number of slot machines and is
limited to resort hotels, shall not be limited as to number.
B. Other licenses are limited as follows:
Licenses Limitations
Class A slot machines Maximum of 15 slot machines
Class B slot machines Maximum of 5 slot machines
Operator's license, bingo license, sports book and race book licenses No restrictions per population
(Ord. 317, 3-22-2005)
2-3A-6: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE OR FINDING OF SUITABILITY:
A. Any person whom the city council determines is qualified to receive a gaming license or finding of suitability in any capacity under the provisions of this
article, having due consideration for the proper protection of the health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city,
may be issued such gaming license or finding of suitability. The burden of proving qualification to receive any gaming license or finding of suitability is
on the applicant.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 69/565
B. An application to receive a gaming license or finding of suitability may be granted if the city council is satisfied that the applicant:
1. Is a person of good character, honesty and integrity.
2. Is a person whose prior activities, criminal record, if any, reputation, habits and associations do not pose a threat to the public interest of the city or to
the effective regulation and control of gaming, or create or enhance the dangers of unsuitable, unfair or illegal practices, methods and activities in the
conduct of gaming or the carrying on of the business and financial arrangements incidental thereto, or give to the gaming industry of the city an
unreputable, unsavory or dishonest reputation or bring discredit or dishonor to the gaming industry.
3. Proposes to conduct or be involved with gaming at a location which is a suitable location as determined in accordance with section 2-3A-17 of this
article.
4. Proposes to conduct or be involved with gaming in premises which meet all requirements of city zoning, building, fire and health codes.
C. A gaming license or finding of suitability shall not be granted unless the applicant has satisfied the city council that:
1. He has adequate business probity, competence and experience in gaming.
2. The proposed financing of the entire operation is:
a. Adequate for the nature of the proposed operation; and
b. From a suitable source.
D. The city council may, in its discretion, grant a license to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, business trust or organization or other
association which complies with the provisions of this article.
E. In conformity with the policy of this article, the city council may, in addition to the above, deny a license in its discretion when:
1. By the granting of such license, a disorderly house or place disruptive to the peace and welfare of the neighborhood may be maintained.
2. The granting of such license may adversely affect the valuation of adjoining and contiguous property.
3. In the judgment of the city council, there are ample and sufficient licensees and establishments in the area or place for which the license is to be
used to properly serve such area or place.
4. In the judgment of the city council, the particular business which proposes to be associated with gaming is not compatible with gaming, or will not
enhance the image or welfare of the city. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3A-7: LICENSING OF CORPORATIONS AND OTHER ASSOCIATIONS:
A gaming license may be issued to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or other form of association, which shall have:
A. Provided the application required by this code.
B. Received a gaming license from the Nevada gaming commission.
C. Satisfied the requirements of subsections 2-3A-6B3, B4, C, and E of this article.
D. Paid all necessary fees as provided in this article.
E. Satisfied the city council that each shareholder, officer, director, partner, trustee, member or manager thereof is qualified for licensing in accordance with
section 2-3A-6 of this article. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3A-8: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; PROCEDURES AND FEES:
A gaming license is a privilege and will not be issued for the operation of gambling games and devices unless the applicant for such license successfully
carries the burden of establishing suitability to receive such license. All applicants required to be licensed or obtain a finding of suitability shall make
application therefor by application directed to the city council and filed with the city manager.
A. Application For License; Information Required: The application shall be made to the city council on forms furnished by the city manager in conformance
with requirements of city gaming ordinances. The application for license or determination of suitability shall request the following information:
1. The name and business address of the proposed licensee.
2. The names and addresses of all owners of the applicant's business premises.
3. The type of gaming license being applied for along with the description of the gambling games, devices and slot machines to be operated.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 70/565
4. The type of business organization the applicant comprises, and a complete explanation thereof, together with a copy of pertinent supportive
documentation.
5. The name, address, nature and percentage of interest of each person owning an interest in the applicant's business and the name and address of
the general manager and any other persons who establish or exercise control over policies for the operation of the business.
6. The names of all persons directly or indirectly interested in the business and the nature of such interest.
7. Applicant's family, residential, employment, education, military and criminal history background covering at least a ten (10) year period immediately
preceding the date of filing of the application.
8. Applicant's financial statement and current and previous business activities and associates, covering at least a ten (10) year period immediately
preceding the date of filing of the application.
9. Such other information and details as the city council or city manager may require in order to properly discharge their responsibilities.
The applicant may satisfy the requirements of subsections A4 through A8 of this section by submitting to the city manager accurate and complete
copies of all application documents supplied to the Nevada gaming commission or the state gaming control board in conjunction with the gaming
activity which is the subject of the city application. The accuracy, completeness and veracity of all application forms and supporting information and
documents shall be attested to by the applicant.
B. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a gaming license with the city of Mesquite are required to provide the city of Mesquite
with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the Mesquite police department. In all cases where the applicant for a gaming license
is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, the city manager shall determine who of the members, principal officers, directors, stockholders,
and/or managers shall present themselves to the city police agency for fingerprinting. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national
criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada
department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint
data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be
disseminated to the city police agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the police agency shall prepare and submit a report containing findings
and a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the city council. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a)
and public law 92-544.
C. Procedures: Upon receipt of complete application documents and upon completion of the investigation of the applicant, the city manager shall present
the application to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
D. Investigation And Fingerprinting Fee: Each application for license filed pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by an investigation and
fingerprinting fee of one hundred forty five dollars ($145.00). This fee is nonrefundable and is in addition to other fees collected pursuant to this title. A
forty five dollar ($45.00) fingerprinting fee shall be required for individuals who are not required to complete an application, but that are required to be
fingerprinted pursuant to subsection B of this section.
E. Application And Fee For Management Personnel Transfer: Upon transfer of any employee previously licensed or found suitable from one licensed
gaming establishment to another, a letter from the gaming establishment to which the transfer is proposed to be made, setting forth the name, work
classification and the previous approval of said employee shall be sufficient application to present to the city council. A transfer fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) shall be paid for the same. (Ord. 405, 7-22-2008, eff. 8-15-2008)
2-3A-9: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
A. Requirements And Procedures:
1. All applicants for an original gaming license of any kind or for a finding of suitability shall not be required to be investigated for financial or personal
background suitability if the applicant obtains a Nevada gaming commission license or finding of suitability. The city manager shall report to the city
council whether or not the applicant complies with provisions of applicable state statutes and city ordinances and regulations.
2. Information of a confidential nature acquired under the terms of this article shall be maintained by the city manager, in a confidential file, available
only to city officials and law enforcement officers; provided, however, that such application constitutes a waiver of confidentiality and privacy as to
those matters disclosed by the investigation and by such waiver permits the interrogation of the applicant at any meeting of the city council
concerning any matters contained in the application or information obtained in the course of an investigation concerning suitability for licensing.
3. The application may be acted upon by the city council at any regular or recessed meeting thereof duly called and noticed subsequent to referring the
application for investigation.
B. Fees:
1. An investigation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall accompany every application. The city manager may require prepayment of additional
investigative fees if he determines the circumstances so warrant. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to beginning the investigation, investigative fees paid shall be refunded to the applicant.
3. The sheriff, chief of police, or other investigative unit performing background investigations shall maintain an accounting of all investigative activity
for which the applicant will be billed, including the date, actual hours expended, description of activity, and the name of the investigator(s) performing
same. Such investigative records shall be compiled as the activities are performed and shall be promptly made available to the applicant, department
or board, upon written request.
C. Confidentiality Required: It is unlawful for any person to disclose any item of personal history, financial records, audits, criminal history or any other item
contained in the investigation file to any person except in the course of the necessary administration of this article, or upon a lawful order of a court of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 71/565
competent jurisdiction, or to officials of the Nevada gaming commission or Nevada gaming control board. Any person violating this subsection shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or up to six (6) months' imprisonment, or by both fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 42, 10-22-1987)
2-3A-10: APPROVAL OF APPLICANT AND POSTING OF BOND:
A. The city council may, in its discretion, and if it is satisfied that the applicant is eligible as provided herein, grant a license or finding of suitability by a
majority vote of the members present.
B. Each applicant required to pay a license fee based on game and machine count shall, prior to commencement of operation of a gaming business, post
a bond with the city manager to ensure the payment of license fees and taxes and the faithful performance of all requirements imposed by law or
regulation. The amount of the bond shall be ten percent (10%) of the amount posted by the applicant with the Nevada gaming commission pursuant to
Nevada Revised Statutes section 463.220(7) and shall be furnished in cash or negotiable securities. If furnished in negotiable securities, the principal
shall be placed without restriction at the disposal of the city manager. The city manager shall retain the bond until the license has achieved prepaid
status with regard to the license fee imposed by section 2-3A-12 of this article.
C. Applicants for a class A slot machine license shall pay to the city manager at the time of application, the semiannual license fees as prescribed in
section 2-3A-12 of this article. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 42, 10-22-1987; Ord 49, 3-23-1989)
2-3A-11: RENEWAL APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES:
A. Fee Notice: The city manager shall send a written notice to every gaming licensee prior to the due date of each semiannual license fee required;
provided, however, that the failure to notify any licensee shall not be held to waive the payment of a gaming license fee; and provided further, that the
actual receipt of such notice is in no case required.
B. File Renewed Application: Every gaming licensee shall file, together with the license fees and taxes required by section 2-3A-12 of this article, an
application for renewal which shall be certified by the licensee, manager or officer thereof. The application for renewal shall contain an accurate report
of all games and devices operated by the licensee during the preceding quarter and a statement of the licensee's game and machine count for that
period.
C. Certification: The form shall include the following certification:
I, , certify and declare under the penalties of perjury that I am the owner, partner, (president, treasurer, other {describe}) of the business named
above, that this is a true, correct and complete report to the best of my knowledge, information and belief, and that this application and report is made
with the knowledge and consent of all other individuals named on the gaming license.
Dated: Signed:
I hereby certify that there has been no unreported change in ownership, management or location of the gambling establishment, games or devices
during the preceding six (6) month period of the calendar year; that the number of games, slot machines or other gaming devices for which license is
sought is not greater than the number issued by the state of Nevada; and that the establishment has a valid state gaming license which has not been
revoked or suspended, conditioned or limited during the preceding six (6) month of the calendar year.
Signed:
D. Renewal Fee: The licensee shall pay, in addition to all other fees, a license renewal fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) each six (6) month period.
E. City Manager Duties: The renewal application form for semiannual renewal of city gaming licenses as well as information regarding licensing fees and
taxes, renewal procedures and certification requirements, shall be provided by the city manager in a form and manner consistent with the requirements
of this article.
F. Payment Of Fees: The required license fee for the applicable period of time shall accompany each application for issuance or renewal of a license and
shall be paid to the city manager who shall collect, process and make receipt for all licenses issued, in accordance with the state law and city
ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 42, 10-22-1987; Ord 49, 3-23-1989)
2-3A-12: LICENSE FEES DESIGNATED:
Each licensee shall pay to the business license department, in advance semiannually, the following fees:
Bingo $150.00 plus
For each chair provided
for players
3.00
Bridge, whist and solo, each 30.00
Chemin de fer (baccarat) 500.00
Crap table:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 72/565
For each table 300.00
For each table over one 500.00
Each roulette, "21", hazard,
faro bank, wheel of fortune
and big six wheel
300.00
Keno 600.00
Panguingue 60.00
Race book 800.00
Racehorse information service 500.00
Slot machine operator 300.00
Slot machines, each machine 50.00
Sports pool 200.00
(not including race books)
Stud poker and draw poker 100.00
Any other game 100.00
(Ord. 49, 3-23-1989)
2-3A-13: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
A. Due Date: Each semiannual fee issued in advance on July 1 and January 1 in each year.
B. Proration: Applicants who receive license approval on a date other than such due dates shall have their license fees prorated on a monthly basis.
C. Fees Nonrefundable: License fees paid pursuant to this section are not refundable.
D. Delinquency:
1. Any semiannual fee which is not received by the department of business activity on or before the due date shall be assessed a late payment penalty
in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of such semiannual fee.
2. If the semiannual fee and penalty is not received by the business license department within fifteen (15) days after the due date, an additional penalty
in an amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of such semiannual fee shall be assessed.
3. If the semiannual fee and all penalties are not received by the business license department within sixty (60) days after the due date, the license shall
be automatically revoked. (Ord. 49, 3-23-1989)
2-3A-14: REFUND OF FEES:
No license fees paid on a flat fee basis under this article shall be refunded whether the operation of the slot machine, game or device for which any license
was issued has been voluntarily terminated or the license has been revoked under the provisions of this article, or for any other reason, except in the case
of clerical error. In the event a gaming license is terminated, any gross fees paid pursuant thereto under this article shall be prorated based on the actual
gross revenue and any excess fees paid over the actual amount owing to the city shall be refunded to the licensee. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3A-15: SPECIAL EVENTS BINGO PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 337, 3-13-2007, eff. 4-5-2007)
2-3A-16: AUDIT PROCEDURES AND ACCESS TO PREMISES AND RECORDS:
A. The city council may require the city manager to conduct periodic audits of the books and records of licensees paying fees pursuant to section 2-3A-12
of this article for the purpose of determining whether licensing fees paid are correct.
B. In those cases resulting in assessment or refund of additional fees or taxes, appropriate notices and report of findings shall be submitted to the city
manager and to the licensee in sufficient detail to enable collection or refund.
C. The applicant or licensee shall not neglect or refuse to produce records or evidence or to give information upon proper and lawful demand by any agent
of the city council, nor shall otherwise interfere, or attempt to interfere, with any proper and lawful efforts by the city council, or any agent to procure
such information. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 73/565
2-3A-17: UNSUITABLE LOCATIONS:
The city council may deny any application for a gaming license if it deems the place or location for which the license is sought to be unsuitable for the
conduct of gaming. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following places or locations are presumed to be unsuitable:
A. Premises located within a five hundred foot (500') radius of churches, schools and children's public playgrounds, except where these community
facilities are located in commercial or hotel tourist zones.
B. Premises located in a place where gaming is contrary to a valid city zoning ordinance, unless the premises qualifies for a nonconforming use under
applicable zoning law.
C. Premises difficult to police.
D. Premises located within a two hundred fifty foot (250') radius of adult oriented businesses or sexually oriented commercial enterprises1.
E. Premises which, in the opinion of the city council, would or may tend to create a public nuisance.
The above restrictions do not apply to licenses issued prior to June 1, 1984, or to any location which is found to be suitable for licensing by the city council
after a public hearing and a determination that the public health, safety and welfare will not be impaired. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-3A-18: WINNINGS OTHER THAN MONEY:
A. All games, other than slot machines licensed under this article, shall be played only for money or tokens or chips representing money. It is unlawful for
any licensee or his agents, servants or employees to provide or represent in any manner that he will give any form of property or thing of value other
than money or tokens or chips representing money as winnings or as a gratuity in connection with the playing of such games.
B. Slot machines may be played for other than money, and any licensee or his agents, servants or employees may promise or represent to give any other
form of property or thing of value as winnings or as a gratuity in connection with the playing of such slot machines; provided, however, that such other
form of property or thing of value shall be clearly identified in a prominent place on each slot machine and shall be made available to the winner thereof
immediately after such slot machine has indicated such winning. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 42, 10-22-1987)
2-3A-19: PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY, GIFTS OR BONUSES FOR PRIVILEGE OF INSTALLATION:
A. It is unlawful for a slot machine operator to advance any money, make any gift or bonus of any kind under any arrangement whatsoever for the privilege
of locating, installing, operating, placing, renting or leasing any slot machine.
B. It is unlawful for any person to receive, under any arrangement whatsoever, any advance of money, gift or bonus of any kind for the privilege of
installing, operating, renting or leasing slot machines in any location in which he owns any interest or has any control. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord.
42, 10-22-1987)
2-3A-20: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All owners, officers, directors, managers and stockholders actively engaging in the management of a gaming business, including operators and all other
persons who are directly authorized by the owners to exercise supervision and control of, and to establish policies for, the operation of said business, and
all employees thereof, must register and remain registered with the Nevada gaming control board as required by Nevada Revised Statutes 463, and any
other applicable provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 294, 2-10-2004)
2-3A-21: GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
The city council may deem that any activity on the part of a licensee, his agents or employees or a person previously found suitable, which is inimical to
the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the people of the city or which would reflect or tend to reflect discredit upon the city or
the gaming industry, or which violates any provision of the Nevada gaming control act (Nevada Revised Statutes 463, 464, 465, 466) or any regulation of
either the Nevada gaming commission or the board is grounds for disciplinary action in accordance with city ordinances. Without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, each of the following are declared to be subject to disciplinary action:
A. Each licensee who violates any provision of this article.
B. Each licensee who knowingly fails to report or conceals from the proper authorities any information which it is his duty to supply under any statute or
regulation by the state gaming commission or by any regulation of the city council.
C. Each licensee who for conduct subsequent to the issuance of a license, becomes ineligible to hold a gaming license as set out in the statutes and
regulations of the state of Nevada and by the regulations of the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 74/565
D. Each licensee who made a misrepresentation of a material fact in his application to obtain a gaming license.
E. Each licensee who fails to correct any objectionable condition which constitutes a nuisance or who fails to correct a hazardous condition which violates
the fire or building codes within a reasonable time after receipt of notice to make such correction from proper authorities; provided, however, that the
notice to correct such condition must be given in writing and must clearly state that a licensee may be disciplined if he fails to comply with the notice.
F. Each licensee who knowingly:
1. Either personally or by employees, conducts, carries on, operates, deals or allows to be conducted, carried on, operated or dealt, any cheating or
thieving game or device, or deals, conducts, carries on, operates or exposes for play any game or games played with cards, dice or any mechanical
device, or any combination of the same, which have in any manner been marked or tampered with to deceive the public or equipped with electrical or
any other device whatever, which renders the game more liable to win or lose, or which tends to alter the normal random selection of criteria which
determines the results of the game.
2. Possesses or permits to remain in or upon any licensed premises any cards, dice, mechanical device or other cheating device whatsoever, the use
of which is prohibited by statute or ordinance.
G. Each licensee who knowingly allows gambling by minors.
H. Each licensee, except for class A slot machine licensees, who employs a minor in the same room of the premises where gambling is being conducted.
I. Each licensee who knowingly allows any male or female person to appear in the nude in any public area on its premises, including, but not limited to,
theaters, lounges and showrooms. For the purpose of this subsection, the following words are defined as follows:
MALE OR FEMALE PERSON: A licensee, his agents and employees, or his independent contractors and their agents or employees.
NUDE: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic or female breast area while not fully covered by an opaque material.
J. Each licensee who files an incomplete or false application for renewal.
K. Each licensee who employs persons who do not hold a valid work identification card.
L. Each licensee who fails to report full and accurate gross revenue to any agency or department of the federal, state or city government, as required.
M. Each licensee who, subsequent to licensing, is convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, which crime is considered by the city council
to be a threat or hazard to the proper control of gaming or to the public health, prosperity, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
For purposes of this section, "knowingly" means that a person knew or would have known, i.e., has a general knowledge of or reason to know, or belief
or grounds for belief which warrant further inspection or inquiry. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
ARTICLE B. POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
2-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them pursuant to sections 2-3A-1 and 2-3A-2 of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears in the context. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-2: INVESTIGATION AND REPORTING OF VIOLATIONS:
The city manager is responsible for the enforcement of gaming ordinances and liquor ordinances1 and the investigation of violations thereof, and shall
report to the city council and city attorney those violations which he deems appropriate for disciplinary action. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-3: CITY COUNCIL TO COOPERATE WITH OTHER REGULATORY AGENCIES:
A. The city council shall cooperate with other public agencies concerned with the regulation and control of the liquor and gambling industries and to that
end may exchange with such agencies any and all types of confidential information. When dealing with any gaming matter, the city council may
immediately inform the state gaming agencies of any investigation, hearing or other actions that the city council,or its members or agents may take.
B. The city council may enter into agreement with the state gaming agencies such that duplication of effort shall be kept to a minimum; provided, however,
that if the apparent violation is of such a character that action should be taken and if the state gaming agencies fail, refuse or decline to assume control
of the investigation and hearing, then the city council and the city manager shall promptly investigate and if disciplinary action is apparently necessary,
the city council shall conduct a hearing as herein provided.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 75/565
C. The city council may enter into agreement with liquor and gaming boards in Clark County, and incorporated cities and towns of Clark County so that
overall regulation and control may be more effectively maintained. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-4: PROCEDURE UPON COMPLAINT AGAINST LICENSEE:
A. Determination By City Attorney: Upon the report by the city manager to the city council of a violation charging a liquor or gaming licensee with the
commission of any act which is cause for disciplinary action the city attorney or his deputy shall determine the legal sufficiency of the evidence and, if
necessary, may request the city manager and/or city police agency to make further investigation of the alleged violation.
B. Citation Service:
1. Upon a finding by the city attorney that there is sufficient evidence of a violation of the ordinances, or of a threat or hazard to the public health,
safety, morals or welfare, he shall draft a written complaint which shall set forth in ordinary and concise language the acts or omissions with which
the licensee or affected person (respondent) is charged. The complaint shall specify the statute, regulation or ordinance which the respondent is
alleged to have violated, or the hazard or threat to the public health, safety, morals, welfare or good order and shall be signed by the city manager.
2. Upon the issuance of the complaint by the city manager, the city council shall forthwith review it and determine by vote of the majority of the
members present whether to issue a citation.
3. The citation shall direct the respondent, within ten (10) days after service thereof upon him to appear by filing with the city council his verified answer
to the complaint. The answer shall state whether or not the respondent requests a hearing, and shall admit or deny the facts alleged in the complaint
and raise all legal and factual issues the respondent desires the city council to consider. The citation shall notify the respondent that failure to file an
answer shall result in disciplinary action against him by default.Service of the citation with a copy of the complaint shall be made upon the
respondent as provided by the Nevada rules of civil procedure for the service of process in civil actions. Proof of service shall be filed with the city
council.
4. The city attorney shall thereafter be in charge of presenting the evidence to the city council.
5. Upon the filing of the answer, the chairperson of the city council shall fix a time and place for hearing and give the respondent not less than fifteen
(15) days' notice. The city council shall give notice of such hearing date and time to the respondent and the district attorney by depositing in the
United States mail a true copy of the notice enclosed in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully paid, addressed to the respondent and his
attorney, if any, and the city attorney at the address shown on the pleadings.
C. Form Of Answer; Filing Deadline:
1. The answer to the complaint shall be signed and verified by the respondent or his agent, served upon the city attorney which prepared the complaint,
and filed with the city council within ten (10) days after service upon respondent of the citation. The complaint, citation and answer shall form the
pleadings for the hearing.
2. The answer shall read substantially as follows:
BEFORE THE MESQUITE CITY COUNCIL, COUNTY OF CLARK,
STATE OF NEVADA
In the matter of:
)
Disciplinary Action Against )
)
A.B., ) ANSWER
))
To the Members of the City Council:
1. The Respondent does not request a hearing.
(Note: If a hearing is desired, omit word "not").
2. The Respondent admits the following facts set forth in the complaint:
3. The Respondent denies the following facts set forth in the complaint:
4. The Respondent believes the following defenses and explanations should be considered by the Board:
5. The Respondent raises the following legal defenses:
LICENSEE
3. Upon the filing of an answer, the respondent shall be entitled to a hearing on the merits upon the issues denied by the answer. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-5: FAILURE TO ANSWER CHARGES DEEMED ADMISSION OF GUILT:
A. Failure of the respondent to answer within the time specified shall be deemed an admission by him of the commission of the act or acts charged in the
complaint. Thereupon, the city council shall forthwith impose disciplinary action, as the case may be, and shall give notice of such disciplinary action by
mailing a true copy thereof by United States registered mail in a sealed envelope with postage thereon fully prepaid, addressed to the respondent at his
latest address of record.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 76/565
B. Failure to file an answer within the time designated shall further constitute a waiver of respondent's right to a hearing and to judicial review of any
decision or order, but the city council, in its discretion, may nevertheless order a hearing. All affirmative defenses must be specifically stated and,
unless objection is taken in the answer, all objections to the form of complaint are waived. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-6: WITNESSES:
A. Subpoena And Compensation: Any time prior to a hearing or during a hearing before the city council, the city council shall issue subpoenas and
subpoenas duces tecum at the request of a party. All witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than parties, officers or employees of the state
of Nevada, or any political subdivision thereof, shall receive fees and mileage in the same amounts and under the same circumstances as provided by
law for witnesses in civil actions in the district court. Such fees shall be paid by the party at whose request the witness is subpoenaed and the city
council may, in its discretion, award as costs the amount of expenses of witnesses to the prevailing party.
B. Service Of Affidavit: The testimony of any material witness residing within or without the state of Nevada may be taken by deposition in the manner
provided by the Nevada rules of civil procedure. Affidavits may be received in evidence at any hearing of the city council in accordance with the
following:
1. The party wishing to use such affidavit shall, not less than four (4) days prior to the day set for hearing serve upon the opposing party or counsel,
either personally or by registered mail, a copy of the affidavit which he proposes to introduce in evidence together with a notice as provided in
subsection B3 of this section.
2. Unless the opposing party, within two (2) days after such service, mails or delivers to the proponent a request to cross examine affiant, his right to
cross examine such affidavit if waived and the affidavit, if introduced in evidence, shall be given the same effect as if the affiant had testified orally. If
an opportunity to cross examine an affiant is not afforded after request therefor is made in accordance herewith, the affidavit may be introduced in
evidence, but shall be given only the same effect as other hearsay evidence.
3. The notice referred to in subsection B2 of this section shall be substantially in the following form:
The accompanying affidavit of (name of affiant) will be introduced as evidence at the hearing set for the day of , . will not be called to testify orally
and you will not be entitled to question him unless you notify the undersigned that you wish to cross examine him. To be effective your request must
be mailed or delivered to the undersigned on or before two (20 days from the date this notice and the enclosed affidavit are serviced upon you.
(Party or Counsel)
(Address)
(Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-7: HEARING PROCEDURE; RECORD:
The following procedures shall apply at all hearings of the city council:
A. At least three (3) members of the city council shall be present at every hearing, and they shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of the hearing
and shall enforce all decisions with respect thereto.
B. No member of the city council who did not hear the evidence shall vote on the decision.
C. The proceedings at the hearing shall be reported either stenographically or by audio recorder.
D. Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation administered by the city council.
E. Every party to a hearing shall have the right:
1. To call and examine witnesses.
2. To introduce exhibits relevant to the issues of the case, including the transcript of testimony at an investigative hearing conducted by or on behalf of
the city council.
3. To cross examine opposing witnesses on matters relevant to the issues of the case, even though the matter was not covered in a direct examination.
4. To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify.
5. To offer rebuttal evidence.
F. If the licensee does not testify in his own behalf, he may be called and examined as if under cross examination.
G. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted and shall
be sufficient to support a finding if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs,
regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in a civil
action.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 77/565
H. The parties or their counsel may by written stipulation agree that certain specified evidence may be admitted even though such evidence might
otherwise be subject to objection. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-8: QUASI-JUDICIAL NOTICE; EVIDENCE ADMISSIBLE:
A. The city council may take official notice of any generally accepted information or technical or scientific matter within the area of liquor and gaming
conduct and control and of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state.
B. The parties shall be informed of any information, matter or fact so such information, matter or fact by evidence or by written or oral presentation of
authorities, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the city council. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-9: AMENDMENTS; FILING OF AMENDED PLEADINGS:
The city council may, in its discretion, before submission of the case for decision, permit the filing of amended or supplemental pleadings and shall notify
all parties thereof, and provide a reasonable opportunity for objections thereto. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-10: MISCONDUCT DURING HEARING:
If any person in proceedings before the city council disobeys or resists any lawful order; refuses to respond to a subpoena; refuses to take the oath or
affirmation as a witness or thereafter refuses to be examined; is guilty of misconduct during the hearing or near the place thereof so as to obstruct the
proceedings, the city council may, in addition to remedies available to it, certify the facts to the district court. The court shall thereupon issue an order
directing the person to appear before the court and show cause why he should not be punished for contempt. The court order and a copy of the statement
of the city council shall be served on the person cited to appear. Thereafter the court shall have jurisdiction of the matter; and the same proceedings, shall
be had, the same penalties may be imposed, and the person charged may purge himself of the contempt as in the trial of a civil action before a district
court. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-11: WRITTEN DECISION OF CITY COUNCIL:
After the hearing of a contested matter, the city council shall render a written decision on the merits which shall contain findings of fact, a determination of
the issues presented and the disciplinary action to be imposed, if any, and shall thereafter make and enter its written order in conformity with such
decision. The affirmative votes of a majority of the city council hearing the evidence shall be required to impose any disciplinary action. Copies of the
decision and order shall be served on the parties personally or sent to them by registered mail. The decision shall become and remain effective upon such
service, unless the city council shall otherwise order. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-12: AGGRIEVED PARTY; PETITION FOR REHEARING:
Within ten (10) days after service of an order of the city council, any party aggrieved may petition for a rehearing. Such petition shall not be granted except
upon a showing that there is additional evidence which is material, necessary and reasonably calculated to change the decision of the city council. The
petition shall be supported by an affidavit of the moving party or his counsel showing with particularity the materiality and necessity of the additional
evidence and the reason why it was not introduced at the hearing. Upon rehearing, rebuttal evidence to the additional evidence shall be permitted. After
rehearing, the city council may modify its decision and order as the additional evidence may warrant. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-13: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved by final decision or order of the city council made after hearing or rehearing as heretofore provided, and whether or not a petition for
rehearing was filed, may obtain a judicial review of questions of law thereof in the eighth judicial district court.
A. The judicial review shall be instituted by filing a petition within twenty (20) days after the effective date of the final order. A petition for review may not be
filed while a petition for rehearing is pending before the city council. The petition for review shall set forth the order or decision appealed from, and shall
set forth the specific rulings on questions of law which the petition contends constitutes error.
B. Copies of the petition shall be served upon the city council and all other parties of record, or their counsel of record, either personally or by registered
mail.
C. The filing of the petition shall not stay enforcement of the decision or order of the city council, but the city council itself may grant a stay upon such
terms and conditions as it deems proper, upon timely filed motion.
D. Upon written request of petitioner and upon payment of such reasonable costs and fees as the city council may prescribe, the complete record on
review, or such parts thereof as are designated by the petitioner, shall be prepared by the city council.
E. The complete record on review shall include copies of all pleadings in the case, all notices and interim orders issued by the city council in connection
with the case, all stipulations, the decision and the order appealed from, a transcript of all testimony, evidence and proceedings at the hearing, the
exhibits admitted or rejected, and any other papers in the case.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 78/565
F. A copy of any document may be used in lieu of an original. The record on review may be shortened by stipulation of all parties to the review
proceedings. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
2-3B-14: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, in an emergency the city council may issue an order for immediate suspension or limitation of a liquor
or gaming license. The emergency order shall state the reason for suspension or limitation and shall afford the licensee a hearing in accordance with
the procedures of this article.
B. The city manager, for cause, and without prior notice, may suspend any alcoholic liquor license until the next regular meeting of the city council. Written
notice of the suspensionshall be given by the city manager to the licensee and also to the city council. At its next regular meeting, after such license
suspension, the city council shall determine whether such suspension shall be rescinded; but if the city council decides that the suspension shall
continue, then, and in such event, the proceedings prescribed in this article relative to license suspension and/or revocation, with required notice and
hearing, shall be initiated as soon as possible. (Ord. 5, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 4
LIQUOR REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
2-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT; LICENSE REQUIRED; ISSUANCE PROHIBITED TO DESIGNATED PERSONS:
A. The city council declares that this liquor control chapter is an exercise of the regulatory powers delegated to the council by the state of Nevada pursuant
to Nevada Revised Statutes 268.090, inter alia.
B. The public health, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city require the regulation and control of all persons and establishments engaged
in the business of alcoholic liquor sales. All such persons and establishments as defined in this chapter shall be licensed and controlled so as to protect
the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city and to safeguard the public.
C. The right to obtain such license is a privilege and the operation of such alcoholic liquor sales facilities, when authorized by such license, is a privileged
business subject to regulations. The license may be revoked for violation of the conditions of this chapter, the laws of the state of Nevada, other
ordinances of the city, or for any other cause deemed sufficient by the council in the exercise of its sole discretion.
D. In conformity with the policy of this chapter, the following persons are declared not to be qualified to hold a license under the provisions of this chapter:
1. A person who does not possess or who does not have a reputation for possessing a good moral character;
2. A person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years;
3. A person who has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
4. A person who the city council, after investigation, determines is not a suitable person to receive or hold a license, after due consideration for the
protection of the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city;
5. A person who illegally resides in the United States;
6. A person whose license, issued under the provisions of this chapter or those ordinances or statutes of any other agency lawfully engaged in the
licensing or regulation of liquor sales, has been revoked for cause;
7. A person who, at the time of renewal of any license issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
8. A partnership, limited partnership, association or limited liability company, unless all of the managers and members of such partnership, limited
partnership, association or limited liability company are qualified and have obtained a license;
9. A corporation, if an officer or director thereof would not be eligible to receive a license for any reason other than citizenship and/or residency;
10. A corporation or limited liability company, unless it is incorporated or organized in the state of Nevada, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under Nevada law to transact business in Nevada;
11. A person whose place of business is controlled by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of an individual licensee;
12. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be used;
13. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
E. In conformity with the policy of this chapter, the council may deny a license upon its discretion when:
1. In the judgment of the council, the granting of such license may tend to create or constitute a public nuisance;
2. By granting of such license, a disorderly house or place may be maintained;
3. The granting of such license may seriously and adversely affect the valuation of neighboring, adjoining, and/or contiguous property;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 79/565
4. The council, after investigation, is satisfied that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to operate the business contemplated by his application;
5. In the judgment of the council there are ample and sufficient licensees and establishments in the area or place for which the license is to be used to
properly serve such area or place; or
6. For any other good and sufficient reason.
F. Any business in existence on the effective date hereof which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use
and shall be subject to title 9 of this code. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words must have the meanings ascribed in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ADMINISTRATOR: The city manager for the city of Mesquite or his designee.
ALCOHOL: A product of distillation of any fermented liquor, rectified either once or more often, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR LIQUOR: The four (4) varieties of liquor, namely, alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol and intended for consumption by human beings as a beverage.
BEER: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or similar product, or any combination
thereof, in water.
BILLIARD HALL: A building, part of building, or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where the game of
billiards or pool may be played and which maintains for play a minimum of twelve (12) pocket billiard tables of either the full standard size of four and onehalf
feet by nine feet (41/2' x 9'), the bar size of three and one-half feet by seven feet (31/2' x 7'), snooker tables or any combination thereof.
BREWPUB: An establishment which manufactures malt beverages and sells those malt beverages at retail pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes 597.230 as may be amended or renumbered.
CATERING: A business which:
A. Prepares food at a licensed location for delivery or service to consumers in the city, and may, in conjunction therewith, provide the service of
alcoholic liquor; or
B. Delivers or serves alcoholic liquors from a licensed location to consumers in the city or at a banquet reception hall located in the city which is
operated by the catering business.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, Nevada, a municipal corporation.
DEMONSTRATION MEAL EVENT: An event held at a restaurant with bar or resort hotel wherein a special meal is prepared and served, with or without a
fee, to invited guests only, that is not open to the public and wherein beers, wines, or spirit based products are sampled at various stages of the meal and
made available for sale for off premises consumption at the time of the event.
DIVISION: The business license division of the city.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any real property including any buildings, improvements, equipment, facilities and parking lots used or maintained in connection with
the operation of a business.
FINDING OF SUITABILITY: Means that, after investigation, a person is found to comply with the requirements of this chapter which are a prerequisite to
involvement with an alcoholic liquor license. This chapter authorizes the city council to require that certain persons who are directly or indirectly involved
with alcoholic liquor licenses be found suitable for such involvement so long as that relationship continues. A finding of suitability relates only to the specific
involvement for which it is made. If the nature of the involvement changes from that for which the applicant is found suitable, or if, in the judgment of the
city council, new information concerning the applicant's suitability has become available, he may be made to submit himself for a new determination of
suitability.
FULL: As used in full on-sale or full off-sale, means the sale or serving of any or all of the alcoholic beverages.
GROCERY STORE: A business located in a building or in a portion of a building which is primarily engaged in the sale of household goods and food
items, such as canned and frozen foods; fresh fruits and vegetables; and fresh and prepared meats, fish, and poultry.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered
at daily rates to transient guests. For purposes of this chapter, hotels must have a minimum of ninety (90) rooms used for sleeping accommodations in a
single or connected structure where access to the sleeping rooms is through a foyer and hallways.
KEY EMPLOYEE: Any executive, manager, employee, agent, officer, or director of an alcoholic liquor licensee having the power to exercise significant
influence or control over decisions concerning any part of the operation of the business or a manager charged with the day to day operations of the
business.
LICENSE: Any license issued by the division pursuant to this chapter which authorizes the person to engage in any of the alcoholic liquor businesses as
defined herein.
LICENSEE: Any person to whom a valid alcoholic liquor license has been issued and is used in this chapter in the plural as well as in the singular.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 80/565
LICENSEE FEE: Any monies required by law to be paid to obtain or renew a license.
LIQUEUR: A distilled liquor produced by combining a base spirit with fruits or herbs and sweetened with sugar syrup; usually considered an after meal
drink.
LIQUOR CATERING: Dispensing, serving, or selling alcoholic beverages only for consumption on the premises where the same are dispensed, served or
sold during the event for which the caterer has been hired; provided, however, that a caterer's services are performed between diverse locations on a
shifting and intermittent basis as opposed to a permanent location.
LIQUOR LICENSE ORIGINATION FEE OR ORIGINATION FEE: A onetime fee, which is due and payable prior to issuance of a new alcoholic liquor
license applied for after the effective date hereof in accordance with sections 2-4-23 and 2-4-26 of this chapter. The fee shall not be required on a change
of ownership.
MEALS: The usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day from a preprinted menu. Establishments with menus limited to foods
such as sandwiches, items commonly known or thought of as fast food, or salads only, are not considered to meet meal service requirements.
MOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public to be a place that provides five (5) or more rooms as
sleeping accommodations offered at a daily rate to transient guests where access to the rooms is gained from the outside.
NONPROFIT CLUB: A nonprofit organization classified in one of the categories defined in section 501 of the United States internal revenue code as being
exempt from payment of federal income tax or duly organized pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes as a nonprofit organization, that owns, rents or leases
a building or space suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests, but does not
include associations organized for any commercial or business purpose.
NONRESTRICTED GAMING: Shall have the same meaning as contained in Nevada Revised Statutes 463.0177, or as may be amended or renumbered.
OFF-SALE: The sale of alcoholic beverages in original sealed or corked containers for consumption off the premises where the same are sold or given
away.
ON-SALE: The sale or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where the same are sold or given away.
OPERATION: The conduct of any business regulated or licensed by this chapter.
PREMISES: Establishment.
RESORT HOTEL: Shall have the same meaning as contained in Nevada Revised Statutes 463.01865, or as may be amended or renumbered.
RESTAURANT WITH BAR: A place or space in a suitable building kept, used, maintained, advertised and/or held out to the public to be a place in which
the primary business is to serve meals and has food available for service during all times that liquor is sold and wherein there is a separation between the
bar/lounge area and the dining area by a barrier sufficient to exclude minors from the bar/lounge area. The seating capacity where food is served must
accommodate fifty (50) or more persons at one time.
RESTRICTED GAMING: Shall have the same meaning as contained in Nevada Revised Statutes 463.0189, or as may be amended or renumbered.
SERVICE BAR: A place at which drinks are prepared for service by employees to patrons away from the service bar area. A service bar does not permit
sales directly to customers and must not include any sit down bar/lounge area. Service bars are permitted in hotels, restaurants, and in casinos.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT: A permit which authorizes the permittee to sell, serve, or give away alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises for
which the permit is issued, in accordance with this chapter and chapter 12 of this title, and only for such time as specified on the permit, but not to exceed
five (5) consecutive calendar days in length, unless otherwise approved in accordance with this chapter, and further provided that said permit has first
been approved by the city manager.
SPIRIT BASED PRODUCTS: A distillate obtained from the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing natural or
added sugar and which contains not more than ten percent (10%) of alcohol by volume. For purposes of this chapter, spirit based products must be in the
same classification as beer and wine.
TAVERN: A place where the primary business is the service or sale of alcoholic liquors at retail by the drink to the general public and is a place wherein no
other business, except gaming, nongambling games (e.g., pool, darts, etc.) or a dance hall is conducted. A tavern may sell or give away cigars, cigarettes,
tobacco, nuts, jerky, popcorn, potato chips, short order menus and pretzels. A restaurant or lunch counter may be operated in the same building with a
tavern.
WHOLESALE/IMPORT: A business in which the owner is authorized to sell liquor as it is originally packaged to retail establishments or other wholesalers
or is authorized to be the first person in possession of alcoholic liquors within the state after completion of the act of importation into the state of Nevada.
(Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-3: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND FEES:
A. Processing Fee: After the issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter, each licensee shall pay, in addition to all other fees, a semiannual license
renewal processing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
B. Application Contents And Requirements For Applicant: A liquor license is a privilege and shall not be issued for the operation of any liquor
establishment unless the applicant for such license carries the burden of proving his suitability to receive and maintain said license.
1. Other Interests And Personnel: All applicants for an original or renewal license for a liquor establishment shall make application therefor by petition
to the city council and by filing same with the city manager, stating in writing the name and address of the general manager or managers of the
business and those persons who are directly authorized by the owner to exercise supervision and control and to establish policies for the operation
of said business. Where there is more than one owner of such an establishment, the names of all such persons owning an interest in such business
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 81/565
shall be listed on the application, together with a statement as to the percentage of such business owned by each individual. If from the preceding
quarter there has been no change in ownership, it will suffice for the applicant for a renewal license to state on the application "no change".
2. Corporations:
a. Application: In all cases where the applicant for an alcoholic liquor license is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers or directors of
the corporation shall be listed on the application. In all such cases, the city manager shall determine who of the principal officers and directors of
such corporation shall present themselves at the city police agency for fingerprinting. It shall also be necessary, in instances where a corporation is
an applicant for an alcoholic liquor license (of any of the several types enumerated herein), to state in the application for such license the names
and addresses of any or all persons, corporations or their nominees who own two percent (2%) or more interest of the stock of such corporation. In
addition to the foregoing information, such application shall contain such further information as the city council, by rule or regulation not
inconsistent with law, may prescribe.
b. Changes In Corporate Officers, Directors And Stockholders: In the case of a corporate licensee, any and all changes in the officers, directors or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than two percent (2%) of the stock of such corporation shall be reported to the city manager within
thirty (30) days of the appointment or election of such officers and directors, or acquisition by such stockholders, as the case may be, and such
officers, directors and stockholders shall be required to qualify for a license as required herein.
3. Personal Data: The following personal data shall accompany the application: If the applicant is an individual, his name and place of residence,
whether or not he is a citizen of the United States, whether or not he is a bona fide resident of Clark County and a registered voter of the state of
Nevada, whether or not he has within five (5) years, been convicted of a felony or for any other crime which would be considered a felony under the
laws of the state of Nevada, or gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
4. Background Investigations For Liquor Registration Card Applicants And Liquor License Applicants:
a. Fingerprint Based Background Checks For Liquor Registration Card Applicants:
(1) All owners, managers and stockholders actively engaging in the management of a liquor establishment, including all persons who are directly
authorized by the owners to exercise supervision and control of, and to establish policies for, the operation of said business, and all employees
thereof must present themselves for fingerprinting in the office of the city police agency and secure a registration card from the city police
agency prior to operating the establishment, and the registration must be carried upon the person at all times, must remain current, and is
nontransferable. Each individual subject to this provision shall provide a full set of fingerprints and a nonrefundable fingerprinting fee of forty five
dollars ($45.00). Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city
police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks.
The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct
national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city police agency, which shall
render fitness determinations. No person shall be employed by any applicant without first complying with the provisions of this subsection. This
provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544.
(2) The registration card may be suspended without notice but shall not be revocable by the city without cause, and then only after notice and
hearing.
b. Fingerprint Based Background Checks; Interrogation By City Council:
(1) Fingerprint Based Background Checks: No license shall be issued for the operation of any liquor establishment unless the applicant presents
himself to the city police agency for fingerprinting. Each applicant shall provide a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct a
state and national criminal records check. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data
to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the state and
national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city of Mesquite, which shall render a fitness determination regarding the applicant. This
provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544.
(2) Interrogation By City Council: Any and all persons required to be fingerprinted under the terms of this chapter shall be required to answer any
and all questions deemed appropriate and necessary by the city council pertaining to such application, or the fitness of any persons connected
as owners, part owners, officers, managers or administrative assistants of any establishments applying for a liquor license.
5. Confidentiality:
a. Fingerprint Related Information: All fingerprinting required to be taken under the terms of this chapter and all other information obtained by reason
of the fingerprints shall be maintained by the city police agency in a confidential file to be open for inspection only by the city council and law
enforcement officers; provided, however, the applicant may waive the requirements of this subsection and by such waiver permit interrogation of
the applicant, at any meeting of the city council, concerning any matters contained in the application or information obtained in the course of an
investigation.
b. Nonfingerprint Related Information: All information other than criminal history information, of a confidential nature supplied under the terms of this
chapter shall be maintained by the city manager, in a confidential file, to be open for the inspection only by city officials and law enforcement
officers; provided, however, the applicant may waive the requirements of this subsection and by such waiver permit interrogation of the applicant,
at any meeting of the city council, concerning any matters contained in the application or information obtained in the course of an investigation.
C. Application By Petition; Investigation:
1. Every person wishing to engage in the business of operating a liquor establishment permitted by law shall make application by petition to the city
council for a license of the kind desired and shall file the application, together with the required license fee, with the city manager, who shall present
the application to the city council at its next regular meeting. The council shall refer the petition to the city manager for investigation of the suitability
of the applicant. If the council determines, upon a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the members present, that an investigation of the suitability of the
applicant is unnecessary, it may approve or deny the application upon a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the members present, for approval or denial. The
city council may waive all or part of the investigation if the applicant is a gaming licensee in good standing with the Nevada gaming commission or if
the licensee holds a liquor license in good standing in Clark County or another incorporated city in Clark County. If the city council determines that an
investigation of the suitability of the applicant is warranted, the applicant shall pay to the city manager any additional required investigation fees, and
the city police agency shall forthwith conduct an investigation of suitability. The investigation shall be completed in the shortest possible time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 82/565
2. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager shall immediately refer the application to the city council at its next regular meeting, together
with the findings and all facts upon which the findings are based. The findings and all facts upon which it is based are privileged and confidential to
the city council only.
3. All investigated applications shall be read at the next meeting of the city council after the completion of the investigation. The application may be
acted upon by the city council at any regular or recessed regular meeting thereof or at any special meeting thereof duly called and noticed as
hereinafter provided.
D. Investigation Of Gaming Applicants For Liquor License: Applicants and the principals of applicants for a liquor license at the same premises, which are
also concurrently applying for a city gaming license, shall only be required to the extent determined by the city council pursuant to requirements of city
gaming regulations1.
E. Temporary License On Transfer Of Ownership: After an application is made for a liquor license, if such is made in contemplation of the sale of an
existing licensed liquor establishment, the city manager may, if he preliminarily finds that such application or applicants are of good moral character,
issue a temporary license for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days. The application for temporary license upon transfer of ownership will only be
considered complete after receipt by the city of all required liquor license and personal suitability application forms, all processing and investigative fees
paid, all required documentation evidencing the ownership and management of the applicant entity, and all required documentation evidencing real
and/or personal property ownership rights to the proposed liquor establishment premises.
F. Investigation Fees:
1. Fees Enumerated:
a. Alcoholic Liquor License: Except for applicants for a nonprofit club liquor license, an individual, corporation, partnership or association filing an
application for an alcoholic liquor license of any of the several types enumerated herein, other than a club license, shall deposit with the city
manager an investigation fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per person to be investigated for the first three (3) persons to be
investigated and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional person to be investigated.
b. Nonprofit Club Liquor License: If the application is for a nonprofit club liquor license, the investigation fee shall not be less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
c. Actual Cost: In addition to the fees required to accompany the application, the applicant shall be required to pay the city the actual cost incurred by
the city or its designated agent to complete the necessary investigations. The city council may require payment of the supplementary investigative
fee in advance as a condition precedent to beginning investigation.
2. Refund Or Waiving Of Fees:
a. The city council will not take final action with respect to any application until all investigative fees have been paid in full. In the event the city
council has obtained an additional investigative fee, which is in excess of the amount expended for investigation, the amount shall be refunded to
the applicant upon request.
b. The city council may, in its discretion, waive payment of an investigative fee when all parties to an application have been licensed, or approved as
stockholders of a corporate licensee within the past year.
c. In the event the applicant is denied a license after investigation, charges deposited or paid shall be forfeited and all outstanding costs incurred by
the city for investigation shall be paid.
d. If the applicant withdraws application prior to the beginning of investigation, posted deposits shall be returned to applicant.
e. In the event any person is an applicant or member of a group of applicants, and such person has been previously investigated by the city council
and has held a license within a preceding period of one year, an investigation fee may not be required.
3. Transfer Or Hire Of Key Employees Or Management Personnel: Upon initial hire by or transfer of any key employee or management personnel from
one licensed gaming establishment to another, or upon the hiring of any new key employee or management personnel, a letter from the licensee's
establishment to which the transfer or hire is supposed to be made setting forth the name, work classification and the previous approval of said
transferred personnel, if any, will be sufficient application to present to the city council, and the transfer fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged
for the same. A list of all newly hired or transferred key employees or management personnel will be reported to the city by the licensee in the next
occurring quarterly payment of license fees to the city and at the time of renewal of the liquor license of the hotel resort and casino.
G. Resubmission Of Disapproved Location: If the city council is not in favor of licensing the particular location or applicant as proposed by the applicant,
request for approval of the same location or applicant cannot be resubmitted for six (6) months. (Ord. 405, 7-22-2008, eff. 8-15-2008)
2-4-4: SCOPE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
A license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter authorizes the licensee or permit holder to exercise only those privileges expressly permitted pursuant
to this chapter for the specific classification of license or permit issued and only on the premises identified in the license or permit. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff.
7-31-2008)
2-4-5: SEMIANNUAL LICENSE, DUE DATE; EXISTING LICENSES, CHANGE OF EXPIRATION DATE, PRORATION:
A. All existing and valid licenses shall be assessed a semiannual fee.
B. Each semiannual fee is due in advance on January 31 and July 31 each year.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 83/565
C. All existing alcoholic beverage licenses on the effective date hereof shall expire semiannually on January 31 and July 31 of each year.
D. All existing alcoholic beverage licenses on the effective date hereof shall be converted to the amended classification and be prorated for the advance
semiannual fee due and payable on July 31, 2008. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-6: CONDITIONS APPLYING TO SPECIFIC LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. A billiard hall may obtain an on-sale beer, wine or spirit based products license only and may not have more than five (5) slot machines or gaming
devices.
B. All brewpubs are subject to the following conditions:
1. A freestanding brewpub, or an independently owned brewpub located within a non-restricted or limited gaming location shall be licensed as a tavern.
2. The operation of a brewpub located in and owned or operated by a non-restricted or restricted gaming licensee shall be covered under the licensee's
non-restricted/restricted gaming liquor license.
C. A catering liquor license is required by any business or nonprofit organization engaged in the catering of liquor.
1. All annual liquor catering licensees must submit a liquor catering event permit at least two (2) business days prior to catering an event within the City
of Mesquite.
2. A business or nonprofit may choose to hold a daily liquor catering license as part of a special event permit provided the event is approved by the City
Manager through the special event permit process. In such cases, there will be a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) fee added to the special event
permit. The business interested in providing any type of alcohol for the event must hold a valid liquor license and must be approved by the City
Manager to cater the event.
D. A nonprofit club liquor licensee must be a duly chartered nonprofit organization and is subject to the following:
1. Only club members, auxiliary members and their bona fide guests are permitted service in such club; provided, however, that the club may service
its own functions and functions of others or organizations wherein a minimum of twenty five (25) persons are attending such function.
2. Applicants for this class of license must present written proof of the organization's nonprofit status at the time of submission of the application.
3. To maintain this license, the organization must maintain nonprofit status for the duration of use. Proof of such status must be shown to the
Administrator or his designee upon request.
E. Off-sale licenses are subject to the following conditions:
1. Off-sale licenses must meet the distance restrictions of section 9-8-8 of this Code.
2. The sale or purchase of liquor and/or beer, wine and spirit based products through drive-up or drive-through window is prohibited.
3. The sale of liquor other than beer, wine, and spirit based products, in a convenience store, gasoline sales establishment, or other similar business, is
prohibited, except as approved by the Governing Body through a conditional use process in conformance with applicable zoning.
4. All locations which have been granted a valid off-sale liquor license prior to the passage of this section are exempt from the provisions of this
subsection until such time as there is any change in ownership or location of such business.
5. The off-sale of beer, wine, and spirit based products is permitted at a restaurant with bar or resort hotel with no additional origination fee or license
fee if the sale is done as part of and at the time of a demonstration meal event.
F. On-sale liquor license shall be issued to the following business types:
1. Dance halls. The license must be issued to the business owner and the business owner is responsible for actions occurring in the facility regarding
any and all liquor and/or beer, wine, etc.
2. Banquet facilities or convention centers.
3. A sports arena.
4. Other business to be considered upon application. License Clerk will assess the application and issue an appropriate license category. The applicant
may appeal to City Council within thirty (30) days.
G. Restaurants with service bar are subject to the following conditions:
1. All alcoholic liquor must be served with meals at tables or booths in the dining room area from a service bar only. A lounge or bar area where
alcoholic liquors are sold, served or given away to patrons or the general public by the drink is prohibited.
2. It is the intent of this section that gaming or the service of alcoholic liquor is merely an adjunct to the meals offered and that the restaurant must not
be advertised or otherwise held out to be a drinking, gambling or any other type of establishment.
3. The restaurant must have a seating capacity of more than fifty (50) persons at one time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 84/565
4. All existing restaurants that serve liquor and/or beer, wine and spirit based products and do not have a bar/lounge area, shall be considered a
restaurant as defined in section 2-4-2 of this chapter. Any change in operation which would create a bar/lounge area shall be subject to the
requirements of subsection H of this section.
H. Restaurants with bar are subject to the following conditions:
1. Meals are to be served during all hours that the bar/lounge is open for business and a cook and food server other than the bartender must be on
duty at all such times.
2. The restaurant with a bar shall conform to the requirements of title 9 of this Code as it relates to zoning and land use regulations for restaurants with
bar.
3. It is the intent of this subsection that gaming or the service of alcoholic liquors is merely an adjunct to the meals offered and that the restaurant must
not be advertised or otherwise held out to be a drinking, gambling, or any other type of establishment.
4. The restaurant must have a seating capacity of more than fifty (50) persons at one time.
5. Existing restaurants with bar which do not comply with the provisions of title 9 of this Code as it relates to regulations for restaurants with bar shall be
deemed nonconforming and shall be subject to license renewal as long as the licensee remains suitable. Such nonconforming licenses may not be
expanded or enlarged unless the expansion or enlargement is in conformance with the provisions and requirements of title 9 of this Code.
I. The license for the sale of alcoholic liquor must not be granted to an establishment whose business or primary business or interest is that of a motel, or
whose building or proposed construction is primarily intended for a motel business.
J. All restricted gaming liquor licenses are subject to the following:
1. A restricted gaming liquor license is only available to an establishment holding a restricted gaming license as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes
463.0189, or as may be amended or renumbered.
2. Such license only authorizes the sale of alcohol for on premises consumption.
K. All taverns are subject to the following conditions:
1. Taverns must meet the distance restrictions of section 9-8-8 of this Code.
2. Taverns may have a Class A slot machine license, nongambling games (e.g., pool, darts, etc.), and/or a dance hall, but shall have no other business.
3. A tavern may sell or give away cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, nuts, jerky, popcorn, potato chips, short order menus and pretzels.
4. A restaurant or lunch counter may be operated in the same building as a tavern.
L. Wholesale/import liquor licenses are subject to the following:
1. The business may not be located in a residential neighborhood.
2. The business must maintain a warehouse and office space sufficient to store at one time either:
a. A stock of alcohol equal to ten percent (10%) or more of its annual gross volume of alcohol sales to retailers within this State, or
b. A stock of beer, wine or spirit based products equal to ten percent (10%) or more of its annual gross volume of beer, wine, or spirit based products
sales to retailers within this State, or
c. A stock of alcohol whose cost of acquisition is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, or
d. A stock of beer, wine, and spirit based products whose acquisition is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more.
M. Beer, wine, spirit based products, liqueur tasting licenses are subject to the following:
1. The license allows the free distribution of samples of beer, wine, spirit based products, or liqueur not to exceed one ounce per sample.
2. May take place within the following businesses:
a. A liquor store operating in conjunction with a full off-sale liquor license may distribute free samples of wine, beer, cordial and liqueur. All such wine,
beer, spirit based products and liqueur tasting must be done under the supervision of an employee of the liquor store who holds a valid work card
and has successfully completed an approved liquor server awareness training program.
(1) Bottles of wine, beer, cordial and liqueur opened for tasting shall not be sold, distributed, or otherwise given away; and
b. A grocery store licensed for full off-sale liquor and/or full beer, wine and spirit based products off-sale may distribute free samples of alcoholic
liquor to persons twenty one (21) years of age and older provided that:
(1) The grocery store licensee submits a written request to the Department of Business License for a grocery store alcohol sampling license that
contains the following information:
(A) Name of the business;
(B) Name of the licensee;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 85/565
(C) Name of all key employees at the business;
(D) Frequency.
3. The designated key employee must be on the store premises at all times that the samples are distributed.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute samples of alcoholic liquor without first obtaining alcohol awareness training.
5. Licensees will renew the license semiannually, January 31 and July 31 with the full off-sale liquor license or beer, wine and spirits off-sale liquor
license. (Ord. 539, 6-26-2018, eff. 7-18-2018)
2-4-7: LICENSE APPLICATION, CONTENTS; GENERALLY:
Whenever a person desires to open, keep, carry on or conduct any alcoholic liquor establishment in the City, or engage in the business, such person must
make application in writing to the division to obtain a license. The applicant shall follow the application procedure as outlined in section 2-4-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-8: LICENSE APPLICANT; BUSINESS PREMISES REQUIRED:
The division must not issue a license, except for a catering liquor license, to any applicant unless the applicant has an established place of business in a
properly zoned area in accordance with title 9 of this Code. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-9: LICENSE APPLICANT; PROVISIONS FOR CORPORATION, LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, AND LIMITED LIABILITY
COMPANY (LLC):
A. In all cases where the applicant for an alcoholic liquor license is a corporation, limited partnership, or LLC, the names and residential addresses of the
officers of the corporation partners, or members of the LLC must be listed on the application.
B. In all such cases, the City Manager, or his designee, shall determine who, if any, of the principal officers of such corporation partners, or members of
such LLC are required to submit to background investigations.
C. In the case of a publicly traded corporation with corporate officers who will not be involved in the day to day operations of the business being applied
for, the corporate officers will not be required to undergo a background investigation. In any such case, the manager of the business being applied for
will be required to undergo a background investigation for a finding of suitability. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-10: FINDING OF SUITABILITY:
This chapter authorizes the City Council to require that certain persons who are directly or indirectly involved with alcoholic liquor licenses be found
suitable for such involvement. A finding of suitability relates only to the specific involvement for which it is made. If the nature of the involvement changes
from that for which the applicant is found suitable, or if, in the judgment of the City Manager, Chief of Police or City Council, new information concerning
the applicant's suitability has become available, he may be made to submit himself for a new determination of suitability. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-
2008)
2-4-11: INVESTIGATION REQUIRED; FEES:
Prior to the issuance of any liquor license, fingerprint based background checks are required, with the accompanying payment of fee, as outlined in section
2-4-3 of this chapter as amended from time to time. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-12: NO REFUND ON INVESTIGATION FEE:
In the event the applicant is denied a license after investigation, charges deposited or paid shall be forfeited and all outstanding costs incurred by the city
for investigation shall be paid as outlined in section 2-4-3 of this chapter as amended from time to time. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-13: WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION; REFUND:
If the applicant withdraws his application prior to the beginning of investigation, posted deposits shall be returned to applicant as outlined in section 2-4-3
of this chapter as amended from time to time. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-14: PREVIOUSLY INVESTIGATED; WHEN FEE WAIVED:
A. In the event any person is an applicant or member of a group of applicants, and such person has been previously investigated by the city council and
has held a license within a preceding period of one year, an investigation fee may not be required as outlined in section 2-4-3 of this chapter as
amended from time to time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 86/565
B. The city council may, in its discretion, waive payment of an investigative fee when all parties to an application have been licensed, or approved as
stockholders of a corporate license within the past year as outlined in section 2-4-3 of this chapter as amended from time to time. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008,
eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-15: LICENSE; CORPORATION, PARTNERSHIP, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY; CHANGES IN MEMBERSHIP:
A. In the case of a corporate licensee, any and all changes in the officers of such corporation must be reported to the division within thirty (30) days of
such change. Such new officers may be required to qualify for a license as required in this chapter. Any new manager of a corporate licensee shall be
required to qualify for a license as required in this chapter.
B. In the case of a partnership or limited liability company, any change in ownership of the partnership or limited liability company must be reported to the
division within thirty (30) days of such change. Any new partners or managers shall be required to qualify for a license as required in this chapter. (Ord.
402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-16: KEY EMPLOYEES:
A. Whenever it is the judgment of a majority of the council or the city manager that the public interest will best be served by requiring any person to obtain
a finding of suitability to hold key employee status, the city manager or his designee must serve notice upon the licensee to make application for such
finding of suitability.
B. Grounds for requiring a finding of suitability of a key employee which are deemed to be in the public interest include, but are not limited to, situations
where the employee is new to the industry, to the particular alcoholic liquor establishment, or to the position or level of influence or responsibility, or the
council for reasons concerning the employee's character, background, reputation or associations deems it in the city's best interest to require such
finding of suitability.
C. The licensee must, within thirty (30) days following receipt of the notice of determination to require a finding of suitability of any key employee, present
the application for key employee to the administrator or provide documentary evidence that such key employee is no longer employed by the licensee
or no longer employed in the position for which the suitability is being required. Application, investigation and payment of fees must be made in
accordance with the requirements of this title.
D. The alcoholic liquor licensee, by whom the key employee is employed, is subject to disciplinary action as set forth in sections 2-4-41 and 2-4-43 of this
chapter for continued employment of an individual in a key employee position after disapproval by the council, or for the employment of an individual in
a key position if said individual refuses to make application as a key employee when notified to do so. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-17: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION WHICH MAY BE REQUIRED:
In order to determine suitability, the applicant may be required to furnish to the city manager or his designee any or all of the following information:
A. A statement of the name and address of the owner(s) of the premises.
B. A copy of any lease or rental agreements whereby the applicant is entitled to possession of the premises.
C. Complete information pertaining to the interest held by any person, firm, or corporation other than the applicant.
D. Complete information pertaining to any change of ownership of any such interest in the premises wherein the licensed alcoholic liquor business is
operated.
E. Any other information deemed relevant to a complete investigation. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-18: LICENSE ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS; PROXIMITY OF TAVERNS SPECIFIED:
Pursuant to its general regulatory authority to regulate the sale of alcoholic beverages, the city council declares that the health, safety, morals and welfare
of the inhabitants of the city are best promoted and protected by requiring a separation between certain liquor license uses as outlined in section 9-8-8 of
this code. The council retains all discretion to approve or disapprove tavern liquor license applications. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-19: LICENSE CONVERSION OR TRANSFER OF LOCATION, RESTRICTIONS; LIQUOR LICENSE ORIGINATION FEE AND
PROCESSING FEE:
No alcoholic liquor license is convertible into a different type of license or transferable to a new location unless such proposed conversion or transfer
complies with and meets all of the requirements of this chapter and title 9 of this code. The council may authorize such conversion or transfer, which
authorization may be withheld for any reason deemed sufficient by the council. The city manager or his designee may authorize a conversion which results
in a downgrade, or a less restrictive license, such as from full off-sale to off-sale beer, wine and spirit based products. If the licensee has paid the liquor
license origination fee for the category being converted, he shall be required to pay the difference between that fee and the liquor license origination fee for
the category to which it is being converted. If the licensee has not paid a liquor license origination fee for the category being converted, he shall be
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 87/565
required to pay the liquor license origination fee for the category to which it is being converted. There shall be no refund of any license origination fee paid
if the license is downgraded. There shall be no liquor license origination fee required for a change of location. Location changes are subject to a fifty dollar
($50.00) processing fee. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-20: LICENSE, PERMIT; TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT; DEATH OF LICENSEE PROVISION:
Licenses and permits may not be transferred or assigned to another person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of death of a person duly licensed
pursuant to this chapter, the personal representative for the estate of the deceased licensee may continue to do business with the license previously
issued upon notification to the division of the death of the licensee, identification of the personal representative, payment of all fees and compliance with
the requirements of this chapter for a period not to exceed one year. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the sale, transfer or assignment of an
alcoholic beverage license and no such license shall in any event be sold, assigned or transferred and it shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
such license if the holder thereof sells, transfers or assigns any alcoholic beverage license in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 402, 7-8-
2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-21: COMMENCEMENT; NONOPERATIONAL STATUS OF BUSINESS:
The licensee must commence operation of the business within thirty (30) days after the license has been approved by the city council and may not
discontinue operation of the business for more than a three (3) month period without council approval. The council may approve nonoperational status of
the business beyond the initial three (3) month period in time increments not to exceed one year but in no event shall the council approve any
nonoperational status beyond a maximum of two (2) years. A license shall be automatically revoked at the expiration of the time periods provided by this
section unless council approval has been granted pursuant to this section. All semiannual license fees must be paid notwithstanding the licensee's
nonoperational status. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-22: LICENSEE'S OR PERMITTEE'S AGREEMENT TO CONFORM TO LAW:
Acceptance of a city alcoholic liquor license or permit by a licensee or permittee constitutes an agreement on the part of such licensee or permittee to be
bound by all of the regulations of the city as the same now are, or may hereafter be amended or promulgated. It is the sole responsibility of the licensee or
permittee to keep himself informed of the context of all such rules and regulations. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-23: ORIGINATION FEES AND LICENSE RENEWAL RATES:
Origination license fees, in addition to the semiannual renewal fees listed in this section, are imposed for the following and are payable prior to the
issuance of license:
License Classification Origination Fee
Beer, wine, spirit based products and liqueur tasting None
Beer, wine, and spirit based products off-sale $ 5,000.00
Beer, wine, and spirit based products on-sale 2,500.00
Full liquor off-sale 20,000.00
Full liquor on-sale 2,500.00
Liquor catering 1,000.00
Nonprofit club liquor 300.00
Nonrestricted/restricted gaming liquor 25,000.00
Restaurant with bar 3,500.00
Restaurant with service bar 2,500.00
Tavern 12,500.00
Wholesale/import liquor 3,500.00
All persons who have submitted a business license application for, or have submitted an application for or have received a use permit for any of the listed
liquor licenses prior to the effective date hereof shall not be required to pay the origination fee.
The licenses provided for in this chapter are issued on a semiannual basis, are not prorated, are fixed and established and must be paid in advance by all
persons receiving such licenses, respectively as follows:
License Classification Semiannual Fee
Beer, wine, spirit based products and liqueur tasting
Beer, wine, and spirit based products off-sale $ 800.00
Beer, wine, and spirit based products on-sale 350.00
Full liquor off-sale 3,500.00
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 88/565
Full liquor on-sale 750.00
Liquor catering 300.00
Nonprofit club liquor 200.00
Nonrestricted/restricted gaming liquor 3,500.00
Restaurant with bar 750.00
Restaurant with service bar 500.00
Tavern 1,000.00
Wholesale/import liquor 750.00
The renewal fees above shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication of adoption of this section for all businesses that have a current, valid
alcoholic liquor license at the time of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 539, 6-26-2018, eff. 7-18-2018)
2-4-24: LICENSE FEES; PRORATION, WHEN APPLICABLE:
A. Initial semiannual license fees paid by applicants who receive license approval on a date other than the due dates of January 31 and July 31 shall be
prorated on a quarterly basis until the next semiannual due date.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-4-23 of this chapter and subject to any other legal requirements, the City Manager is authorized, upon the
written request of an applicant, to permit an applicant to make four (4) equal payments of the entire origination license fee required in section 2-4-23 of
this chapter in the manner set forth below. In the event that a request is made for four (4) equal payments of an origination fee, the first payment must
be paid prior to issuance of the liquor license. The remaining three (3) origination fee payments shall be paid in successive three (3) month intervals.
Failure to make a timely origination fee payment shall result in immediate revocation of the liquor license. Reinstatement of the liquor license shall be in
accordance with the provisions of section 2-4-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 453, 3-27-2012, eff. 4-19-2012)
2-4-25: LICENSE ORIGINATION AND SEMIANNUAL FEES MODIFICATION:
License origination and semiannual fees shall be modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-26: PENALTIES; REVOCATION; REINSTATEMENT:
A. Late Payment Penalties: Any semiannual fee which is not received by the division on or before the due date shall be assessed a late payment penalty
in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of such semiannual fee. If the semiannual fee and penalty is not received by the division within
fifteen (15) days after the due date, an additional late payment penalty in the amount equal to thirty five percent (35%) of such semiannual fee shall be
assessed. If the semiannual fee and all penalties are not received by the division within sixty (60) days after the due date, the license shall be
automatically revoked.
B. Reinstatement:
1. A license which has been automatically revoked because a licensee has not complied with the semiannual license fee provisions of this section or
because of nonoperational status, or because a licensee has not complied with the origination fee provisions in section 2-4-24 of this chapter may be
reinstated by the city manager if, not later than sixty (60) days following the date the license was automatically revoked, the licensee pays to the
division:
a. The delinquent and unpaid semiannual license fee or origination fee;
b. All late payment penalties that have accrued pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section; and
c. A five hundred dollar ($500.00) license reinstatement assessment.
2. Upon payment of the delinquent semiannual license fee and/or origination fee, all applicable late payment penalties and the reinstatement
assessment, the city manager shall reinstate the revoked license. Upon such reinstatement of the license, the licensee shall be allowed to reengage
in the sale of alcoholic beverages at the location to which the license applies. (Ord. 453, 3-27-2012, eff. 4-19-2012)
2-4-27: RECLASSIFICATION/CONVERSION OF EXISTING LICENSES:
All alcoholic beverage licenses valid as of the effective date hereof shall be converted to the new license classification and be subject to the license fees
set forth in this chapter based on the following:
Current Classification New Classification
Brewpub liquor license Tavern
Import wholesale alcoholic liquor license Wholesale/import liquor
Packaged beer license Beer, wine, and spirit based products off-sale
Packaged beer and wine license Beer, wine, and spirit based products off-sale
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 89/565
Packaged liquor license Full liquor off-sale
Portable bar liquor license Liquor catering
Resort hotel and casino liquor license Nonrestricted/restricted gaming liquor
Restaurant liquor license Restaurant with bar or restaurant with service bar
Retail beer license Beer, wine, and spirit based products off-sale or on-sale
Retail beer and wine license Beer, wine, and spirit based products off-sale or on-sale
Service bar license Restaurant with service bar
Service club liquor license Nonprofit club liquor
Tavern liquor license Tavern
No current liquor license classification Beer, wine, spirit based products and liqueur tasting
(Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-28: SPECIAL EVENTS PERMITS:
The city manager or his designee may authorize the issuance of a special events permit which includes the sale or serving of liquor pursuant to chapter 12
of this title. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-29: LICENSE ISSUANCE MORATORIUM:
The council may declare a quarterly, semiannual or annual moratorium by resolution on any or all alcoholic liquor applications or licenses if, in its
discretion, it is found to be in the best interests of the city. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-30: LAND USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS; CONFORMANCE WITH TITLE 9 OF THIS CODE:
A. No alcoholic liquor license will be issued unless the location is in accordance with title 9 of this code.
B. Approval of a location or of a use permit pursuant to title 9 of this code does not guarantee or constitute approval of any liquor license. (Ord. 402, 7-8-
2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-31: DISTANCE LIMITATIONS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR LICENSES:
A. Locations for certain alcoholic liquor licenses are subject to distance restrictions as set forth in title 9 of this code. No such liquor licenses will be issued
unless the location is in accordance with title 9 of this code.
B. Approval of a location or of a use permit pursuant to title 9 of this code does not guarantee or constitute approval of any liquor license. (Ord. 402, 7-8-
2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-32: INTERIOR LIGHTING:
At all times while any alcoholic liquor licensed premises is open for business, the interior lighting therein shall be sufficient to make easily discernible upon
immediately entering the main entrance the appearance and conduct of all persons and patrons in that portion of the premises where alcoholic liquors are
sold, served, delivered or consumed. In no event shall the intensity of the interior lighting be less than one foot-candle power light when measured to a
point thirty inches (30") from the floor whenever persons and patrons are sitting or standing within the premises. This requirement shall apply in all cases
except in licensed establishments where floorshows are permitted under city ordinance. In such cases, the floor showroom lights only may be dimmed
during the floorshow, and at the conclusion of each floorshow, the lighting must then immediately be restored to the minimum standards of light intensity
prescribed. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-33: DISTRIBUTING OFF PREMISES PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any holder of an alcoholic liquor license, or any agents or employees of such licensee to sell, serve, give away or otherwise distribute
any alcoholic liquor outside the premises described in the application of such license.
B. Any licensee who desires to sell, serve, give away, or otherwise distribute any alcoholic liquor in the parking lot, or other outdoor portion of the premises
for a specific event may make written application to the city manager at least ten (10) days prior to the event for permission to do so. Upon receipt of a
written request, the city manager shall require the applicant to apply for and obtain a special events permit pursuant to the requirements in chapter 12
of this title. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-34: INTOXICATION ON PREMISES OF LICENSEE OR EMPLOYEES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 90/565
It is unlawful for any licensee or any of his agents or employees, while engaged in the performance of his duties, to be in an intoxicated condition, in or
about the premises where the business of dispensing alcoholic liquors is being conducted and while such licensee, agent or employee is engaged in the
performance of his ownership or employment duties. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-35: PROVIDING TO INTOXICATED PERSON PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any licensee or any of his agents or employees to sell, serve or give away any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person. (Ord. 402, 7-8-
2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-36: DISTRIBUTING TO MINOR; ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICY; COPY ON PREMISES; REQUIREMENT TO SHOW:
A. It is unlawful for any licensee or any of his agents or employees to sell, serve or give any alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years.
B. Every liquor licensee or permittee who sells, serves, gives, or otherwise furnishes alcoholic liquor shall adopt a policy to prevent a person under twenty
one (21) years of age from obtaining an alcoholic beverage from that person.
C. A copy of the policy shall be kept on the premises at all times and shall be made known to and available to all employees.
D. The policy shall be available upon request by the business license division or police department. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-37: MINOR EMPLOYMENT IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided by state law, it is unlawful for any permittee or licensee to employ or to permit a person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to sell or handle alcoholic liquor.
However, a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age, while working in his/her capacity as an employee of a supermarket, convenience store,
drugstore or department store may handle or sell at off-sale any alcoholic liquor when he/she is being directly supervised by another employee or owner
who is at least twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-38: APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES:
The terms and conditions of this chapter are intended to be applied in conjunction with all other ordinances of the city or state requirements for the
protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The fact that such ordinances or state requirements are not specifically referred to in this
chapter does not preclude their application to alcoholic liquor licensees or permittees. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-39: LICENSED PREMISES; COSTUMES OF MALE AND FEMALE EMPLOYEES:
A. It is unlawful for any person, while acting as an employee, waiter, waitress, performer or entertainer in any live act, play, demonstration or exhibition or
while serving food or drink to any customer, to do any of the following acts on the premises where alcoholic beverages are licensed to be sold:
1. Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
2. Expose or use any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or stimulates the genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region.
B. A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress, performer or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such
person is paid any compensation.
C. It is unlawful for any licensee, or any owner, officer, director, representative, manager, agent, servant or employee of a licensee to allow, cause, permit,
procure, counsel or assist any person to perform any of the acts set forth in this section on the premises where alcoholic beverages are licensed to be
sold or served. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-40: LICENSED PREMISES ENTERTAINMENT RESTRICTIONS; APPLICATION:
Section 2-4-32 of this chapter shall apply to all establishments defined in this chapter which sell, serve or give away alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008,
eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-41: ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
The police department and city manager or his designee shall have jurisdiction to investigate and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The police
department and city manager or his designee shall have all powers which may be necessary or appropriate for a complete and effective exercise of
jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the power to enter and inspect the licensed premises at any time during the business hours of the licensee, and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 91/565
the police department and the city manager or his designee shall have the power to examine all books and records of the licensee or applicant. The police
department and the city manager or his designee are each authorized to request information from a licensee or applicant at any time in furtherance of the
exercise of their jurisdiction. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-42: LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, LIMITATION:
The provisions of chapter 1 of this title are applicable to all alcoholic liquor licenses. In addition, the council may deem that any activity on the part of the
licensee, his agents or employees, or a person previously found suitable, which is contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter, or which violates any
ordinance or regulation of the city or the state of Nevada is grounds for disciplinary action which may result in a revocation, suspension, or limitation of the
alcoholic liquor license. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each of the following licensees are declared to be subject to disciplinary action:
A. Each licensee who violates any provision of this title;
B. Each licensee who knowingly does any act to sell, lease or purchase an alcoholic liquor business operation or any portion thereof without taking
immediate and affirmative steps to obtain council approval;
C. Each licensee who knowingly fails to report or conceals from the council a full disclosure of the names of persons having an interest in the ownership of
or having an equitable or beneficial right to the profits under a license in which he has an interest;
D. Each licensee who knowingly fails to report or conceals from proper authority any information which it is his duty to supply under any statute, ordinance,
and/or regulation of the state or city;
E. Each licensee who, for conduct subsequent to the issuance of a license, becomes ineligible to hold an alcoholic liquor license as set out in the statutes,
ordinances, and/or regulations of the state or city;
F. Each licensee who permits his licensed premises to be frequented by, or become the meeting place, hangout or rendezvous for prostitutes, or those
who engage in sexual conduct on the premises, vagrants, intoxicated persons, or those who engage in the use or distribution of controlled substances,
or in any other illegal occupation or business and is subject to provisional suspension of his license and possible disciplinary action as prescribed
herein. The provisional suspension must be in writing describing the violations present, or committed, and must not be rescinded until the violations are
corrected, or by order of the council in accordance with section 2-1-14 of this title.
Note: Any inaction or correction by the licensee of any violations or conditions in accordance with this subsection, which resulted in a correction notice,
or a provisional suspension of a license, does not preclude further disciplinary action by the city manager or council in accordance with this chapter and
section 2-1-14 of this title.
G. Each licensee who makes a misrepresentation of a material fact in his application to obtain a license;
H. Each licensee whose alcoholic liquor license in any place in the state of Nevada has been revoked for cause;
I. Each licensee who knowingly allows any male or female person to appear nude in any public area on its premises including, but not limited to, theaters,
lounges, and showrooms;
1. "Knowingly" means having a general knowledge of or reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of
the character of any exposure of the male or female body;
2. "Male or female person" means a licensee, his agents, employees, independent contractors and their agents and employees, and patrons;
J. Each licensee who employs a person in a key employee position, if said employee refuses to make application as a key employee when notified to do
so as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-43: LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
Every licensee shall be responsible for the acts of his employees and agents committed while on the licensed premises and during the course and scope
of employment. Every licensee shall accordingly use adequate care in the selection of his employees and agents. In any license suspension, limitation or
revocation proceedings, the fact that the licensee did not have actual knowledge of the events complained of shall be no defense and every licensee
accepts his license subject to said condition. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
2-4-44: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof such
person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowable under Nevada Revised Statutes, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term not
to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such conviction shall also subject the permittee or licensee to have his permit or license
revoked. Thereafter, any person adjudged guilty of a violation of this chapter or any of the terms, conditions or provisions thereof may, in the discretion of
the council, be denied a permit or license. (Ord. 402, 7-8-2008, eff. 7-31-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 92/565
Chapter 5
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PAWNBROKERS AND
SECONDHAND DEALERS
ARTICLE A. DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS
2-5A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT; LICENSE REQUIRED; ISSUANCE PROHIBITED TO DESIGNATED PERSONS:
A. The city council declares that this article is an exercise of the regulatory powers delegated to the council by the state of Nevada pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 268.095(1)(a), inter alia.
B. This article is to protect against criminal activity, including fraud and burglary, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of
privacy and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety and welfare, by regulating door to door solicitors, peddlers and canvassers. (Ord. 477, 12-
10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER: Any natural person who is not in the business of selling goods and who makes or attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his
residence, without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: a) enlisting or attempting to enlist support for or
against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation
of money or anything of value for or against such cause, b) distributing or attempting to distribute a handbill or flier advertising a noncommercial event or
service, or c) making or attempting to make noncommercial surveys for research purposes, analysis, opinion polls and any similar work.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, religious or eleemosynary group, partnership, association or corporation which solicits
and collects funds for charitable purposes and is classified in one of the categories defined in section 501 of the United States internal revenue code as
being exempt from payment of federal income tax as evidenced by the organization's 501 registration number or is duly organized pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapters 81, 82, 84 or 86.
DEPARTMENT: The development services department, business license division.
DIRECTOR: The business license official or their designee in the business license division of the city.
PEDDLER: Any natural person other than a mobile food vendor who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the City, not having been invited
by the resident or occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering or attempting to
offer the same for sale. "Peddler" does not include a natural person who distributes handbills or fliers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event,
activity, good, or service that is offered to a resident for purchase at a location away from his residence or at a time different from the time of visit.
SOLICITOR: Any natural person other than a mobile food vendor who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the City, not having been invited
by the resident or occupant thereof, for the primary purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares or other
personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. "Solicitor" includes any natural person who distributes a
handbill or flier advertising a commercial event, good, or service. This definition also includes any natural person who, without invitation, goes upon private
residential property for the primary purpose of requesting a donation for political, charitable, religious purposes or other noncommercial purpose, even if
incidental to such purpose the solicitor offers or provides goods or services. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any natural person eighteen (18) years of age or older to engage in any peddling or solicitation activities within the City without first
obtaining a license issued by the department. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Information Required: Applicants for a permit and license under this article must file with the business license official a sworn application in writing in
duplicate on a form to be furnished to the business license official, which shall give the following information:
1. Name Of Applicant: True and legal name and description of the applicant and any aliases used by the applicant.
2. Address: Permanent home and full local address of the applicant.
3. Description Of Business: A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
4. Name And Address Of Employer: If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
5. Duration Of Business: The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
6. Information Regarding The Goods To Be Sold: The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are
manufactured or produced, location of such goods or products at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 93/565
7. Photograph Of Applicant: A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which
picture shall be approximately two inches by two inches (2" x 2") showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner.
8. References: The names of at least two (2) reliable property owners in the City who will certify the applicant's good character and business
respectability, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
9. Statement Regarding Former Convictions: A statement regarding whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or
violation of any Municipal law, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed.
10. Additional Information: The business license official may require such additional questions to be answered by each applicant as he deems proper
and necessary. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
B. Investigation Of Applicant; Fee:
1. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: With the exception of any applicants currently licensed by a State board or agency that requires a
background check prior to licensing, all applicants applying for a permit or license pursuant to this article, all employees of applicants who engage in
the activity of a door to door solicitor or peddler, and all persons who directly, in this City, supervise or control the activities of said employees shall
provide the City of Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the Mesquite Police Department. Fingerprint data will
be used to conduct State and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the City Police Agency is authorized to transmit
the fingerprint data to the Nevada Department of Public Safety to conduct State criminal records checks. The Nevada Department of Public Safety is
authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the
State and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the City of Mesquite. The City of Mesquite shall also investigate the character, reputation
and financial condition of all applicants. Upon completion of the investigation, the City of Mesquite shall render a fitness determination regarding
persons being investigated. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and Public Law 92-544. (Ord. 523, 9-26-
2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2. Payment Of Fee: Any person filing an application for a door to door solicitor or peddler license in the City, shall deposit with the business license
official a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of one hundred forty five dollars ($145.00) per applicant.
3. Forfeiture Or Return Of Fee: All investigation and fingerprinting fees shall be paid in full prior to investigation. In the event the applicant is denied a
license after investigation, charges deposited or paid shall be forfeited. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to beginning any investigation,
the investigation and fingerprinting fees shall be returned to the applicant.
4. Group Or Corporation: In the event the applicant shall be a group or corporation, there shall be required an investigation of each employee who
engages in the activity of a door to door solicitor or peddler and also each person who directly, in this City, supervises or controls the activities of the
employees; and a fingerprinting fee of forty five dollars ($45.00) shall be collected upon each such person.
5. Fees Paid Prior To Investigation: No investigation shall be made on any applicant prior to the payment by the applicant and receipt of such fee by the
business license official and no license shall be issued until all such fees are paid.
C. Investigation Of Application:
1. Investigation: Upon receipt of the application and payment of fees, the original shall be referred to the business license official, who shall cause such
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good.
2. Statement Of Prior Arrest: The application statement of prior arrest and/or conviction shall be forwarded to the Police Chief for verification. The
Police Chief shall immediately report his findings to the business license official.
D. Denial Of License:
1. Upon the Director's review of the application, the business license official shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant for any of the following
reasons:
a. The applicant has been convicted of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or a misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled
substances, or any violent act against a person or property, such conviction having been entered within the ten (10) years immediately preceding
the date of application;
b. The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the
ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application.
2. The license application may also be denied for good cause as set forth in section 2-1-13 of this title.
3. The business license official's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that
his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. Notice shall be delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown
on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address.
E. Approval Of Application: If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
business license official shall endorse on the application the approval thereof.
F. License Fee To Accompany Application: The required license fee for the applicable period of time shall accompany each application for issuance or
renewal of a license and shall be paid to the business license official. The license fee shall be charged as outlined in section 2-1-13 of this title as may
be amended or renumbered from time to time.
G. License Issuance; Contents Of Identification Card, Identification Exhibition:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 94/565
1. Upon the approval of the business license official after due investigation of the applicant's suitability, and upon receipt of the license fee, if required,
the business license official shall issue a business license to the door to door solicitor or peddler.
2. An identification card for each door to door solicitor, peddler, or persons acting in supervisory positions above them shall be obtained from the Police
Chief. The identification card, to be carried on the person of each such person at all times whenever he is so engaged in the City, shall include
thereon his name and address, his right or left thumbprint, a photograph of the person, his description, the license and its number under which he is
working, the date of its issuance, and the type of goods for which it was issued and the vehicle, if any, he commonly uses. Every natural person
required to obtain a license and identification card under the provisions of this article shall allow inspection of the license and identification card upon
request by any prospective customer, business license officer in the City or police officer. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-5: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire in twelve (12) months. (Ord. 523, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-5A-6: TRANSFER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the licensee to use any license or identification card issued under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 477, 12-
10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-7: LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS OF EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS:
Any person or entity who employs, contracts, or otherwise engages another to conduct soliciting, peddling, or canvassing activities, is responsible for the
acts or omissions of his employees or agents committed during the course of employment or performance of activities governed by this article. In any
suspension, limitation, or revocation proceeding, the fact that the distributing service or person who employed, contracted, or engaged another did not
have actual knowledge of the violations shall be no defense. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-8: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
A. No solicitor, canvasser, or peddler shall intentionally make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
B. A solicitor, canvasser, or peddler shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor, canvasser, or
peddler; 2) the name and address of the entity with whom the solicitor, canvasser, or peddler is associated; and 3) the purpose of the solicitor,
canvasser, or peddler's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an
informational flier.
C. No solicitor, canvasser, or peddler shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his or her true and correct name.
D. No solicitor or peddler shall represent directly or by implication that the granting of a business license certificate implies any endorsement by the City of
the solicitor's or peddler's goods or services or of the individual solicitor or peddler. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-9: ENTRY UPON POSTED PREMISES UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any natural person, while canvassing, peddling or soliciting, to enter upon any residential premises or to knock on the door, window
or any other part of the residential structure, or ring the bell of any residential premises, or to do any other act calculated to attract the attention of anyone
inside of the premises, where the owner, resident, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry, or any of the points of
ingress to the premises, a sign with visible and legible letters at least three-fourths (3/4) of an inch in height bearing the words "No Trespassers", "No
Canvassers", "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or words of similar import. A sign containing any of these or similar phrases is deemed to prohibit all activities
governed by this article. This regulation shall apply to all groups of structures or complexes such as apartments, condominiums or private gated
communities, which have posted such a sign or signs with letters at least one and a half inches in height at the entrance(s) or other point(s) of ingress
regardless of whether any individual particular residence is posted. This section shall not apply, however, when the solicitor, peddler or canvasser has,
despite the signage, been specifically invited by the owner, resident, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-
31-2013)
2-5A-10: HOURS OF SOLICITATION:
No person, while conducting the activities of a canvasser, peddler or solicitor, shall enter upon any private property, knock on doors, ring any bells, or
otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-
2013)
2-5A-11: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, OR PEDDLERS:
A. It is a violation of this article for any solicitor, canvasser, or peddler through ruse, deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take
action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 95/565
B. Any solicitor, canvasser, or peddler, who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or dwelling to leave, shall immediately and peacefully
depart.
C. The solicitor, canvasser, or peddler, shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical contact with, or touch another person without the person's
consent.
D. The solicitor, canvasser, or peddler, shall not follow a person into a residence without their explicit consent.
E. The solicitor, canvasser, or peddler, shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and
unequivocally their lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor, canvasser, or peddler.
F. The solicitor, canvasser, or peddler shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-12: RESTRICTION ON DISTRIBUTING, DEPOSITING, OR PLACING MATERIAL ON PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any material advertising their wares or any material
advertising the cause for which they are soliciting or canvassing upon any private property, if requested by an owner, resident, occupant, or person legally
in charge of the property, not to do so, or if there is placed on the property in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign with visible and
legible letters at least three-fourths (3/4) of an inch in height bearing the words "No Trespassers", "No Canvassers", "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or any
similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of the property do not desire to be molested, or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to
have any such advertising materials left upon such property.
This provision shall not apply, however, when the solicitor, peddler or canvasser has, despite the signage, been specifically invited by the owner, resident,
occupant or person legally in charge of the property to leave the material.
Every person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 477,
12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-13: LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this article may be revoked, limited or suspended for any of the reasons set forth in section 2-1-14 of this title or subsection 2-5A-
4D of this article. Any inaction or correction by the licensee of any violations or conditions which resulted in a correction notice, or a provisional suspension
of a license, does not preclude further disciplinary action by the business license official or council in accordance with this article and section 2-1-14 of this
title. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5A-14: APPEALS; JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Appeal rights are the same as those set forth in section 2-1-14 of this title as amended or renumbered from time to time. Procedures for judicial review of
final decisions are the same as those set forth in section 2-1-14 of this title as amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-
31-2013)
2-5A-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as the law allows
for a misdemeanor crime. Whenever in this article any act is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in this article the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense or misdemeanor, the
doing of any such prohibited act, or the failure to do any such required act, shall constitute a violation of this article. Every day of violation of this article
constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
ARTICLE B. PAWNBROKERS
2-5B-1: STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT; REGULATION:
It is found and declared that the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and the police power of the city, require the
regulation and control of all persons engaged in the business of pawnbrokers or in the operation of pawnshops. All "pawnbrokers" as defined in section 2-
5B-2 of this article, shall be licensed and controlled to protect the public health, safety, morals, good and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city and
to safeguard the public. It is further found and declared that the right to obtain such license is a privilege due to the opportunities for criminal transactions
or the hiding or exchange of stolen goods and other illegal or illicit activity and that the operation of such facility, when authorized by such license, is a
privileged business subject to regulations, and that the license may be revoked for violation of the conditions of this article. In conformity with the policy of
this article, the following persons are declared not to be qualified to hold a license under the provisions of this article:
A. A person who does not possess or who does not have a reputation for possessing a good moral character.
B. A person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 96/565
C. A person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
D. A person whom the city, after due consideration for the protection of the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the city, determines is not a suitable person to receive or hold a license.
E. A person who is a licensee of either the Nevada state gaming commission or the licensing board of Clark County relative to gaming or the licensee of
any incorporated cities in the state relative to gaming.
F. A person whose license, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, or those ordinances or statutes of any other agency lawfully engaged in the
licensing or regulation of pawnbroker businesses, has been revoked for cause.
G. A person who, at the time of renewal of any license issued under this article, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
H. A partnership, limited partnership or association, unless all of the members of such partnership, limited partnership or association are qualified to obtain
a license.
I. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state of Nevada, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under Nevada law to transact
business in Nevada.
J. A corporation or limited liability corporation, if an officer, director, or member thereof would not be eligible to receive a license for any reason which
would disqualify an individual applicant. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the words and terms defined in this section have the meanings ascribed to them unless a different meaning clearly appears in the
context.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle that is used upon a highway, but not operated on rails, for the purpose of transporting persons or property.
PAWNBROKER: Any person within the city who loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor, or who loans or advances money or personal property by taking chattel mortgage
security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property in his possession. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroking business in the city without first having procured a city license therefor, as provided in
this article. A separate license shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the conducting of such pawnbroking business.
B. If a pawnbroker accepts motor vehicles as pledged property or in any other manner allows the use of a motor vehicle as collateral for a loan, the
pawnbroker must obtain an additional automobile pawnbroker license from the city as required by Nevada Revised Statutes 268.0973, as may be
amended or renumbered from time to time, and pay the additional fee outlined in section 2-1-13 of this title (pawnbrokers), as may be amended or
renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-4: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this article shall state the name of the person to whom issued, the place of business and street number where such business is
located and the amount of capital employed. Such license shall entitle the person receiving it to do business at the place designated in such license. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-5: POSTING LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroking business in the city, unless, he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place, in the place of
the business, the license certificate. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
A. Application For License:
1. Application for a pawnbroker license or motor vehicle pawn license shall be filed with the business license official.
2. After the time of approval of the business license, a pawnshop license must be active within thirty (30) days, with all fees and bonding requirements
completed. In no instance may a license remain inactive for more than forty five (45) days unless there has been special approval by the city after a
review of circumstances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 97/565
3. Applicants shall reply in writing to any and all questions pertaining to the issuance or renewal of licenses, as may be required by the city to process
applications.
B. Contents Of Application:
1. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, and in case of a firm or corporation, the names and addresses of the persons
composing such firm, or the names and addresses of the officers and stockholders of such corporation; also the place, street and number where
such business is to be carried on; and shall specify the amount of capital proposed to be used by the applicant in such business; and signed by at
least five (5) citizens of the city, of good reputation, certifying to the good reputation and moral character of the applicant.
2. Said application shall also state in writing the names and addresses of all persons owning an interest in such business, including the name and
address of the general manager or managers of the business, and where there is more than one owner of a pawnbroker's establishment, the names
of all such persons owning an interest in such business shall be listed on the application, together with a statement as to the percentage of such
business owned by each individual.
3. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must state in the application his name and place of residence, whether or not he is a citizen of the
United States, whether or not he is a bona fide resident of Clark County and a registered voter of the state.
4. Said application shall set forth a consent to police department and business license department investigation of the applicant's background,
including, but not limited to, financial background, employment history and criminal record.
5. The application shall require the applicant to list any and all previous arrests, convictions or pending litigation, except minor traffic citations, and the
applicant must certify that they are true and complete. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-7: APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION FEES:
A. Application Fee: At the time of filing such application, the applicant shall deposit with the business license official an amount of money equal to at least
one-half (1/2) year, and not more than one year's charge for the license applied for. This sum of money shall be refunded to the applicant if the license
petitioned for is not granted.
B. Investigation Fees: Each applicant shall be required to deposit with the application a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of one hundred
forty five dollars ($145.00).
C. Timing Of Fee Payment: No investigation shall be made of any applicant for a pawnbroker dealer's license prior to the payment by the applicant, and
receipt of application and investigation fees, by the city, and no license shall be issued until all appropriate fees are paid. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff.
12-31-2013)
2-5B-8: FINGERPRINT BASED BACKGROUND CHECKS:
A. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: In addition to submitting an application, each applicant for a pawnbroker license shall present themselves to the
city police agency for fingerprinting and furnish the city police agency or business license department any other information necessary to conduct an
investigation of such applicant's character and reputation. In all cases where the applicant for a pawnbroker's license is a firm, partnership, association
or corporation, the business license official shall determine who of the members, principal officers, directors, stockholders, and/or managers shall
present themselves to the city police agency for fingerprinting. Fingerprint data provided by applicants will be used to conduct state and national
criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada
department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint
data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be
disseminated to the city police agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the city police agency shall prepare and submit to the business license
official a report containing findings and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-9: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
A. All fingerprints required to be taken under the terms of this article and all information obtained by reason of said fingerprints shall be maintained by the
city police agency in a confidential file to be opened for the inspection only of city council members, law enforcement officers and peace officers of the
state.
B. All information, other than criminal history information, of a confidential nature supplied under the terms of these regulations shall be maintained by the
business license official in a confidential file, to be open for the inspection only of city council members, law enforcement officers and peace officers of
the state. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-10: PROPRIETOR ONLY ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No pawnbroker license shall be issued to any person, copartnership, corporation, company or association other than the real and actual proprietor of the
business and place of business for which it is issued. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-11: BUSINESS PROHIBITED IN LIQUOR OR GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit pawnbroker business in any establishment wherein there is licensed liquor or gaming. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 98/565
eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-12: BOND FOR PAWNBROKER:
A. Bond: The applicant shall file, with the application, a bond running to the city, conditioned for the faithful observance of all ordinances of the city
respecting pawnbrokers, during the continuance of such license, and any renewal thereof. This bond shall be in the sum of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), with two (2) or more individual sureties. The applicant shall attach to the bond a justification to the effect that the sureties are residents
within the county and each are worth the amount specified in such bond, over and above all just debts and liabilities, and exclusive of property exempt
from execution.
B. In Lieu Of Bond: In lieu of the above mentioned bond there may be used a surety bond from a company authorized to do business in the state of
Nevada.
C. Bond Approval: The bond provided for in this section shall be approved by the business license official before any pawnbroker license shall be issued.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-13: LICENSE FEE:
License fees shall be charged as outlined in section 2-1-13 of this title, as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff.
12-31-2013)
2-5B-14: LICENSE LIMITATION:
A pawnbroker license shall not permit the licensee to conduct the business of a merchant, or any other business except the sale of pawned or pledged
articles or things after forfeiture according to law. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-15: RENEWAL, COMPLIANCE:
No pawnbroker license now issued, or hereafter issued, shall be renewed or extended for a total period of more than one year without complying with all
the provisions of this article. The provisions of this article as to issuance of licenses shall apply to all persons now holding a pawnbroker license when the
same shall expire by their terms. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-16: COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW:
Each new pawnshop licensee shall be subject to a comprehensive review by staff after six (6) months of operation. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-
2013)
2-5B-17: LICENSE TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Any assignee or transferee of a valid pawnbroker license is required to receive a pawnbroker license prior to engaging in the business of pawnbroking. It is
unlawful for any licensee to permit the licensed premises to be managed or utilized by a lessee, assignee or other transferee who has not first received a
pawnbroker license and obtained approval of city for the transfer or assignment of the pawnbroker licensed, and filed a new bond in accordance with
section 2-5B-12 of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to do business, or attempt to do business, under a license transferred to them without
such consent of the city. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-18: REGISTRATION CARD REQUIRED:
All owners, managers and stockholders actively engaging in the management of a pawnbroker operation, and all employees thereof, must present
themselves for fingerprinting in the police chief's office and secure a registration card prior to operating the establishment, and such registration card must
be carried upon the person at all times, must remain current and is nontransferable, but shall be revocable by the city for cause. Each individual subject to
this provision shall provide a full set of fingerprints and a nonrefundable fingerprinting fee of forty five dollars ($45.00). Fingerprint data will be used to
conduct state and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data
to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this
fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks
will be disseminated to the city police agency, which shall render fitness determinations. No person shall be employed by any applicant without first
complying with the provisions of this section. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-19: RETENTION OF PLEDGE OR PAWN:
The pawnbroker shall retain in his possession every pledge or pawn ninety (90) days after the maturity of the loan, or ninety (90) days after the last
payment of interest, whichever is greater; provided that all personal property including motor vehicles, placed in pawn, must be held for redemption by the
pawnbroker, for at least one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of pledge. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 99/565
2-5B-20: PAWN TICKET:
A. Pawn Ticket To Be Furnished To Pledgor: Any pawnbroker shall furnish to the pledgor what is known as a pawn ticket (i.e., receipt), plainly numbered,
containing the name, residence, age, sex, race and description of the pledgor, a description of the article or thing pawned or received, the specific type
of transaction (buy, pawn or sell), date of receipt thereof, the amount loaned and rate of interest, the time for redemption, and names of the pledges,
and shall affix to each article or thing, a tag, upon which tag shall be inscribed a number of legible characters, which number shall correspond to the
number of the pawn ticket, and be entered in the record ledger required to be kept pursuant to this article. In the case of motor vehicles, the description
shall include the make, model, color, year, and vehicle identification number of the particular vehicle.
B. Information On Back Of Pawn Ticket:
1. The following information shall be printed on the back of each pawn ticket required to be given the pledgor:
In the event of failure to pay the loan within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date hereof, or within ninety (90) days after maturity, or within
ninety (90) days after payment of any monthly interest due, whichever period of time is the greater, you shall thereby forfeit all right and title unto
such pledged and pawned property to the pawnbroker who shall thereby acquire an absolute title to the same.
2. The reverse side of the receipt shall also be marked in such a manner that the amounts of principal and interest and any other charges paid by the
person securing the loan can be clearly designated thereon. Each payment shall be entered upon the reverse side of the ticket and shall designate
how much of the payment is being credited to principal, how much to interest, and how much to any other charge, with the date of the payments
shown thereon. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-21: SEPARATION OF ITEMS:
The pawnbroker shall be responsible to keep separate any pawned items being held for redemption from those items being released for sale after the
redemption period. All pawned items being held for redemption must be stored in an area not visible to customers. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-22: DAILY REPORT TO POLICE CHIEF:
Every pawnbroker in the city must, before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of every day, make and deliver to the police chief, at his office, a full, true
and detailed report in writing, on forms setting forth an exact description of each article or thing pawned or received by such pawnbroker during the twenty
four (24) hours immediately preceding such report. This report shall be a full, detailed and correct copy of all entries in the master record ledger required to
be kept as stated in section 2-5B-24 of this article. If no article or thing has been pawned or received, a report must be made to that effect. (Ord. 477, 12-
10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-23: FORMS FOR DAILY REPORT:
The chief of police or his designee shall cause such a number of blanks to be printed as may be necessary for the purpose of making the reports required
by this article. The police chief or his designee shall from time to time cause such additional blanks to be printed as may be required. These blanks shall
be so printed and subdivided that they shall have space for writing in all the matters required by this article to be registered and reported. This report shall
be written in the English language in a clear, legible manner. Such blanks shall bear a caption, providing spaces in which shall be filled in the date of the
report, the name and residence of the person making the same and the hour of day when made, and all other matters required by this article to be
reported. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-24: PAWNSHOP RECORD LEDGER:
A. Every pawnbroker shall maintain in his place of business a book or other permanent record ("master record ledger") wherein every transaction made
must be legibly recorded in the English language, at the time of each loan or purchase, a record thereof containing:
1. The date and time of the transaction.
2. The name or other identification of the person or employee conducting the transaction.
3. The name, age, street and house number, the serial number of one piece of positive identification and a general description of the complexion, color
of hair and facial appearance of the person with whom the transaction is had. In lieu of recording the serial number of a piece of positive
identification, the record may contain an indication that the pawnbroker knows the person with whom the transaction is had.
4. A description of the property received in pledge. In the case of watches, the description must contain the name of the maker and the number of the
works or the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed thereon must be included in the description.
5. The amount of money loaned or advanced.
6. The number of any pawn ticket issued.
7. The time when the property is redeemable.
B. No entry made in the master record ledger shall be erasable, obliterated or defaced.
C. The master record ledger as well as all goods, articles, vehicles or things pawned, pledged or deposited, shall be open and available to the prosecuting
attorney or any peace officer upon reasonable notice to the pawnbroker.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 100/565
D. Upon receipt of any pawned item, the pawnbroker should mark the same with a mark of identification, which will be related to the entry made in the
master record ledger. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-25: POLICE TO PROVIDE FORMS AND FILE REPORTS:
The chief of police or his designee shall deliver the blanks provided for in section 2-5B-23 of this article to the person from whom these reports are
required, from time to time, at the cost of the police department. The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall, upon receipt of such reports, file them in
some secure place in his office, and they shall be open to inspection only by the chief of police, the city prosecutor, any officer directed by the chief of
police, or upon the order of some court duly made for that purpose. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-26: CERTIFICATION OF RIGHT TO PLEDGE OR SELL PROPERTY; UNLAWFUL TO ACCEPT ARTICLES FROM CERTAIN
PERSONS:
A. The person with whom a transaction is had shall, at the time of the transaction, certify in writing that he has the legal right to pledge or sell property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his servant, agent or employee to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge from a person who
appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or is a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-27: PAWNSHOP EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTED TO PERSONS OVER EIGHTEEN YEARS:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to employ any clerk or person under the age of eighteen (18) years to receive any pledge or make any loan. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-28: PAWNBROKER LIABLE FOR EMPLOYEES:
The holder of a pawnbroker's license shall be liable for any and all acts of his employees, and for any violation by them of any of the provisions of this
article. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-29: RETENTION AND REMOVAL OF PROPERTY RECEIVED IN PLEDGE:
A. No property received in pledge by a pawnbroker may be removed from his place of business after the receipt of the property is reported to the chief of
police as provided in this article, unless the property is: redeemed by the owner thereof; or released to the custody of a peace officer in the manner set
forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 646.047.
B. A pawnbroker who receives a motor vehicle in pledge as security for a loan may remove the motor vehicle from his place of business to a place used
for storage of motor vehicles that meets the requirements set forth in section 2-5B-35 of this article. The pawnbroker shall hold the motor vehicle at the
place of storage for the same period that personal property must be held at his place of business pursuant to this article and may only remove the
motor vehicle from the place of storage under the same conditions that personal property may be removed from the place of business pursuant to this
article. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-30: IDENTIFICATION OF BUSINESS REQUIRED:
Every person licensed under this article shall cause his name, or the firm name, or the corporation name, with the words "licensed pawnbroker" to be
printed or painted, in large, legible characters, and placed over the outside of the door or entrance of his office or place of business. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-31: RESTRICTION ON KNIVES AND RAZORS:
A licensed pawnbroker may buy, sell or take for pledge, pawn or security, safety razors, or any dirk, bowie knife or any other knife of any kind or size,
whether or not it has any blade over three inches (3") long; provided, however, that no licensed pawnbroker shall buy, sell or take for pledge, pawn or
security any other razor, sword, cane, slingshot, blackjack, brass knuckles or Spanish stiletto; provided further, however, that permission to buy, sell or take
for pledge, pawn or security of any of the aforementioned permitted knives does not mandate permission to carry such weapons concealed upon the
person of anyone in contravention of applicable city ordinances or state statutes. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-32: LIMITS ON INTEREST AND CHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or receive interest at a greater rate than ten percent (10%) a month for money loaned on the security of
personal property actually received in pledge, and no person shall ask or receive a higher rate of interest or discount on any such loan or on any actual
pretended sale or redemption of personal property; provided, however, that for any loan made, the pawnbroker may collect a handling charge of five
dollars ($5.00) in addition to the interest rate. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or receive any appraisal fee, storage fee, or any fee or
charge other than the amounts hereinabove specified. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-33: MEMORANDUM OF RECORD BOOK ENTRY TO PLEDGOR:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 101/565
Every pawnbroker shall at the time of each loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things, a memorandum or note signed by
them in such record book, and an estimated value of the goods, articles or things pledged; and no charge shall be made or received by any pawnbroker,
for any such entry, memorandum or note. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-34: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:
There shall be allowed two (2) pawnbroker licenses for each fifty thousand (50,000) in population for the combined population of the city of Mesquite and
the town of Bunkerville, as determined and reported by the state of Nevada department of taxation, pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes
360.283, and as certified by the governor, pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 360.285. Each pawnbroker shall be limited to one
pawnshop license. An automobile pawnbroker license obtained by a licensed pawnbroker pursuant to section 2-5B-3 of this article shall not count against
the pawnbroker license limit set forth in this section. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-35: STORAGE COMPOUND WHEN MOTOR VEHICLES ARE PAWNED:
A. Pawnbrokers engaged in pawning motor vehicles shall provide and maintain at least one storage compound within the city limits, sufficient in size to
handle a minimum of fifteen (15) motor vehicles. Such compound shall be enclosed by a chainlink fence or block wall topped with eighteen inch (18")
outriggers. Gates or doors for access to the compound shall be kept closed and locked when the premises are not open for business. Any portion of
said compound that is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the nearest edge of the right of way of any city maintained roadway shall be screened so as
not to be visible from the main traveled way of such roads.
B. A pawnbroker shall not charge more than the daily vehicle storage fee outlined in Nevada Revised Statutes 646.050, as amended or renumbered from
time to time, for the storage of a motor vehicle which is collateral for a loan. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-36: INACTIVITY OF LICENSE:
The license of a pawnbroker who has not engaged in any pawn activity for a period of ninety (90) consecutive calendar days shall be subject to revocation
by the city unless the pawnbroker has received specific approval or permission to close or to stay closed, but such total time shall not exceed one year
from date of approval. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-37: INSURANCE AND SAFEKEEPING OF PLEDGES:
Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions hereof shall provide a safe place for the keeping of the pledges received by them and shall have sufficient
insurance on the property held on pledges, for the benefit of the pledgors, to cover the pledgors' loss in case of destruction by fire. This policy shall be
made payable, in case of loss, to the proper authority, for the benefit of the pledgors, as their interest may appear, which policy shall be deposited with
such proper authority. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-38: LIABILITY INSURANCE WHEN MOTOR VEHICLES ARE PAWNED:
Every pawnbroker engaged in pawning motor vehicles shall possess and maintain garage keeper's liability insurance in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), general (public) liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and collision insurance in
the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-39: CLEAR TITLE REQUIRED FOR PAWNING MOTOR VEHICLE:
It is unlawful to pawn any motor vehicle on which there exists any lien, security interest or encumbrance of whatever nature or to pawn any motor vehicle if
the person pawning said motor vehicle is not the legal owner. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-40: LICENSE PLATES TO BE REMOVED AT TIME OF MOTOR VEHICLE PAWN:
The license plates from any motor vehicle to be pawned must first be removed by or at the direction of the registered owner of the motor vehicle. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-41: PAWNBROKER TO OBTAIN DEALER'S LICENSE FROM STATE OF NEVADA WHEN MOTOR VEHICLES ARE
PAWNED:
Every motor vehicle pawnbroker engaged in pawning motor vehicles must possess a dealer's license from the state of Nevada department of motor
vehicles and must fully comply with the requirements set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 482.318 et seq. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-42: PAWNBROKER TO OBTAIN USE PERMIT FROM CITY OF MESQUITE:
Every pawnbroker must possess a use permit pursuant to title 9 of this code. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 102/565
2-5B-43: APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES, NEVADA REVISED STATUTES:
A. The terms, conditions and policies of other applicable ordinances are intended to be applied in conjunction with the enforcement of all other ordinances
of the city designed for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The fact that such ordinances are not specifically referred to in
this article shall in no manner preclude their application to pawnbroker licensees.
B. The terms, conditions and requirements of this article are in addition to those imposed under Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 646. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-44: LICENSEE'S AGREEMENT TO CONFORM TO LAW:
Acceptance of a city pawnbroker license by a licensee constitutes an agreement on the part of such licensee to be bound by all of the regulations of the
city as the same are now, or may hereafter be amended or promulgated. It is the sole responsibility of the licensee to keep informed of the content of all
such rules and regulations, and ignorance thereof shall not excuse violations. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-45: LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION:
A license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked, suspended, or canceled by a majority vote of the city council at any regular or at any special
meeting convened and held for that purpose upon a show cause order for any wilful violation or omissions of this article. If a license is revoked,
suspended, or canceled pursuant to this provision, it shall be unlawful for the licensee to maintain or conduct such business under the license, or at all.
Upon such revocation, suspension or cancellation, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall immediately
cease all business at all places under such license. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-46: NOTICE OF HEARING; HEARING PROCEDURE:
Notice and the procedure of a hearing scheduled for the purposes set forth in section 2-5B-45 of this article shall be in accordance with section 2-1-14 of
this title, as amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5B-47: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A. Fine: Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. License Revocation: In addition to the penalties above named, any person convicted of wilfully violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to having his license to do business within the city revoked. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
ARTICLE C. SECONDHAND DEALERS
2-5C-1: STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT; REGULATION:
It is found and declared that the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the city of Mesquite require the regulation and control of
persons engaged in the secondhand dealer business, or in the operation of secondhand shops. All secondhand dealers, as defined in this article, shall be
licensed and regulated so as to protect the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city of Mesquite and to
safeguard the public. It is further found and declared that the right to obtain such license is a privilege and that the operation of a secondhand dealer's
business, when authorized by such license, is a privileged business subject to regulations, and that the license may be revoked for violation of the
conditions of this article. In conformity with the policy of this article, the following persons are declared not qualified to hold a license under the provisions
of this article:
A. A person who does not possess or who does not have a reputation for possessing a good moral character;
B. A person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years;
C. A person who has been convicted of a crime involving theft, fraud, dishonesty, receiving or possessing stolen property, any controlled substance
violation whatsoever, or any sex offense;
D. A person whose license, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, or those ordinances or statutes of any other agency lawfully engaged in the
licensing or regulation of secondhand dealer businesses, has been revoked for cause;
E. A person who, at the time of renewal of any license issued under this article, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
F. A partnership, limited partnership or association, unless all of the members of such partnership, limited partnership or association are qualified to obtain
a license;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 103/565
G. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state of Nevada, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under Nevada law to transact
business in Nevada;
H. A corporation or limited liability corporation, if an officer, director, or member thereof would not be eligible to receive a license for any reason which
would disqualify an individual applicant. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the words and terms defined in this section have the meanings ascribed to them unless a different meaning clearly appears in the
context.
COLLECTIBLE: An object of personal property that has special value primarily because of its unique characteristics and the high level of demand for the
object.
DROP OFF CENTER: A collection site where recyclable materials may be taken by persons and deposited into designated containers.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle that is used upon a highway, but not operated on rails, for the purpose of transporting persons or property.
NEW MERCHANDISE: All commodities which merchants normally sell, whether at wholesale or retail, and which have never entered into common
marketplace for sale or distribution to a consumer.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS OR RECYCLABLES: Those materials in, or out of, the solid waste stream, that have not been discarded or abandoned by
their owner, and that still have useful physical, chemical or biological properties after serving their original purpose; and, that can be reused or recycled for
the same or other purposes. Reusable materials and salvageable materials are considered to be recyclables for the purpose of this article.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person having a place of business in the city for purchasing, trading or dealing in any secondhand personal property.
Establishments conducting the business of recyclables, or of a drop off center, are included in this definition.
Note: This definition specifically exempts a licensed pawnbroker or a dealer of used books, clothing, musical instruments, sporting goods, or
prerecorded media, and the taking in of used items on trade for store credit or the purchase of store merchandise from the requirement to obtain a
secondhand dealer's license.
Secondhand Dealer, Category A: A. A person whose principal business practices and transactions are primarily in new merchandise, with used, or
secondhand, merchandise constituting a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the business activities.
B. This category of secondhand dealer license includes license classifications I or II.
Secondhand Dealer, Category B: A. A person whose principal business practices and transactions are primarily in used, or secondhand
merchandise.
B. This category of secondhand dealer license includes license classifications I or II.
Secondhand Dealer, Category C: A person whose business practices and transactions are in:
A. Furs;
B. Coins, currency, or stamps; or
C. Collectibles.
Secondhand Dealer, Class I: Includes all secondhand dealers who handle, or deal in secondhand motor vehicles or trailers for sale or for the
purpose of dismantling, wrecking, disassembling and selling the dismantled, wrecked or disassembled parts or accessories; and, secondhand
motor vehicles or trailers, or parts and accessories thereof; and, secondhand dealers who dismantle, wreck, or disassemble motor vehicles or
trailers, and who possess the appropriate state of Nevada department of motor vehicles dealer's license.
Secondhand Dealer, Class II: Includes all secondhand dealers who handle, or deal in one or more of, but not limited to, the following: metals, scrap
metals, rags, paper, furs, furniture, fixtures, household goods, radios, televisions, office supplies and equipment, pictures, paintings, watches, gold,
silver and other precious metals, diamonds and other precious stones, recyclables, and dealers who smelt gold or wrought gold, or other wrought
metals. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-3: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct any secondhand dealer business as described in this article without first having obtained a license therefor, as
hereinafter provided. A separate license shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the conduct of such businesses. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 104/565
2-5C-4: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this article shall state the name of the person to whom issued, the place of business and street number where such business is
located and the amount of capital employed. Such license shall entitle the person receiving it to do business at the place designated in such license. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-5: POSTING LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a secondhand dealer business in the city, unless, he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place, in the
place of the business, the license certificate. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-6: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF SECONDHAND DEALER LICENSES; EXCLUSIONS:
Excluding category A and C and class I secondhand dealers, there shall be no more than twelve (12) category B licenses in the city. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-7: LICENSE; LOCATION SUBJECT TO USE PERMIT:
Secondhand dealers must possess a use permit if a use permit is required by this code. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-8: LICENSE; TO WHOM ISSUED:
No secondhand dealer's license shall be issued to any person, corporation, company, copartnership, or association other than the real and actual
proprietor of the business and place of business for which it is issued. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-9: LICENSE APPLICATION, CONTENTS; GENERALLY:
A. Application:
1. Whenever a person desires to conduct any secondhand dealer business in the city, or engage in the business thereof, such person shall make
application in writing to the business license department of the city to obtain a license therefor. Upon receipt of a complete application, and upon
receipt of the results of all background investigations, the business license official shall issue the business license.
2. A secondhand dealer license must be active within thirty (30) days of the date of city approval, with all fees and bonding requirements completed. In
no instance may a license remain inactive for more than forty five (45) days unless there has been special approval by the city after a review of
circumstances.
3. Applicants shall reply in writing to any and all questions pertaining to the issuance or renewal of licenses, as may be required by the city to process
applications.
B. Contents Of Application:
1. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, and in case of a firm or corporation, the names and addresses of the persons
composing such firm, or of the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and stockholders of such corporation; also the place, street and
number where such business is to be carried on; and shall specify the amount of capital proposed to be used by the applicant in such business; and
signed by at least five (5) citizens of the city, of good reputation, certifying to the good reputation and moral character of the applicant.
2. Said application shall also state in writing the names and addresses of all persons owning an interest in such business, the name and address of the
general manager or managers of the business, and where there is more than one owner of a secondhand dealer's establishment, the names of all
such persons owning an interest in such business shall be listed on the application, together with a statement as to the percentage of such business
owned by each individual. Each licensee shall designate on the application form the name of an agent residing within the county who is responsible
for the conduct of the business and authorized to immediately answer to the business license official or its agents should inquiry or action be deemed
necessary.
3. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must state in the application his name and place of residence, whether or not he is a citizen of the
United States, whether or not he is a bona fide resident of Clark County and a registered voter of the state, and whether or not he has been
convicted of a felony or of any other crime which would be considered a felony under the laws of the state.
4. The application shall set forth a consent to police department and business license department investigation of the applicant's background, including,
but not limited to, financial background, employment history and criminal record.
5. The application shall require the applicant to list any and all previous arrests, convictions or pending litigation, except minor traffic citations, and the
applicant must certify that they are true and complete. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-10: APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION FEES:
A. Application Fee: At the time of filing such petition, the applicant shall deposit with the business license official an amount of money equal to at least onehalf
(1/2) year, and not more than one year's charge for the license applied for. This sum of money shall be refunded to the applicant if the license
petitioned for shall not be granted.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 105/565
B. Investigation Fees: Each applicant shall be required to deposit with the application a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of one hundred
forty five dollars ($145.00).
C. Timing Of Fee Payment: No investigation shall be made of any applicant for a secondhand dealer's license prior to the payment by the applicant, and
receipt of such fee, by the city, and no license shall be issued until all appropriate fees are paid. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-11: FINGERPRINT BASED BACKGROUND CHECKS; INVESTIGATION FEES:
A. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: In addition to submitting an application, each applicant for a secondhand dealer's license shall present himself
to the police agency for fingerprinting and furnish the police or agency any other information necessary to conduct an investigation of such applicant's
character and reputation. In all cases where the applicant for a secondhand dealer's license is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, the
business license official shall determine who of the members, principal officers, directors, stockholders, and/or managers shall present themselves to
the city police agency for fingerprinting. Fingerprint data provided by applicants will be used to conduct state and national criminal records checks.
Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of public safety to
conduct state criminal records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau
of investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city police
agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the police agency shall prepare and submit to the business license official a report containing findings
and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and
public law 92-544. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-12: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
A. All fingerprints required to be taken under the terms of this article and all information obtained by reason of said fingerprints shall be maintained by the
city police agency in a confidential file to be opened for the inspection only of city council members, law enforcement officers and peace officers of the
state.
B. All information, other than criminal history information, of a confidential nature supplied under the terms of these regulations shall be maintained by the
business license official in a confidential file, to be open for the inspection only of city council members, law enforcement officers and peace officers of
the state. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-13: SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF SECONDHAND DEALER LICENSE:
A. In all cases, to obtain, and maintain, a category A secondhand dealer license, the business so licensed shall derive a minimum of seventy percent
(70%) of its gross revenues from the sale of new merchandise during any six (6) month period of time.
B. No category B secondhand dealer shall conduct, carry on, or maintain any other type of business activity on the premises of the licensed business.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-14: LICENSE; CORPORATION, PARTNERSHIP, ASSOCIATIONS; CHANGES IN MEMBERSHIP:
In the case of a corporate licensee, any and all changes in the officers and directors of such corporation shall be reported to the business license
department within thirty (30) days of the appointment or election of such officers and directors. Such officers or directors shall be required to qualify for a
license as required in this article. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-15: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of the results of the background investigation from the police department, the business license department shall issue the license; provided,
however, that all other conditions, restrictions, payment of fees, and compliance with all applicable state statutes and city ordinances have been met. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-16: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE EXCEPT BY CITY:
A. A secondhand dealer license shall be nontransferable to any other person or place of business, without prior approval from the city, and the filing of a
new bond by the person to whom such license is, or may be, transferred or assigned. It shall be unlawful for any person to do business, or attempt to
do business, under a license transferred to him without such consent of the city.
B. Any assignee, or transferee, of a valid secondhand dealer's license shall be required to obtain a separate license prior to engaging in the business of a
secondhand dealer.
C. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit the licensed premises to be managed or utilized by a lessee, or other transferee, who has not first obtained a
separate secondhand dealer's license. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-17: LICENSE RENEWAL, COMPLIANCE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 106/565
No secondhand dealer license now issued, or hereafter issued, shall be renewed or extended for a total period of more than one year without complying
with all the provisions of this article. The provisions of this article regarding issuance of licenses shall apply to all persons now holding a secondhand
dealer license, when the same shall expire by their terms. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-18: LICENSE FEES:
License fees shall be charged as outlined in section 2-1-13 of this title, as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff.
12-31-2013)
2-5C-19: DISPLAY OF SIGN:
Every secondhand dealer, except class I secondhand dealers, shall maintain and display at all times during the period of his license, in a conspicuous
place at the public entrance to the licensed premises, a sign in letters not less than six inches (6") in height, bearing the name of such licensee and the
words "Licensed Secondhand Dealer". (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-20: SECONDHAND DEALER REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Class II Secondhand Dealer Purchasing From Minor: It is unlawful for any class II secondhand dealer, whether acting for himself as licensee, or whether
by an employee or agent of the licensee, to purchase any secondhand merchandise as defined herein, from any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years, except with the written consent or direction of the parent or guardian of such minor. Said written permission shall be maintained as part of the
records as specified in section 2-5C-22 of this article.
B. Class I Secondhand Dealer Purchasing From Minor: It is unlawful for any class I secondhand dealer, whether acting for himself as licensee, or whether
by an employee or agent of the licensee, to purchase any secondhand merchandise as defined herein from any person under eighteen (18) years of
age, unless the person has title, free and clear, for the motor vehicle, or parts, to be purchased, except with the written consent or direction of the
parent or guardian of such person.
C. Soliciting On Streets Or Public Highways Prohibited: No secondhand dealer shall be permitted to solicit business upon any street or public highway to
the county.
D. Canvassing For Jewelry, Precious Metals, Etc., Prohibited: No person shall conduct a house to house canvass for the purchase or sale of secondhand
or used watches, jewelry, gold and other precious metals, diamonds and other precious stones, wrought gold or other wrought precious metals within
the city.
E. Proper Fumigation Required: No secondhand dealer shall sell or offer for sale any clothing until the same has been cleaned, pressed and mended, nor
shall such person sell or offer for sale any mattress, pillow or bedding until same has been properly fumigated.
F. Premises Requirements:
1. Premises Declared Nuisance: It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to permit any debris,
rubbish, dirt or refuse to be accumulated on his licensed premises, or to permit any dense smoke, cinders, dust, gas or odor which shall be offensive
or prejudicial to the health or dangerous to the life of persons to escape from his licensed premises.
2. Maintenance Of Premises, Safety: Every premises or enclosure, except a completely enclosed building, used in the conduct of a class I secondhand
dealer business shall be maintained at all times in good condition by the licensee and dismantled motor vehicle or trailer parts shall be piled and
stored so that there is freedom from danger to the life or safety of all employees, business invitees and trespassers. Each licensee shall provide
reasonable safeguards of the premises. Any class I secondhand dealer business established within one-half (1/2) mile of housing areas of main
thoroughfares shall be enclosed by a tight fence or wall at least eight feet (8') high. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-21: RESALE TIME LAPSE:
Except for class I secondhand dealers, every dealer in secondhand merchandise as defined herein must keep, without concealment, for a period of thirty
(30) days, subject to inspection by any police officer or license agent, all merchandise purchased or received from any person, before selling, shipping, or
otherwise disposing of the same. The secondhand dealer shall be responsible to keep separate any secondhand items being held during the minimum
thirty (30) day period from those items being released for sale. All secondhand items being held must be stored in an area not visible to customers. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-22: RECORDKEEPING; REPORTING; REPORTING EXCEPTION; RECORD RETENTION; RECEIPTS:
A. It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer to fail to keep a substantial and well bound book, or other appropriate recordation as approved by the chief of
police, in which he shall enter in ink, or otherwise typed, at the time of purchase or receipt, legibly, and in the English language and shall be kept in
accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 647.
B. Each secondhand dealer shall make the necessary reports to the police department in accordance with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 647 and shall be in a form acceptable to the chief of police or his designee.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 107/565
C. The records required to be kept per subsection A of this section are required to be kept and maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3)
years from the date of original transaction.
D. Upon receipt of any secondhand item, the secondhand dealer should mark same with a mark of identification.
E. Every secondhand dealer shall, at the time of each purchase, deliver to the person selling any goods, articles or things, a receipt signed by him,
containing the substance of the entry required to be made by him in such record book, and the sum paid by him for the goods, articles or things
purchased; and no charge shall be made or received by any secondhand dealer for any such entry, memorandum or note.
F. Every holder of a class I secondhand dealer license shall promptly deliver to the chief of police all motor vehicle and trailer state license plates attached
to any vehicle or trailer received by him for resale, exchange, wrecking or dismantling. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-23: LICENSEE LIABLE FOR THE ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
Every licensee shall be liable for the acts of his employees committed during the course and scope of employment. In any license suspension, limitation or
revocation proceedings, the fact that the licensee did not have actual knowledge of the events complained of shall be no defense, and every licensee
hereunder accepts his license subject to said condition. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-24: LICENSEE'S AGREEMENT TO CONFORM TO LAW:
Acceptance of a city secondhand dealer license by a licensee constitutes an agreement on the part of such licensee to be bound by all of the regulations
of the city as the same are now, or may hereafter be amended or promulgated. It is the sole responsibility of the licensee to keep himself informed of the
content of all such rules and regulations, and ignorance thereof shall not excuse violations. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-25: LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION:
The council, at any regular or special meeting, may deem that any activity on the part of the licensee or employees, or a person previously found suitable,
which is contrary to the public health, safety, morals, good order, or general welfare of the residents of the city or the state of Nevada is grounds for
disciplinary action which may result in a suspension, limitation or revocation of the secondhand dealer's license, upon a show cause order. If a license is
revoked, suspended, or canceled pursuant to this provision, it shall be unlawful for the licensee to maintain or conduct such business under the license, or
at all. Upon such revocation, suspension or cancellation, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall immediately
cease all business at all places under such license. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each of the following reasons are declared to be a
basis for disciplinary action:
A. Conviction of the licensee of any crime involving theft, fraud, dishonesty, receiving or possessing stolen property, any narcotics violation or any sex
offense; or
B. Conducting a secondhand dealer business in an unlawful manner or in a manner detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; or
C. Each licensee who violates any provision of this article; or
D. Each licensee who knowingly fails to report or conceals from the business license official a full disclosure of the names of all persons having an interest
in the ownership of or having an equitable or beneficial right to the profits under a license in which he has an interest; or
E. Each licensee who knowingly fails to report or conceals from proper authority any information which it is his duty to supply under any statute, ordinance
or regulation of the state or the city; or
F. Each licensee who, for conduct subsequent to the issuance of a license, becomes ineligible to hold a secondhand dealer's license as set out in the
statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state or city; or
G. Each licensee who made a misrepresentation of a material fact in his application to obtain a license; or
H. Each licensee whose secondhand dealer's license in any place in the state of Nevada, or in any state or municipality which is empowered to issue a
license or permit for the business of secondhand dealer, has been revoked for cause. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-26: NOTICE OF HEARING:
Notice and the procedure of a hearing scheduled for the purposes set forth in section 2-5C-25 of this article shall be in accordance with section 2-1-14 of
this title, as amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5C-27: APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES, NEVADA REVISED STATUTES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 108/565
A. The terms, conditions and policies of other applicable ordinances are intended to be applied in conjunction with the enforcement of all other ordinances
of the city designed for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The fact that such ordinances are not specifically referred to in
this article shall in no manner preclude their application to secondhand dealer licensees.
B. The terms, conditions and requirements of this article are in addition to those imposed under Nevada Revised Statutes 647. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff.
12-31-2013)
2-5C-28: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a fine, not to exceed the maximum allowable fine under the Nevada Revised Statutes, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term not to exceed six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and shall subject the licensee to suspension, limitation or revocation of his license. Any person being
adjudged guilty of a violation of this article, or any of the provisions or prohibitions thereof, may, in the discretion of the council, be denied a license. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
ARTICLE D. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
2-5D-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT; REGULATION:
It is found and declared that the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the residents of the city require the regulation and control
of all mobile food vendors. All mobile food vendors shall be licensed and regulated to protect the public health, safety, morals, good order and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the city and to safeguard the public. It is further found and declared that the right to obtain such a license is a privilege and
that the license may be suspended, limited or revoked for violation of the conditions of this article. In conformity with the policy of this article, the following
persons are declared not to be qualified to hold a license under the provisions of this article:
A. A person who violates, or has violated, the provisions of this title despite notice by the city;
B. A person who has been convicted of a crime involving theft, fraud, dishonesty, receiving or possessing stolen property, any controlled substance
violation or any sex offense;
C. A person whose license, issued under the provisions of this title, or those ordinances or statutes of any other agency lawfully engaged in the licensing
or regulation of businesses as defined in this chapter, has been denied, suspended or revoked for cause;
D. A person who, at the time of renewal of any license issued under this title, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
E. A partnership, limited partnership association, limited liability company, or other business entity unless all of the members of such partnership, limited
partnership association, limited liability company, or business entity are qualified to obtain a license;
F. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state of Nevada, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under Nevada law to transact
business in Nevada; or
G. A corporation, if an officer or director thereof would not be eligible to receive a license for any reason which would disqualify an individual applicant.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, or the words are otherwise defined herein, the words and terms used in this article have the
following meanings:
DEPARTMENT: The department of development services business license division.
DIRECTOR: The business license official or his designee in the business license division of the department of development services.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: Means, but is not limited to, any person or employee or agent thereof carrying on or conducting the business of selling ice
cream, fruit, candy, vegetables, meats or any other edible foods, raw, prepared, loose or packaged, from a motor vehicle, or other type of food service
conveyance, approved, or required to be approved, by the statutes or ordinances of the Clark County health district governing such vehicles, conveyances
and sales practices. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-3: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any mobile food vendor to engage in the business of mobile food vending within the city without first obtaining a license in compliance with
the provisions of this article and this title. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 109/565
A. Information Required: Applicants for a permit and license under this article must file with the business license official a sworn application in writing in
duplicate on a form to be furnished to the business license official, which shall give the following information:
1. Name Of Applicant: Name and description of the applicant.
2. Address: Permanent home and full local address of the applicant.
3. Description Of Business: A brief description of the nature of the business and the food to be sold.
4. Name And Address Of Employer: If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
5. Statement Regarding Former Convictions: A statement regarding whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or
violation of any municipal law, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed.
6. Additional Information: The business license official may require such additional questions to be answered by each applicant as he deems proper
and necessary.
B. Investigation Of Applicant; Fee:
1. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a permit or license pursuant to this article and all employees of applicants who
engage in the activity of a mobile food vendor, shall provide the city of Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the
Mesquite police department. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data,
the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal records
checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct
national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city of Mesquite. The city of
Mesquite shall also investigate the character, reputation and financial condition of all applicants. Upon completion of the investigation, the city of
Mesquite shall render a fitness determination regarding persons being investigated. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544.
2. Payment Of Fee: Any person filing an application for a mobile food vendor license or an employee in the city, shall deposit with the business license
official a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of one hundred forty five dollars ($145.00) per applicant.
3. Forfeiture Or Return Of Fee: All investigation and fingerprinting fees shall be paid in full prior to investigation. In the event the applicant is denied a
license after investigation, charges deposited or paid shall be forfeited. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to beginning any investigation,
the investigation and fingerprinting fees shall be returned to the applicant.
4. Group Or Corporation: In the event the applicant shall be a group or corporation, there shall be required an investigation of each employee who
engages in the activity of a mobile food vendor and also each person who directly, in this city, supervises or controls the activities of the employees;
and a fingerprinting fee of forty five dollars ($45.00) shall be collected upon each such person.
5. Fees Paid Prior To Investigation: No investigation shall be made on any applicant prior to the payment by the applicant and receipt of such fee by the
business license official and no license shall be issued until all such fees are paid.
C. Investigation Of Application:
1. Investigation: Upon receipt of the application and payment of fees, the original shall be referred to the business license official, who shall cause such
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good.
2. Statement Of Prior Arrest: The application statement of prior arrest and/or conviction shall be forwarded to the police chief for verification. The police
chief shall immediately report his findings to the business license official.
D. Denial Of License:
1. Upon the business license official's review of the application, the business license department shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant for any
of the following reasons:
a. The applicant has been convicted of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or a misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled
substances, or any violent act against a person or property, such conviction having been entered within the ten (10) years preceding the date of
application;
b. The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the
ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application.
2. The license application may also be denied for good cause as set forth in section 2-1-13 of this title.
3. The business license official's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that
his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. Notice shall be delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown
on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-5: MOBILE FOOD VENDOR VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION STICKER WITH
IDENTIFICATION NUMBER:
A. Trash Receptacles: Each mobile food vendor's vehicle must be equipped with a trash receptacle, and each mobile food vendor shall be held
responsible for litter in the vicinity of his vehicle.
B. Vehicle Identification Sticker With Identification Number: Each mobile food vendor shall post in a prominent place on the upper left corner of the back of
the vehicle, a sticker with an identification number thereupon, as approved by the business license official and issued by the police department,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 110/565
showing the vehicle's city mobile food vendor license number. The display shall be of such color, size and placement that the identification number can
be easily read at a distance of ten feet (10').
C. Issuance Of Vehicle Identification Sticker With Identification Number: In addition to any licensing or certification requirement imposed by the Southern
Nevada health district, a mobile vendor's vehicle must first be issued a vehicle identification sticker with identification number by the police department
before a business license may be issued for the operation of that vehicle. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-6: VEHICLE MAINTENANCE:
The licensee shall maintain a vehicle to be used for vending in such a condition that:
A. All doors, windows, hoods and trunks open and close securely;
B. The exterior of the vehicle is clean and in good repair; and
C. Any windows on the vehicle are clear of signs and other obstructions.
D. The vehicle contains safety equipment required by Nevada Revised Statutes 484.579 and 484.582 as may be amended or renumbered from time to
time, if applicable. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-7: FURTHER REGULATIONS:
A. Mobile food vendors shall be subject to the fees set forth in section 2-1-13 of this title.
B. Each mobile food vendor shall be in compliance with the regulations enacted by the Clark County health district, and shall show written evidence of the
same, prior to issuance of a license by the department.
C. An identification card for each mobile food vendor, or persons acting in supervisory positions above them shall be obtained from the police chief. The
identification card, to be carried on the person of each such person at all times whenever he is so engaged in the city, shall include thereon his name
and address, his right or left thumbprint, a photograph of the person, his description, the license and its number under which he is working, the date of
its issuance, and the type of food for which it was issued and the vehicle, if any, he commonly uses. Every natural person required to obtain a license
and identification card under the provisions of this article shall allow inspection of the license and identification card upon request by any prospective
customer, business license official in the city or police officer.
D. No licensee hereunder may lease, rent, or otherwise hire a vehicle to another for use as a mobile food vendor's vehicle. Every driver shall be a licensee
hereunder, or the direct employee of such licensee.
E. During the hours that schools are in session and during the period of one-half (1/2) hour before or after the times posted on the applicable school zone
signs, no mobile food vendor shall sell or solicit, or attempt to sell or solicit, or park a vehicle: 1) within one thousand feet (1,000') in any direction from
the extreme outside perimeter of any school and/or adjacent park grounds, 2) within a posted school zone, or 3) on the opposite side of the street
which runs next to the front of a school.
F. No mobile food vendor shall enter on private property, knock on doors, ring any bells, or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. This section shall not apply, however, when the mobile food vendor has been specifically
invited by the owner, resident, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises.
G. No mobile food vendor shall:
1. Consume alcoholic beverages or be intoxicated while vending.
2. Vend on any street at a location where the speed limit is greater than thirty five (35) miles per hour.
3. Vend from any vehicle which is parked or stopped on a street within seventy five feet (75') of an intersection.
4. Vend on a street, except from the side of the vehicle away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the right hand curb or edge of the street.
5. Vend to a person standing in a roadway.
6. Vend on a street unless there is a clear view of the vehicle for a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction.
7. Play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for production of sound from the vehicle:
a. In such a manner as to create a "breach of peace", as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 203.010. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-8: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
All mobile food vendors are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any customer or potential customer, business license official or peace officer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 111/565
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-9: SIGNS DENYING APPROACH:
A. It is unlawful for any mobile food vendor to knock on the door, or ring the bell of any residence whereon a sign with visible and legible letters at least
three-fourths (3/4) of an inch in height bearing the words "No Trespassers", "No Peddlers", "No Canvassers", "No Mobile Food Vendors", "No
Solicitors", or other words of similar import are painted, affixed or exposed to public view, or to attempt to gain admittance thereto.
B. This regulation shall apply to all groups of structures or complexes such as apartments, condominiums, or private gated communities which have
posted signage pursuant to subsection A of this section at the entrance(s) or other points of ingress to such property regardless of whether any
individual residence is individually posted, provided that the sign has letters at least one and a half inches in height.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a mobile food vendor who knocks at any door, or rings any bell, at the specific invitation of the owner,
resident, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-10: TRANSFER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any mobile food vendor to transfer his license to any other person. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-11: LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, LIMITATION:
Any license issued under this article may be revoked, limited, or suspended by the business license official for any of the reasons set forth in this article
and section 2-1-13 of this title. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-12: LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
Every licensee shall be responsible for the acts of his employees and agents committed during the course of employment or licensed activity. In any
license suspension, limitation or revocation proceedings, the fact that the licensee did not have actual knowledge of the events complained of shall be no
defense, and every licensee hereunder accepts his license subject to said condition. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-13: LICENSEE'S AGREEMENT TO CONFORM TO LAW:
Acceptance of a license constitutes an agreement on the part of such licensee to be bound by all of the regulations of the city as the same now are, or
may hereafter be amended or promulgated. It is the sole responsibility of the licensee to keep themselves informed of the content of all such rules and
regulations, and ignorance thereof will not excuse violations. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-14: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Appeal rights of applicants are set forth in section 2-1-14 of this title. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-15: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Procedure for judicial review of final decisions and order of the council are set forth in section 2-1-14 of this title. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-5D-16: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as the law allows
for a misdemeanor crime. Whenever in this article any act is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in such article the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense or misdemeanor, the
doing of any such prohibited act, or the failure to do any such required act, shall constitute a violation of this article. Every day of violation of this article
constitutes a separate offense. Any person being adjudged guilty of a violation of this article or any of the provisions or prohibitions thereof may, in the
discretion of the council, be denied a license thereafter. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
Chapter 6
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND INDEPENDENT MASSAGE THERAPISTS
2-6-1: STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT; PRIVILEGED BUSINESS FINDING:
The City Council hereby finds that massage establishments seriously affect public health, safety, the economic, social and moral well being of the City and
its residents, that such businesses must be regulated strictly for the welfare of the public and that such businesses must therefore comply with the
provisions of this chapter. It is further found and declared that the right to obtain such license is a privilege and that the operation of a massage
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 112/565
establishment or business by an independent massage therapist, when authorized by such license, is a privileged business subject to regulations, and that
the license may be revoked for violation of the law or regulations of the State, the conditions of this chapter, and/or other ordinances of this City. (Ord. 542,
8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words, as they appear in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ADVERTISING: The intentional placement or issuance of any sign, card or device, or the permitting or allowing of any sign or marking on a motor vehicle,
in any building, structure, newspaper, magazine, handbill, flyer or other publication, any airway transmission, on the internet or in any directory under the
listing of "massage therapy" or "massage" or other words of similar import.
ANCILLARY EMPLOYEE: Any employee of a massage establishment or of an independent massage therapist that is not a massage therapist.
BOARD: The Nevada State Board of Massage Therapists.
CHAIR MASSAGE: A massage administered by a massage therapist to a fully-clothed patron's neck, shoulders, back, arms, hands and feet utilizing a
massage chair. A patron or guest at a hotel or resort hotel receiving a chair massage in the swimming pool area of the hotel or resort hotel shall be
considered fully-clothed when wearing appropriate public swimming attire.
CITY BUSINESS OFFICIAL: The Director or his designee in the City Business License Department.
CONTROL: The power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a massage establishment, massage therapist, employee or
agent in any way.
DEPARTMENT: The City Business License Department.
EMPLOYEE: Any massage therapist who is a bona fide employee of a massage establishment.
INDEPENDENT MASSAGE THERAPIST: A massage therapist who is not an employee of a massage establishment, is a sole practitioner, and hires no
employees.
MMC: Mesquite Municipal Code.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any fixed place of business where any individual, firm, company association, partnership, corporation, or combination of
individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or conducted, for money or any other consideration, any massage therapy. For
purposes of this chapter, including, without limitation, responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and penalties for failure to so comply,
the term shall include the owners, managers, members, partners, directors, or shareholders of the business entity operating as a massage establishment.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSEE PRACTITIONER: The licensee of a massage establishment who performs massage therapy.
MASSAGE OR MASSAGE THERAPY: The application of a system of pressure to the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body as described
in Nevada Revised Statutes 640C.060(1), and for purposes of this chapter, shall also mean any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands, or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions,
ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. Reflexology is excluded from this definition.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who is licensed pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 640C to engage in the practice of
massage therapy or any person performing massage therapy as defined above. While the provisions of this chapter apply to anyone performing massage
therapy or operating a massage establishment, regardless of whether such person or place is licensed as such, nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to allow the practice of massage without all appropriate licenses and permits. Massage therapist includes both independent massage therapists and
massage therapists who are employees of a massage establishment unless otherwise specified.
OUTCALL MASSAGE THERAPY: Any massage given or provided off the premises of a licensed massage establishment by a massage therapist licensed
by the City and State.
PATRON: Any person who receives a massage or other service offered by a massage establishment or independent massage therapist.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY: A. Sexual intercourse;
B. Examining or touching any specified anatomical area of a patron;
C. Rubbing against a patron for sexual gratification;
D. Kissing;
E. Hugging, touching, fondling or caressing of a romantic or sexual nature;
F. Not providing a patron privacy to dress or undress except as may be necessary in a medical emergency;
G. Not providing a patron a gown or draping except as may be necessary in a medical emergency;
H. Removing the patron's clothing or gown or draping without consent, except as may be necessary in a medical emergency;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 113/565
I. Encouraging masturbation or any other sex act in the presence of a massage therapist or employee;
J. Dressing or undressing in the presence of the patron;
K. Masturbation or any other sex act by the massage therapist or any employee in the presence of the patron;
L. Discussing the sexual history, preference or fantasies of the massage therapist or employee;
M. Any behavior, gesture or expression that may reasonably be interpreted as seductive or sexual;
N. Making statements regarding the patron's body, appearance, sexual history or sexual orientation other than for legitimate health care purposes;
O. Sexually demeaning behavior including any verbal or physical contact which may reasonably be interpreted as demeaning, humiliating,
embarrassing, threatening or harming a patron;
P. Photographing or filming the body or any body part of a patron; or
Q. Showing a patron sexually explicit photographs or video.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: The human genitals, pubic region, anus, or perineum of any person, or the breasts of a female. (Ord. 542, 8-28-2018,
eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises, the operation of a massage
establishment, or the performance of massage therapy as an independent massage therapist or a massage establishment licensee practitioner, without
first obtaining and thereafter maintaining valid, unexpired City and State licenses for that activity. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-4: LICENSE FEE:
A. License fees shall be charged as outlined in section 2-1-13 of this title, as may be amended or renumbered from time to time. A massage establishment
with separate facilities for men and women shall be considered a single massage establishment and shall be charged a single annual license fee. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-5: INDEPENDENT MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE:
A. An independent massage therapist license authorizes the licensee to:
1. Perform massage therapy to a client in a leased or rented room in a licensed massage establishment;
2. Perform massage therapy to a client at the client's temporary or permanent residence, transient lodging, or at the client's place of business; and
3. Advertise as an independent massage therapist.
B. An independent massage therapist licensee must comply with all applicable provisions of the City zoning regulations.
C. If an independent massage therapist operating as a sole proprietor, or other entity type, wishes to conduct his or her business from a commercial
location, he or she is still considered a sole proprietor or independent contractor and must be licensed separate from the massage establishment and is
required to obtain a separate massage license if the commercial location is licensed as a massage establishment.
D. If the commercial location is not licensed as a massage establishment or does not have a conditional use permit allowing massage therapy at that
location, the independent massage therapist shall be required to obtain the massage establishment license prior to providing massage therapy at the
commercial location. (Ord. 542, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-6: ADVERTISEMENTS:
A. A person shall not advertise that such person provides massage therapy services in the City unless, in the case of a natural person, the person is
licensed to practice massage therapy by the board, and in the case of a business, such business is a licensed massage establishment. No person shall
advertise that massage therapy services are provided at a business located within the City unless the business has been issued a license allowing for
massage therapy to be performed at the business location and such permit has not been suspended or revoked.
B. No massage establishment or massage therapist shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement,
picture, or statement which is known or, through the exercise of reasonable care, should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading or which would
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 114/565
reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that sexual stimulation or sexual gratification will be provided, in order to induce any person to purchase or
utilize any massage services of the massage establishment or massage therapist.
C. All advertising by a massage therapist must include his or her legal name, license number and the name of his or her employer, if applicable. All
advertising by a massage establishment must include the business name and license number(s) of the massage establishment.
D. In the event a massage establishment or its manager in charge becomes aware of any advertising that: 1) directs the viewer of the advertisement to the
massage establishment, either by name or address; and 2) violates the provisions of this section, the massage establishment or manager in charge
shall take reasonable steps to have such advertising removed or taken down, or in the event such advertising is on flyers or handbills, shall cease
distributing them. With respect to internet advertising or posting, reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to, requesting the host of the
website on which the advertising is located, or the person posting the advertisement, to remove or delete the advertisement or post.
E. Two (2) or more violations of this section within a six-month period may subject the massage establishment license to suspension, limitation or
revocation pursuant to section 2-6-16 of this chapter and the massage establishment, manager in charge, massage therapist or other party responsible
for the advertising, to disciplinary action. (Ord. 542, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-7: REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee or principal of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons who at any time are employed or contracted as massage
therapists and their State license numbers. Such register shall be made available upon request to representatives of the department or the Mesquite
Police Department during regular business hours. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
Each massage establishment licensee shall display the establishment's City business license in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the
massage establishment. The City and State license of any person licensed under this chapter to perform massage therapy must be displayed in a
conspicuous manner on the premises where the licensee is performing massage therapy. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-9: AGE OF EMPLOYEES:
It is unlawful for any massage establishment licensee or principal to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-10: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any independent massage therapist or massage establishment licensee, or a principal or employee thereof, to do any of the following:
A. Any massage establishment, manager in charge or person acting for the massage establishment, to employ, in any capacity, any person who is not at
least eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Any person licensed under this chapter to operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in such license or to
engage in the business of operating a massage establishment under a false or assumed name when the use of such false or assumed name is not
otherwise permitted by law, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name.
C. Any massage therapist or employee to expose his or her genitals, buttocks, chest or breasts, or make any intentional, occasional or repetitive contact
with a patron's specified anatomical areas.
D. Any massage establishment owner, massage therapist or employee to be present in any room with a patron unless the patron's specified anatomical
areas are fully covered.
E. Any massage establishment, massage therapist, employee, agent, representative or patron to engage in or solicit sexual activity from any person, at
any time within a massage establishment. These acts are unlawful if they occur at any time within a massage establishment, regardless of whether the
activity occurs during the course of a massage and regardless of whether the person consents. It shall also be a violation if the massage
establishment, employee, agent, massage therapist, or representative, initiates sexual activity with or encourages sexual activity from the person
regardless of whether the sexual activity actually occurs.
F. Any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverages on the premises of any massage establishment.
G. Any gaming as defined in this title to occur on the premises wherein the business of massage is conducted.
H. A massage establishment to employ any person who is not legally qualified to work in the United States.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 115/565
I. Any individual that is not a patron, employee, or massage therapist of the massage establishment to be present in any area of the massage
establishment identified as, or designated for, employees only or intended for patron services during operating hours.
J. Any massage establishment, employee, or independent massage therapist, or other person to use the massage establishment premises as a residence
or sleeping quarters.
K. Any massage establishment, employee, independent contractor, or other person acting on behalf of any of the foregoing to fail to allow any agents or
officers of the division, Code Enforcement, Police Department or State or County regulatory agencies access to the premises for administrative
inspections or to hinder such representative while performing such inspection.
L. Any massage establishment owner or manager in charge to fail to report to the division any arrest that occurs on the premises of the massage
establishment of which it has actual or constructive knowledge, within three (3) calendar days of the arrest, regardless of whether the person arrested
is an employee, patron or independent massage therapist, if the arrest is related to activities that occurred on the premises of the massage
establishment.
M. Subsections F and G of this section shall not apply in cases where the massage establishment is located within a facility such as, but not limited to a
hotel, resort hotel, athletic club, etc., and where gaming or alcohol is legally permitted. In such cases, the prohibition of alcoholic beverages and
gaming shall only apply to the area of the facility dedicated to the use of the massage establishment. (Ord. 542, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-11: OUTCALL MASSAGE:
Any licensed massage establishment may dispatch a licensed massage therapist to administer a massage therapy to a client, but only if the therapy is to
take place at the client's transient lodging, temporary or permanent residence or at the client's place of business. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-12: PROOF OF LICENSURE:
An applicant for a license to perform massage therapy under this chapter shall provide to the department proof of temporary or permanent licensure by the
Nevada Board of Massage Therapists. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-13: LICENSE INVESTIGATION; BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL ACTION:
A. The business license official shall refer applications for independent massage therapy licenses or massage establishment licenses to the Mesquite
Police Department for investigation. Upon completion of the investigation, the business license official shall approve or deny the application.
B. The business license official may deny, or suspend an independent massage therapy license or a massage establishment license for good cause,
which includes, but is not limited to:
1. The application is incomplete or contains false, misleading or fraudulent statements with respect to any information that is required in the application;
2. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals fails to satisfy any qualification or requirement that is imposed by this Code, or other local,
State or Federal law or regulation that pertains to the particular license or approval for suitability which is sought;
3. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals is residing in the United States illegally;
4. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals is engaged, or has commenced, instituted, advertised, aided, carried on, continued or
engaged, in a business, trade or profession without having obtained a valid license, or has solicited, encouraged, caused or procured another to do
so;
5. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals has been subject, in any jurisdiction, to disciplinary action of any kind with respect to a
license, an approval for suitability, a permit or a work card to the extent that such disciplinary action reflects upon the qualification, acceptability or
fitness of the applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals;
6. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals has been convicted of an act that constitutes a crime which involves moral turpitude or
involves any local, State or Federal law or regulation which relates to the same or a similar business, or has been convicted of having solicited,
encouraged, caused or procured another to commit such a violation;
7. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals has been convicted of having perpetrated, or solicited, encouraged, caused or procured
another to perpetrate, deceptive practices upon the public;
8. The applicant, prospective licensee or any of its principals suffers from a legal disability under the laws of the State;
9. The premises on which the business is proposed to be conducted do not satisfy local, State or Federal laws or regulations which pertain to the
activity that is proposed to be engaged in;
10. The proposed business activity constitutes, promotes, fosters, aids or otherwise enables a private nuisance, public nuisance or chronic nuisance;
11. The licensee, any of its principals, their employees or those acting on their behalf failed to cooperate with the business license official's efforts to
enforce the provisions of this Code;
12. Two (2) convictions of any person for solicitation of prostitution on the massage establishment premises within the preceding three (3) year period;
13. The applicant or licensee fails to possess or maintain a valid unexpired massage therapist license issued by the Nevada Board of Massage
Therapists; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 116/565
14. The applicant or licensee has been convicted of a charge of solicitation of prostitution during the three (3) year period immediately preceding the
action taken by the City of Mesquite. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-14: LICENSE RENEWAL DECLINED:
The business license official may decline to renew a license to an independent massage therapist or a massage establishment for good cause, which
includes, but is not limited to:
A. The licensee or any of its principals is engaged, or has commenced, instituted, advertised, aided, carried on, continued or engaged, in a business, trade
or profession without having obtained a valid license, or has solicited, encouraged, caused or procured another to do so;
B. The licensee, any of its principals, or their employees or those acting on their behalf, have been subject, in any jurisdiction, to disciplinary action of any
kind with respect to a license, an approval for suitability, a permit or a work card to the extent that such disciplinary action reflects upon the
qualification, acceptability or fitness of such licensee or any principal;
C. The licensee, any of its principals, or their employees or those acting on their behalf, have been convicted of an act that constitutes a crime which
involves moral turpitude or involves any local, State or Federal law or regulation which relates to the same or a similar business, or have been
convicted of having solicited, encouraged, caused or procured another to commit such a violation;
D. The licensee, any of its principals, or their employees or those acting on their behalf, violate a condition which is imposed upon the license;
E. The licensee, any of its principals, or their employees or those acting on their behalf, have been convicted of having perpetrated deceptive practices
upon the public;
F. The licensee or any of its principals suffers from a legal disability under the laws of the State;
G. The premises on which the business is conducted do not satisfy local, State or Federal laws or regulations which pertain to the activity which is actually
engaged in;
H. The business activity constitutes, promotes, causes, allows, fosters, aids, or otherwise enables a private nuisance, public nuisance or chronic nuisance,
or has been or is being conducted in an unlawful, illegal or impermissible manner, including, but not limited to, causing, allowing, promoting, fostering,
aiding, enabling, exercising deliberate ignorance toward or failing to abate a private nuisance, public nuisance or chronic nuisance;
I. The licensee, any of its principals, their employees or those acting on their behalf failed to cooperate with the business license official's efforts to enforce
the provisions of this Code;
J. The applicant or licensee fails to possess or maintain a valid unexpired massage therapist license issued by the Nevada Board of Massage Therapists;
K. The licensee has been convicted of a charge of solicitation of prostitution during the three (3) year period immediately preceding the business license
official's action; or
L. Two (2) convictions of any person for solicitation of prostitution on the massage establishment premises within the preceding three (3) year period. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-15: MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Licenses issued under this chapter are not transferable to any other person. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-16: DISCIPLINARY ACTION - LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION:
Any activity by a massage establishment or its employees, agents, independent contractors, and representatives or a person previously found suitable,
which is contrary to the public health, safety, morals, good order or general welfare of the residents of the City or that violates any City ordinance or State
law or regulation is grounds for the issuance of criminal citations, notices of violation and civil penalties, and/or the suspension, limitation or revocation of a
license. Disciplinary action may also be imposed for any of the following:
A. Doing or failing to do any act that would make one unqualified to obtain or hold a license under the provisions of this chapter or Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 640C;
B. Operating a massage establishment or providing massage therapy services in an unlawful manner or in a manner detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or State law;
C. Knowingly failing to report or concealing from proper authority any information that the massage establishment, employee or independent massage
therapist has a duty to report under this chapter or any statute, ordinance or regulation of the State or the City;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 117/565
D. Becoming ineligible to hold a massage therapy or massage establishment license as set out in the statutes and ordinances of the State or City after a
massage therapy or massage establishment license has been issued;
E. Misstating, misrepresenting or omitting any material fact in any application to obtain a license or conditional use permit;
F. Conduct on the part of any person, where such person engages in sexual activity, offers sexual activity or solicits sexual activity, from any person, at any
time on the premises of the massage establishment;
G. Conduct on the part of any person that results in any person being charged with solicitation of prostitution on the premises of any massage
establishment;
H. Possession of alcoholic beverages, or existence of any gaming activity, in the massage establishment or, in the case where the massage establishment
is located within a facility licensed for alcohol or gaming such as a hotel, resort hotel, or athletic club, then in the area of such facility dedicated to the
use of the massage establishment;
I. Transferring or attempting to transfer or assign a license issued under this chapter; or
J. Failure to comply with any of the requirements specified in this chapter or Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 640C, as may be amended or renumbered.
(Ord. 542, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-17: NOTICE OF HEARING; HEARING PROCEDURE:
Notice and the procedure of a hearing scheduled for the purposes set forth in section 2-6-16 of this chapter shall be in accordance with section 2-1-14 of
this title, as amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-18: APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES; STATE AND FEDERAL LAW:
A. The terms, conditions and policies of other applicable ordinances are intended to be applied in conjunction with the enforcement of all other ordinances
of the City designed for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The fact that such ordinances are not specifically referred to in
this chapter shall in no manner preclude their application to massage establishments and independent massage therapists.
B. The terms, conditions and requirements of this chapter are in addition to those imposed under State and/or Federal law. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-
31-2013)
2-6-19: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor and may result in a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for
up to six (6) months for each violation of any provision of this chapter. Additionally, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each violation on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-6-20: OBTAINING A LICENSE AFTER REVOCATION - PROHIBITION:
No massage establishment license shall be granted, and any existing massage establishment license may be revoked, limited or suspended, with respect
to any person whose business license, massage establishment license, massage therapy license or other similar license was revoked, limited or
suspended in any jurisdiction, for the period of two (2) years following the date of such revocation or suspension. The prohibition on granting a license, and
the potential revocation, limitation or suspension of an existing license, shall also apply to the spouse, family member, or business associate of, or any
person who holds more than a ten percent (10%) ownership interest in, such business whose license was suspended, limited or revoked. (Ord. 542, 8-28-
2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
2-6-21: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
A. The Director, agents or officers of the division, Code Enforcement, the Police Department, or any State or County regulatory agency shall be entitled to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Such enforcement power shall include, but not be limited to, the power to issue notices of violation of this chapter, impose civil penalties up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation for each day or any portion thereof during which the violation occurs or continues, declare nuisances,
serve notices of correction, issue red tag/stop work orders, initiate suspension or revocation of licenses pursuant to section 2-6-16 of this chapter and
to perform all other duties relating to licensing enforcement as provided in this title. In addition, those persons identified in subsection A of this section
shall have the authority to prepare, sign and serve misdemeanor citations pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 171, as may be amended or
renumbered, to enforce the provisions of this title.
C. The Director or his designee shall also have the authority to issue a "red tag/stop work order" for the following reasons:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 118/565
1. No manager in charge present on the premises during business hours;
2. No massage therapist on the premises;
3. Refusal of the manager in charge, employee or other person to allow agents or officers of the division, Code Enforcement, the Police Department, or
any State or County regulatory agency onto the premises for inspection to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
4. Occurrence of a crime on the premises of the massage establishment related to the operations of the massage establishment or actions of an
employee or independent massage therapist;
5. Existence of a threat to the public health, safety, welfare or morals;
6. A third violation of the provisions of this chapter by any employee, independent massage therapist or the massage establishment, or any
combination thereof, in a six-month period;
7. Failure to comply with a plan of correction established between the division and the massage establishment or massage therapist during the time
provided for in the plan of correction; or
8. Upon notice to the division or City from the board or other governmental agency of discipline against a massage establishment or its employees or
independent massage therapists if the discipline is an indication that continued operation of the massage establishment or provision of massage
therapy services may be a threat to the safety, welfare, health or morals of the City.
The "red tag/stop work order" shall direct the massage establishment employees, independent massage therapist, or unlicensed person performing
massage to cease and desist from the activity, or activities designated in the "red tag/stop work order". The "red tag/stop work order" shall be given
in writing by the Director or his designee to the massage establishment, its agents, or employees, or to unlicensed persons providing services in
violation of this chapter, clearly stating the violation(s) being committed. The Director or his officers shall affix a copy of the "red tag/stop work order"
to the public entrance(s) of the massage establishment in a prominent location. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the "red tag/stop work
order" from the public entrance(s) of the establishment without the express written authorization of the Director or one of his officers.
D. Any violation of a "red tag/stop work order", issued pursuant to subsection C of this section, shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter and
shall be cause to suspend, limit and/or revoke the massage establishment or independent massage therapist license. A notice of violation and civil
penalty may be issued for each violation, for each and every day of continued violation.
E. When, in the course of enforcing the provisions of this title relative to emergency suspension or a "red tag/stop work order", the division shall have the
authority to lock and seal the premises where the massage therapy services are being provided.
F. Any agents or officers of the division, Code Enforcement, the Police Department, or any State or County regulatory agency shall have access to every
part and portion of the massage establishment or location where massage services are being provided at any time when a massage establishment is
open for the transaction of business or massage therapy services are being provided, and after regular business hours if business is still being
conducted, for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Failure of the Director or agents or officers of the division, Code Enforcement, the Police Department, or any State or County regulatory agency to
discover violations and/or take action to enforce any provision of this chapter shall not constitute a forfeiture or waiver of such person's right to take
appropriate action at any time thereafter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the Director or agents or officers of the division, Code
Enforcement, the Police Department, or any State or County regulatory agency to impose any penalty on a massage establishment or massage
therapist, if the division, Police Department, or relevant agency deems the matter giving rise to a notice of violation has been corrected.
H. This section is supplemental to, and not exclusive of, enforcement measures available to other officials regarding this title. (Ord. 542, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-
18-2018)
2-6-22: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT LICENSE - OUTSIDE JURISDICTION - SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment or provide services as an independent massage therapist in the City without obtaining
a massage establishment or independent massage therapist license and paying all fees in connection therewith as set forth in section 2-6-4 of this
chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to provide massage therapy services in the City without first having obtained, and thereafter maintaining, a valid massage
therapist license pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 640C.
C. Any independent massage therapist who is based in any jurisdiction in Clark County, Nevada, other than the City and that wishes to come into the City
to perform massage therapy, including chair massage, must first be licensed as a massage therapist by the board pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes chapter 640C and must also obtain an independent massage therapist license from the City in accordance with this chapter.
D. Massage businesses that are based in any jurisdiction in Clark County, Nevada, other than the City and who wish to send massage therapists into the
City to perform massage therapy, including chair massage, must first obtain a City massage establishment license in accordance with this chapter.
E. Any owner of a massage establishment who wishes to engage in the occupation of massage must have a valid, unexpired license from the board in
addition to the massage establishment license required pursuant to this chapter.
F. It is unlawful for a massage establishment or manager in charge of a massage establishment to allow massage therapy to be performed at the massage
establishment by a person not licensed as a massage therapist. (Ord. 542, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 119/565
Chapter 7
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
2-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of the chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. An additional purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and
uniform signage regulations related to sexually oriented businesses to control the deleterious and adverse affects of such signage, and prevent
inappropriate exposure of the activities of such businesses to the community. This chapter is to be construed as a regulation of time, place and manner of
operation of these businesses consistent with the United States and Nevada constitutions. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
C. The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A. The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female
breast; or
B. A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the
female breast.
OPERATOR: The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district, or any other
agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE: A single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family, or mobile park or subdivision and campground, as defined in this
municipal code.
SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility, including, but not limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens,
elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. "School" includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities
used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the
body covered by supporting straps or devices.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 120/565
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or seminude model studio.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: Those businesses defined as follows:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar
machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store Or Adult Video Store: A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock
in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to the sale, rental for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
B. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others;
C. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult
video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the
specified materials which depict or describe "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant "bottle club", or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features: a) persons who appear seminude or in a state of seminudity; b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: a) offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description, of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability
of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising,
including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time less than ten (10) hours; or c) allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any
form of consideration.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of seminudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual
activities".
Escort: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Massage Parlor: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with "specified sexual
activities", or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas".
The definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed massage establishment, at a licensed
hospital, by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, or by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school
athletic program.
Seminude Model Studio: Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of seminudity is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
Sexual Encounter Establishment: A business or commercial establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities" when one
or more of the persons is seminude. The definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 121/565
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen
percent (15%), as the floor areas existed on November 9, 1993.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following:
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means;
C. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or
other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
2-7-3: ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED:
The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in the specified industrial-light (IR-1) zoning and shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
A. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the following "sexually oriented businesses", as defined in section 2-7-2 of this chapter,
within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such business, any religious institution, library, school, boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth
organization meeting place, public park, recreational area or open space, trail, public building, or any trail alignment or public building location as
approved and shown in the city master plan, when the ordinance codified herein becomes effective and including any other designated trails or public
building sites as they are adopted from time to time thereafter, or any property zoned for residential or agricultural use or any property used for
residential purposes and are classified as follows:
1. Adult arcade;
2. Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
3. Adult cabaret;
4. Adult motel;
5. Adult motion picture theater;
6. Adult theater;
7. Massage parlor;
8. Sexual encounter establishment;
9. Escort agency; or
10. Nude model studio.
B. The consumption, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited at sexually oriented businesses as set forth above and in this chapter. (Ord.
305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
As regarding subsection 2-7-3A of this chapter, distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any
place, area or facility listed in subsection 2-7-3A of this chapter, shall also be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of any place, area or facility listed in subsection 2-7-3A of this chapter. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 122/565
2-7-5: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
The city zoning ordinance hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in industrial light (IR-1) zoning as provided in section
2-7-3 of this chapter. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in section 2-7-8 of
this chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. Operational Requirements: A person commits a misdemeanor, if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business except as provided
in section 2-7-3 of this chapter.
B. Distance Restrictions: A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet
(1,000') of: a) any religious institution; b) any school; c) the boundary of any residential district; d) a public park adjacent to any residential district; e) a
property line of a lot devoted to residential use; or f) a boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization.
C. Similar Businesses; Distance Restrictions: A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
within one thousand feet (1,000') of another such business, which will include, any adult arcade, adult book store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor or any sexual encounter establishment.
D. Number Permitted In Building; Enlargement: A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of
more than one sexually oriented business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually
oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
E. Defense To Prosecution; Modeling: It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
F. Quota For Sexually Oriented Businesses: One sexually oriented business will be permitted for each twenty five thousand (25,000) in population as
determined by the United States census. A second license will be available for application after the census population of the city has been determined
to be at least twenty five thousand (25,000) persons. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-6: REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A. Any sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating on November 9, 1993, that is in violation of sections 2-7-3 and 2-7-5 of this chapter, shall be
deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period of one year, with a possible extension of one year to be
granted by the city council only upon a convincing showing of extreme financial hardship which is defined as the recovery of the initial financial
investment in the nonconforming use, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such
nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more
sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand feet (1,000') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and continually operating at the particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is
nonconforming.
B. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, public
building, residential district or residential lot within one thousand feet (1,000') of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license
has expired or has been revoked.
C. Any establishment subject to the provision of this section shall apply for the permit provided for by section 2-7-8-2 of this chapter within thirty (30) days
of the effective date of this chapter. Any establishment, existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall comply with the regulations pertaining to
sections 2-7-10, 2-7-12 and 2-7-19 of this chapter within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter, and all other applicable permit regulations
within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-7: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without having a valid permit due to locational restrictions is subject to a suit
for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or thirty
(30) days' imprisonment, and if an injunction must be sought, attorney fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 123/565
2-7-8: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMITS:
2-7-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the
city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of
this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or
effect of this section to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or harmful material to minors. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-8-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the particular type of
business. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without
said permit.
B. The city manager or his/her designee is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually oriented business
permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. The city manager or his/her designee is also responsible for ascertaining whether a
proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit is being applied for complies with all locational requirements of sections 2-7-3, 2-7-5 and 2-7-6
of this chapter, all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date hereof in the city
and the city comprehensive plan.
The police department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time
period set forth.
The code enforcement office is responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in order to ascertain
whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances.
C. An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the city. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the
city an original and two (2) copies of a sworn permit application on the standard application form supplied by the city or designee.
D. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
1. If the applicant is:
a. An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age;
b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
c. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under
the laws of the state, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent
and the address of the registered office for service of process.
2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he must state: a) the sexually
oriented business's fictitious name; and b) submit the required state registration documents.
3. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection D1 of this section has, within the two (2) or five (5) year period as
specified in section 2-7-8-4 of this chapter immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the
specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.
4. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to subsection D1 of this section and/or licensees of this chapter have had a previous
permit under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including
the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection D1 of this section has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this section whose permit has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
5. Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to subsection D1 of this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted
businesses.
6. The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing.
7. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any.
8. The applicant's mailing address(es) and residential address.
9. A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
10. The applicant's driver's permit number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
11. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 124/565
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
12. A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a state registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this chapter within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property
to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential property within one thousand feet (1,000')
of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted.
13. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the
application for a permit as applicant.
14. If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes or other video reproductions
which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the application requirements stated in
section 2-7-10 of this chapter.
E. Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the
event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30)
days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the city manager or his/her designee, shall be grounds for suspension
of a permit.
F. In the event that the city manager or his/her designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a
proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete
the application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to
properly complete the application.)
G. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
health, fire and building codes and laws.
H. The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing an application under this
section.
I. Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any "sexually oriented business" defined in this chapter, and as part of any application for a permit
under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the city or its designee a certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the
locational requirements of sections 2-7-5 and 2-7-6 of this chapter.
J. The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit.
K. By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise by the
city manager or his/her designee, the police department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable
in the city of their respective responsibilities under this chapter.
L. The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to section 2-7-9 of
this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 405, 7-22-2008, eff. 8-15-2008)
2-7-8-3: INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION:
A. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a permit pursuant to this chapter and all individuals listed in the application pursuant
to subsection 2-7-8-2D1 of this chapter shall provide the city of Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the Mesquite
police department. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city
police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks. The
Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct national criminal
records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city of Mesquite, which shall render a fitness
determination regarding the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544.
B. Fees: All applicants shall provide a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of one hundred forty five dollars ($145.00). All nonapplicants
required to be fingerprinted pursuant to this section shall provide a nonrefundable forty five dollar ($45.00) fingerprinting fee.
C. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city or its designee,
shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police department and
any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth
in this chapter. Said investigation shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date the results of the fingerprint based background check are
received. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval
of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefor. The police department shall only be required to certify that
the fingerprint based background check was completed and to disseminate the results of the state and national criminal background checks to the city
of Mesquite. The police department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 125/565
D. Approval Or Disapproval Of Application: A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business
will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or
disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city or its designee. (Ord. 405, 7-22-2008, eff.
8-15-2008)
2-7-8-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A. Time Limit For Grant Or Denial Of Permit: The city manager or his/her designee, shall grant or deny an application for a permit within thirty (30) days
from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time,
the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the city or its designee, notifies the
applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons(s) for that denial.
B. Grant Of Application For Permit:
1. The city manager or his/her designee, shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection C of this section is present.
2. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business whether permitted or not may be subject to indecency
pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S., 111 S. Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991). The permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
C. Denial Of Application For Permit:
1. The city manager or his/her designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:
a. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
b. An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
c. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding
twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve
(12) months.
d. An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
e. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by
the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance.
f. The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not been paid.
g. An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business under sections 2-7-3, 2-7-5 and 2-7-6 of this chapter.
h. The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order.
i. The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been suspended or revoked.
j. An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for which:
(1) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
(2) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering or tax violations;
(3) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses for "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse,
rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful to
minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations; offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month period;
(4) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant;
(5) An applicant who has been convicted of the above described "specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only
when the time period required in this subsection has elapsed.
k. An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ, an employee who does not have a valid license as required in section 2-7-9 of this chapter.
2. If the city manager or his/her designee, denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial.
3. If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous application for a
permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different
decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 126/565
2-7-8-5: INITIAL AND QUARTERLY PERMIT FEE:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) initially and three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per
quarter thereafter. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-8-6: INSPECTION:
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, the code enforcement office, the Clark County health department, and
the fire and rescue department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time
it is occupied or open for business.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business
under this chapter, or his/her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time
that it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-8-7: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
A. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 2-7-8-4 (for
renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient) of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.
B. When the city manager or his/her designee, denies renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter for one year from
the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city or its designee, finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the
applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-8-8: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. The city manager or his/her designee, shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a permittee, or an
employee of a permittee, has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or
2. Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working in the sexually oriented business premises; or
3. Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; or
4. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
5. Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state
or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the
event of such statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the city or its designee, shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall
allow the permittee a seven (7) day period in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the
seven (7) day period, the city or its designee, shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension.
6. Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section 2-7-8-11 of this chapter. In the event that the city or its designee, suspends a permit on the ground
that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to section 2-7-8-11 of this chapter, the city manager or his/her designee shall forthwith notify
the permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied.
7. Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation in section 2-7-13 of this chapter.
8. Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as required in section 2-7-9 of this chapter.
B. The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord. 103, 11-9-
1993)
2-7-8-9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. The city manager or his/her designee shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in section 2-7-8-8 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. The city manager or his/her designee, shall revoke a permit upon determining that:
1. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's
opportunity for obtaining a permit; or
2. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or
3. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or
4. A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended;
or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 127/565
5. A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for which the time period required in section 2-7-8-4 of this chapter has not elapsed; or
6. On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit; or
7. A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees related to a sexually oriented business; or
8. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
9. A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented business under a single roof.
C. When the city manager or his/her designee, revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city manager or his/her
designee finds that the basis for revocation under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another permit
until the number of years required under this section have elapsed. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-8-10: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt
review of such administrative action through the city council or special city review board if one is established by the city. If the denial, suspension or
revocation is affirmed upon review, the administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-8-11: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
A. A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
B. A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
1. Obtains an amendment to the permit from the city manager or his/her designee, which provides that he/she is now the permittee, which amendment
may be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with the city manager or his/her designee, setting forth the
information called for under section 2-7-8-2 of this chapter in the application; and
2. Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual permit fee set by this chapter.
C. No permit may be transferred when the city manager or his/her designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings have
been or will be brought against the permittee.
D. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another location.
E. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be deemed revoked.
(Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-9: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
A. Employee License Required: Each individual to be employed in a "sexually oriented business", as defined in section 2-7-2 of this chapter, who engages
in the services rendered by a seminude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a live performer or
entertainer shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license.
B. Applicant Information: Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the city manager or his or her designee the following information:
1. The applicant's name or any other names (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual;
2. Age, date and place of birth;
3. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
4. Present residence address and telephone number;
5. Present business address and telephone number;
6. State driver's license or identification number; and
7. Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
8. Attached to the application form as provided above, a color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 128/565
9. A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country ever had a license,
permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or
suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in
full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application.
10. Whether the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act", as defined in subsection 2-7-8-4C1j of this chapter. This information shall
include the date, place and nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and identifying the convicting jurisdiction.
C. Investigation: The city manager or his or her designee shall refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to the police department
for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application.
D. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a sexually oriented business employee license are required to provide the city of
Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints and a nonrefundable fingerprinting fee of forty five dollars ($45.00). Fingerprinting shall be completed at the
Mesquite police department. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national criminal records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data,
the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of public safety to conduct state criminal records checks.
The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation to conduct national
criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the city police agency, which shall issue a report
to the city manager in accordance with subsection E of this section. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and
public law 92-544.
E. Issuance Of License: The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) working days from the date the results of the fingerprint based
background check are received. After the investigation, the city manager or his or her designee shall issue a license unless the report from the police
department finds that one or more of the following findings is true:
1. That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any
report or record required to be filed with the police department or other department of the city;
2. That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
3. That the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" as defined in subsection 2-7-8-4C1j of this chapter;
4. That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter;
5. That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
F. Renewal Of License:
1. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal by the city manager or his or her designee upon the written application
of the applicant and a finding by the city manager or his or her designee and the police department that the applicant has not been convicted of any
"specified criminal act" as defined in subsection 2-7-8-4C1j of this chapter, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period
which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.
2. The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee as set by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 405, 7-22-2008, eff. 8-15-2008)
2-7-10: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS;
PROHIBITION OF ACTIVITIES OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS FROM BEING PERFORMED ON AN OUTCALL OR OFF
PREMISES BASIS:
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight
feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram
in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimension of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The city manager or his/her designee, may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city or it's designee.
4. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 129/565
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or
persons at all times, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A of this section.
7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes" shall be permitted in the
walls or partition separating each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room, restroom or any other room on the premises. No door may be
attached or installed on any viewing room.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access
and an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
B. A person having a duty under subsection A of this section commits a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
C. The activities of a sexually oriented business may not be performed on an outcall or off premises basis. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-11: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has
been issued for said business under this chapter and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer or allow:
A. Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
B. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
C. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises without the specific consent of a parent or guardian;
or
D. A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the business premises as an employee. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-12: ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any
applicable state statute or local ordinance.
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or performances at
such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence
or location of such sexually oriented business.
C. The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside the premises.
D. All off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a
lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This
required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business
for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the
required sketch or diagram of the premises.
E. Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operator of a sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of the city, commonly
known as the sexually oriented business ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted city ordinances or
regulations. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-13: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and allows such business to remain open for business, or to permit any
employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 130/565
B. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, said employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a
sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord.
305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-14: NUDITY PROHIBITED AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
The United States supreme court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S., 111 S. Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991), which upheld the rights of cities to
prohibit live public exposure of a person's private parts, specifically applies to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of whether or not a permit has
been issued to said businesses under this chapter), including said businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed at the
premises.
Live, public nudity is prohibited within the city, including any sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this
section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of section 2-7-8-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
2-7-15: ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A
VALID PERMIT:
In addition to the criminal provisions found at other sections of this chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to sexually oriented
businesses.
It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and said person knows or should know that:
A. The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under this chapter for any applicable classification;
B. The business has a permit which is under suspension;
C. The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
D. The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-16: EXEMPTIONS:
A. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
B. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted
under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employees bona fide use
of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-17: CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, EQUITABLE AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
A. In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the state penal code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the
criminal provisions of this chapter, such person upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days in the city jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each
violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be
considered as a separate offense.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive
relief or an action at law for damages.
C. Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from prosecuting any violation of this chapter by means of a code enforcement
board established pursuant to the authority as provided by the laws of the state.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 131/565
D. All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be cumulative and independently available to the city and the city shall be authorized to
pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-18: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION:
The city and its designee, the police department and all other departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and employees, charged with
enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually
oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter. (Ord. 103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-19: PROHIBITION OF DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES:
A. It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
B. Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include, but are not limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather restraints,
racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse.
C. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six (6) months incarceration or both. (Ord.
103, 11-9-1993)
2-7-20: SIGNS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this code, the following more restrictive requirements for signs pertaining to sexually oriented businesses shall
prevail:
A. No more than one exterior on premises sign shall be allowed;
B. No sign shall be allowed to exceed twelve (12) square feet;
C. No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the exterior walls or roofs of such premises;
D. No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or implying the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs shall
contain alphanumeric copy only;
E. Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted;
F. Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed;
G. Other than the signs specifically allowed by this chapter, the sexually oriented business shall not attach, construct or allow to be attached or
constructed, any temporary sign, banner, light or other device designed to draw attention to the business;
H. Off premises signage is prohibited for sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 305, 11-23-2004)
Chapter 8
FESTIVALS AND CONCERTS
ARTICLE A. OUTDOOR FESTIVALS
2-8A-1: DEFINITION:
"Outdoor festival" means any music festival, dance festival, "rock" festival or similar musical activity, at which music is provided by paid or amateur
performers or by prerecorded means, which is held at any place other than in a permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed
for the purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities, and to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-8A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain, conduct, advertise, sell or furnish tickets for an outdoor festival in the city unless he shall first obtain a license from the
city to operate or conduct such festival. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 132/565
2-8A-3: LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE; REQUIREMENTS:
A. Fee; Contents Of Application: Application for a license to conduct an outdoor festival shall be made in writing to the business license official at least
sixty (60) days prior to the time indicated for the commencement of the planned activity and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and shall contain the following:
1. The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making said application. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and
addresses of the partners must appear. Where the applicant is a corporation, the application must be signed by the president, vice president and
secretary thereof and must contain the addresses of said corporate officers; and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted
with the application.
2. A statement of the kind, character or type of festival which the applicant proposes to conduct, operate or carry on.
3. The address or legal description of the place where the proposed festival is to be conducted, operated or carried on. Additionally, the applicant must
submit proof of ownership of the place where the festival is to be conducted or a statement signed by the owner of the premises indicating his
consent that the site be used for the proposed festival.
4. The date or dates and hours during which the festival is to be conducted.
5. An estimate of the number of customers, spectators, participants and other persons expected to attend the festival for each day it is conducted.
6. The names and addresses of anyone contributing, investing or having a financial interest greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in producing
the festival.
B. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a permit or license pursuant to this article shall provide the city of Mesquite with a full
set of fingerprints. In all cases where the applicant for a license or permit is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, the business license official
shall determine who of the members, principal officers, directors, stockholders, and/or managers shall present themselves to the city police agency for
fingerprinting. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the Mesquite police department. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct state and national criminal
records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the city police agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada department of
public safety to conduct state criminal records checks. The Nevada department of public safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the
federal bureau of investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the state and national criminal checks will be disseminated to
the city of Mesquite, which shall render a fitness determination regarding the applicant. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
239B.010(1)(a) and public law 92-544.
C. Fees: All applicants shall provide a nonrefundable investigation and fingerprinting fee of one hundred forty five dollars ($145.00). All nonapplicants
required to be fingerprinted pursuant to this section shall provide a nonrefundable forty five dollar ($45.00) fingerprinting fee.
D. Festival Plans Filed With Application: A detailed explanation shall be submitted with the application and shall indicate the applicant's plans to provide
security and fire protection, water supply and facilities, food supply and facilities, sanitation facilities, medical facilities and services, vehicle parking
space, vehicle access and on site traffic control, and, if it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will remain at night or overnight, the
arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar facilities. The applicant's plans shall include what provisions shall be made for
numbers of spectators in excess of the estimate, provisions for cleanup of the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded. A plot
plan showing arrangement of the facilities, including those for parking, egress and ingress, shall be submitted with said application. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-8A-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE; POSTING:
A. Issuance And Fee: When the business license official certifies that conditions have been met, the business license official shall, upon payment of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day of operation, issue a license specifying the name and address of the licensee, the kind of festival licensed and
the number of days' operation authorized.
B. Posting Of License: The licensee shall keep such license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises at which the festival is conducted.
C. License Nontransferable: No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable or removed to another location. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-
31-2013)
2-8A-5: BOND AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT:
A. Bond: Any licensee may be called upon to post an indemnity bond and/or a performance bond in favor of the city in connection with the operation of a
festival. Bonds required by this article must be approved by the city attorney prior to the issuance of a license. An applicant may be required to submit a
surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state in a penal amount determined by the city council. The bond
shall indemnify the city, its agents, officers, servants and employees and the city council against any and all loss, injury and damage of any nature
whatsoever arising out of or in any way connected with said festival, and shall indemnify against loss, injury and damage to both person and property.
Additionally, the city may demand that applicant provide a corporate surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in
the state, indemnifying the city and the owners of property adjoining the festival site for any costs necessitated for cleaning up and/or removing debris,
trash or other waste from, in and around the premises. The bond shall be in an amount determined by the city council.
B. Financial Statement: Each licensee shall be required to provide a financial statement to give assurance of the ability of the promoters and/or applicants
to meet the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-8A-6: LICENSING CONDITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 133/565
The city may establish conditions which must be met prior to the issuance of any license under this article except that the city may take a matter under
submission before determining which conditions shall be imposed. Where the city takes a matter under submission, written notice of any conditions
imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a license must be mailed to the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the original hearing.
The conditions which may be imposed by the city pursuant to the city's general police power for the protection of health, safety and property of local
residents and persons attending festivals in the city, are as follows:
A. Police Protection: Every licensee shall employ, at his own expense, police protection. The number and type of officers shall be determined and specified
by the city law enforcement agency to provide for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the place of the festival. Funds to
employ this specified number of law enforcement officers at the current hourly salary rate, shall be deposited with the business license official at least
ten (10) days prior to the specified date the activity is to occur. A minimum of one law enforcement officer for every five hundred (500) persons
expected to be in attendance shall be required. Where the city's law enforcement agency specified the employment of off duty peace officers to meet
the requirements of this chapter, said peace officers shall be under the complete direction and control of the police agency.
B. Fire Protection: Every licensee shall provide at his own expense adequate fire protection as determined by the fire protection agency or agencies
having jurisdiction where the event is to be conducted. Flammable vegetation and other fire hazards shall be removed in a manner and in such quantity
as determined by the fire chief or fire chiefs. First aid fire extinguishment equipment shall be provided as directed by the fire chief or fire chiefs.
C. Water Facilities:
1. Location of water facilities on the premises must be approved by the Southern Nevada health district prior to issuance of a license.
2. The minimum supply of water to the outdoor festival shall be fifteen (15) gallons of fresh water for each person in attendance per day. All water shall
meet United States health service standards. Public and private flush type water closets, lavatories and drinking facilities shall be required as
determined by the Southern Nevada health district. Sewage and drainage systems relating to such facilities shall be subject to the prior approval of
the Southern Nevada health district and the business license official.
D. Food Concessions:
1. Where the proposed festival is to be held a substantial distance from public eating places, food handling places or like establishments, the applicant
shall be required to demonstrate that food will be available at the premises for each day of operation to adequately feed the number of persons
expected to be in attendance.
2. Concessionaires must be licensed and operate under a valid health district permit pursuant to local ordinances and state laws. Every licensee shall
provide at least one flush type water closet and lavatory for each sex in a closed facility for employees of each food concession or operation within
the enclosure area of such food operation unless otherwise approved by the Southern Nevada health district.
3. Under no circumstances shall the Southern Nevada health district allow such flush type water closets and lavatories to be located more than fifty feet
(50') from the concession or operation. All lavatories required in conjunction with food concessions and food operations shall be provided with hot
and cold water under pressure which shall be dispensed by an approved type mixing faucet. All sewage, sink waste and wastewater from water
closets, lavatories, sinks operated in connection with food concessions or food operations shall be disposed of to a public sewer or a sewage
disposal system approved by the Southern Nevada health district and the business license official.
E. Sanitation Facilities Required:
1. Water Closets And Lavatories:
a. Every licensee shall provide at least one enclosed flush type water closet facility marked "men" and one such facility marked "women" on the
premises of a festival on the basis of one flush type water closet for each forty (40) males and one for each forty (40) females expected to be in
attendance. Urinals may be substituted for the required flush type water closets for men at the ratio of one urinal and one flush type water closet
per sixty (60) males.
b. Lavatories provided with cold water under pressure, soap and paper towels shall be provided on the basis of one lavatory for each seventy five
(75) persons expected to be in attendance.
c. Where flush type water closets cannot be made available for the persons in attendance, the city may allow the use of portable chemical toilets.
Such chemical toilets must meet the approval of the Southern Nevada health district before any license may be issued. Chemical toilets shall be
emptied and recharged at the licensee's expense as necessary pursuant to procedures established by the Southern Nevada health district. The
requirement for flush type water closets, food concessions, food operations and for the use of employees may not be waived.
2. Garbage And Trash Containers; Removal: Every licensee shall be required to furnish at least one trash can with thirty six (36) gallon capacity, with a
tightfitting lid, for each twenty five (25) persons expected to be in attendance. An adequate supply of plastic bag liners to fit the trash receptacles
shall be provided and each container shall at all times have a plastic bag liner inserted and when full, it shall be tied, removed and a new plastic bag
liner inserted. The pick up and removal of refuse, trash, garbage and rubbish shall be at least once a day and more often if required by the Southern
Nevada health district. A signed contract with a licensed refuse collector shall be submitted to the Southern Nevada health district and a copy of
same filed with the health district. Removal of all trash and refuse shall be at the licensee's expense.
F. Medical Facilities:
1. Where a proposed festival is expected to attract a large number of persons for a site located a substantial distance from adequate existing treatment
facilities, the applicant shall be required to provide emergency medical treatment facilities on the premises of the festival.
2. Where the proposed festival is located close to adequate existing facilities, the applicant shall provide, as required by the Southern Nevada health
district, emergency treatment facilities on the premises of the festival.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 134/565
3. The location of such facilities, number of doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists, nurses and other aides needed to staff said facilities and the quantity
of medical supplies, drugs, ambulances and other equipment that must be on the site shall be approved by the Southern Nevada health district prior
to the issuance of any license under this article.
4. The Southern Nevada health district shall calculate the need for medical services, based on the number of persons expected to attend a festival,
their expected age group, the duration of events planned and the possibility of exposure to inclement weather and outdoor elements. Traffic lanes
and other adequate space shall be designated and kept open for access and travel for ambulance, helicopter and other emergency vehicles to
transport patients, or staff to appropriate on and off site treatment facilities.
G. Parking Areas:
1. Every licensee shall provide adequate parking space for persons attending the festival by motor vehicle.
2. Persons desiring to operate or conduct a festival may be called upon to provide a separate parking space for every two (2) persons expected to
attend the festival by motor vehicle. Such individual parking spaces shall be clearly marked and shall not be less than twelve feet (12') wide and
twenty feet (20') long. The business license official must approve an applicant's parking plan before a license shall be issued.
H. Access And Parking Control:
1. Every licensee shall provide adequate ingress and egress to festival premises and parking areas therefor. Necessary roads, driveways and
entranceways shall exit to ensure orderly flow of traffic into the premises from a highway or road which is a county road or highway or which is a
highway maintained by the state. A special accessway for fire equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles may be required. The business
license official must approve the licensee's plan for ingress and egress before a license shall be issued.
2. Additionally, any applicant may be required to show that traffic guards are under his employ to ensure orderly traffic movement and relieve traffic
congestion in the vicinity of the festival area.
I. Hours Of Operation: All festivals which are subject to license under this article shall close and cease operation continuously between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of each and every day.
J. Illumination: Every licensee planning to conduct a festival after dark, or planning to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises after
dark, shall provide electrical illumination to ensure that those areas which are occupied are lighted at all times. The business license official must
approve an applicant's lighting plan as a prerequisite to issuance of a license hereunder. A licensee may be required to illuminate specific areas on the
premises in accordance with the following scale of lighting intensity:
Illumination Watts Per Square Foot
Open areas reserved for spectators 0.50
Stage areas 5.00
Parking and overnight areas 0.25
Restroom and concession areas 1.00
K. Overnight Camping Facilities: Every licensee authorized to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises overnight shall provide
camping facilities and overnight areas approved by the Southern Nevada health district and city prior to the issuance of any license.
L. Communication: Licensee shall be required to establish a communication system for public use where ordinary communication is not available.
M. Miscellaneous: Any applicant may be required to meet any other condition prior to receiving a license to conduct a festival which is reasonably
calculated as necessary to protect the health, welfare and property of local residents and persons attending a festival. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-
31-2013)
2-8A-7: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE; NOTICE OF DENIAL:
A. Grounds For Denial: The city may deny issuance of license if it finds any of the following:
1. The applicant fails to meet the conditions imposed pursuant to this article.
2. The proposed festival will be conducted in a manner and/or location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or building and safety standards established
by the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state.
3. The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for license, or in any other document
required pursuant to this article.
4. The applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or
manager, has previously conducted the type of festival being applied for which resulted in the creation of a public or private nuisance.
5. The applicant, his employee, agent or any person associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment of:
a. An offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture or place, or of selling obscene matter; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 135/565
b. An offense involving lewd conduct; or
c. An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another; or
d. An offense involving misconduct with children; or
e. A felony offense.
B. Notice Of Denial: Where the application is denied, the business license official shall mail to the applicant written notice of denial within fourteen (14)
days of the action, which notice shall include a statement of the reasons the application was denied. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-8A-8: EXEMPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
Nothing contained in this article shall apply to outdoor concerts, dances, recitals, musicals or similar event, with respect to which all of the following
provisions are met:
A. All tickets, passes or admissions are sold, furnished or distributed solely within the city.
B. No notices, advertisements, solicitations or announcements of any type are circulated or distributed outside the city.
C. No more than one thousand (1,000) tickets, passes or admissions to the event are permitted.
D. The event is held on a single calendar day within the city and shall not take place between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M.
E. If the event is commercially motivated or if any type of admission whatsoever is collected, the person operating, maintaining, promoting or conducting
the event shall be required to:
1. Obtain a temporary business license from the business license official.
2. File with the business license official a surety bond running to the city in an amount equal to the expected gross receipts from ticket sales. The surety
bond shall guarantee the performance for the licensee to any citizen who has paid money for admittance to the event. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-
31-2013)
2-8A-9: COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a complaint with the business license official or may petition the city council to conduct a hearing concerning the revocation of the
license of any licensee. The business license official shall notice the petition for hearing in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 477, 12-10-
2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-8A-10: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful for any licensee, employee, agent or person associated with said licensee, to do any of the following:
A. Conduct or operate a festival without first procuring a license to do so.
B. Sell tickets to a festival without a license first having been obtained.
C. Operate, conduct or carry on any festival in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance.
D. Exhibit, show or conduct within said place of festival any obscene, indecent, vulgar or lewd exhibition, show, play, entertainment or exhibit no matter by
what name designated.
E. Allow any person on the premises of the licensed festival to cause or create a disturbance in, around or near any place of festival, by offensive or
disorderly conduct.
F. Knowingly allow any person to consume, sell or be in possession of intoxicating liquor while in a place of a festival except where such consumption is
expressly authorized under the terms of this article and under the laws of the city.
G. Knowingly allow any person at the licensed festival to use, sell or be in possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug while in, around or near a place of
the festival. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-8A-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 136/565
A. Grounds For Revocation: The city council shall have the power to revoke any license, or to revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable conditions,
when the following causes exist:
1. The licensee fails, neglects or refuses to pay to the business license official the fee prescribed by this article.
2. The licensee, his employee or agent, fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any or all of the conditions imposed pursuant to this article.
3. The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a manner which violates any law or regulation established by the ordinances of the city or the
laws of the state.
4. The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a disorderly manner or knowingly allows any person to remain on the premises of the festival
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any narcotic or dangerous drug.
5. The licensee, his employee or agent, is convicted of any of the offenses enumerated under this article.
B. Notice Of Intent To Revoke; Hearing: Notice of intent to revoke any license shall be given and the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing. The business
license official shall give notice, setting forth the causes for revocation and shall state the time and place at which the matter of revocation will be heard
before the city council. The notice shall be mailed not later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. The city council shall hear all interested
parties and may revoke a license for one or more causes enumerated by this article. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
Chapter 9
RESERVED1
(Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
Chapter 10
NEWSRACKS
2-10-1: PURPOSE:
A. The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to newsracks on the public right of way and other
public property. The purpose of this chapter is to advance and improve safety and aesthetics by controlling the number, size, construction, placement
and appearance of newsracks without restricting the free dispersal of information guaranteed by the constitution of the United States and the state.
B. More specifically, the purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, morals, health, safety and general welfare by regulating the placement,
appearance, servicing and ensuring of newsracks so as to protect against the dangers of impairing or distracting the vision of motorists and
pedestrians; the hazards of unreasonably interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into or egress from
any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; unreasonably
interfering with the use of public property for its intended purpose; unduly restricting access to the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mailboxes or locations used for transportation purposes; unsightly structures; neglectful servicing of newsracks resulting in visual blight on public rights
of way and other public property and detracting from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements; reduction
in value of surrounding property; unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims or suits; and public dissemination
and/or display of harmful or offensive matters to minors.
C. The city council finds and determines that the strong and competing interests of the public and of newspapers require a reasonable accommodation
which can only satisfactorily be achieved through the means of this chapter which is designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the time,
place and manner of using newsracks. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate orinterfere with the publication,
circulation, distribution or dissemination of any newspapers. (Ord. 104, 11-11-93)
2-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:
NEWSRACK: Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers or new periodicals.
PARKWAY: That area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area between the edge of the roadway and the
property line adjacent thereto. "Parkway" also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
PERSON: Any individual, company, corporation, association, business or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Parks, squares, plazas and any and all other real property owned by the city.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the
general public for street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway, storm drainage, bicycle path or other purposes.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 137/565
SIDEWALK: Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
STREET: All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
(Ord. 104, 11-11-1993)
2-10-3: PERMITS:
A. No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right of way or other public property without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. An amended application for said permit shall be filed with the city manager in the event that
additional newsracks are installed in the city or removed from the city by the applicant subsequent to the issuing of the original permit by the city.
B. Applications for permits required by this section shall be filed with the city engineer upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by him or her. The
application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The number of newsracks and location(s) of the proposed installation or maintenance of the newsrack(s);
3. The date that said newsrack(s) is proposed to be installed or maintained;
4. The nature, type and model of the newsrack(s) proposed to be installed or maintained;
5. That the applicant agrees, upon expiration or revocation of the permit, to immediately restore the public right of way or other public property to its
condition prior to the installation or maintenance of the newsrack(s);
6. The name, address, and telephone numbers of a responsible individual whom the city may notify of contact at any time concerning the applicant's
newsrack(s);
7. Any additional information which the director of municipal services may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application.
C. Not more than one permit shall be required for each applicant regardless of the number of newsracks proposed to be installed or maintained.
D. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay an annual permit fee provided by resolution of the city council. The fee required shall apply to
each newsrack installed or maintained by the applicant.
E. In addition to the annual permit fee payable pursuant to subsection D of this section, each applicant shall pay an inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
for each newly installed or replaced newsrack. Existing newsracks previously permitted and inspected are specifically exempt from this inspection fee.
F. In additional to the permit application, each applicant shall also execute a document, approved as to form by the city attorney, agreeing to hold the city,
its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claim demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the location of any
newsrack located upon, in or over a public right of way or other public property and deposit with the city clerk a certificate of insurance evidencing that
a liability insurance policy in minimum amounts set by the city council has been issued, naming the city as an additional insured, andcontaining a
provision that the policy cannot be cancelled except upon twenty (20) days' written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance is
cancelled at any time during the time the newsrack is installed or maintained on public property, said newsrack shall be removed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
G. Each permit shall be valid for a period of one year, and shall be renewed in the same manner set forth in this section for original applications.
H. Each permit shall be issued only to the person by the permittee. If any permittee assigns his permit to another, the permit will be deemed revoked as of
the time of the attempted assignment. (Ord. 104, 11-11-1993)
2-10-4: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests,
wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway.
B. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right of way or other public property,
when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility
purposes, public transportation purposes or other government use, or when such newsrack interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts,
traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location, when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any
sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery, or when such newsrack interferes with the ordinary use of public property.
C. Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right of way or other public property, shall comply with the following standards:
1. Stands for newsracks shall be single pedestal, K-jack style mounts, model 100 or equivalent. Newsrack mount shall be painted black.
2. No newsracks shall exceed sixty inches (60") in height, thirty inches (30") in width, or twenty four inches (24") in depth.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 138/565
3. Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than twelve
inches (12") nor more thanthirty six inches (36") from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed
parallel to such wall and not more than six inches (6") from the wall. The provisions of subsection C8 of this section shall prevail over the foregoing.
4. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the owner of the
newsrack, unless the consent of the owner of such property or object is obtained in writing and presented with the permit application.
5. Newsracks may be placed, chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three (3) newsracks may be joined or placed
together in this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen inches (18") shall separate each group of three (3) newsracks so attached.
6. No newsrack, or group of attached newsracks allowed under subsection C5 of this section shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred
twenty five (125) pounds when empty.
7. Every newsrack shall be installed on a single pedestal or a multiple post which shall be securely anchored to the ground and shall be constructed,
installed and maintained in a safe and secure condition approved by the director of municipal services.
8. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
a. Within five feet (5') of any marked crosswalk;
b. Within fifteen feet (15') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
c. Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire callbox or other emergency facility;
d. Within five feet (5') ahead of and fifteen feet (15') to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;
e. Which is attached to any parking meter, traffic signal, fire hydrant, street light, power pole, sign post, tree or refuse container;
f. Within five feet (5') of any bus bench or bus shelter;
g. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet (6');
h. Within five feet (5') of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the
reasonable use of such window for display purposes;
i. So that the front face or display window of the newsrack is within three feet (3') of any lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees;
j. Within five feet (5') of any bicycle rack.
9. The placement of all newsracks in the city shall comply with all local and state handicapped accessibility regulations.
10. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than to state the name of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein
on the display window only of the newsrack.
11. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times so as not to become mechanically
inoperable or have cracked or broken coverings or casings. If an inspection is required concerning maintenance, the owner of said newsrack shall be
charged a ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee for each newsrack so inspected.
a. No more than four (4) newsracks shall be located upon, in or over any public right of way or other public property within a space of two hundred
feet (200') in any direction within the same block of the same street. In determining which newsracks shall be permitted, the city manager shall be
guided solely by the following criteria:
(1) First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation.
(2) Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (at least one publication having been published in a
calendar week).
(3) Subject to the priorities listed, any publication not deemed to fall under the definitions of the above classes shall constitute a miscellaneous
category and shall be eligible on a "first come, first served" basis to secure remaining available newsrack space pursuant to this section.
(4) In the event that there is a conflict between newspapers within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsrack
spaces remaining to accommodate the competing newspapers, after first filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth
above, then the city manager or his/her designated representative shall assign the space or spaces at random by placing the names of all
applicants for the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be drawn, one at a time, until the particular
locations' remaining number of unfilled newsracks has been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time and date designated by the
city manager or his/her designated representative.
b. Every person who places or maintains a newsrack upon, in or over any public right of way or other public property shall permanently affix to each
newsrack the permittee's name, address, telephone number and permit number in a place where such information may be easily seen.
c. No person shall knowingly display in any public newsrack or other display device, any material which is defined by Nevada Revised Statutes
section 201.265 as harmful to minors, including photographs or pictorial representations of the commission of any of the following acts: sodomy,
oral copulation, sexual intercourse, masturbation, bestiality or an exposed penis in an erect and turgid state, unless such material is:
(1) Displayed in an area from which minors are excluded; or
(2) Is covered by a device, commonly known as a "blinder rack", such that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material is not exposed to view.
d. A person commits the offense of disseminating harmful material to minors, as defined under Nevada Revised Statutes section 201.265 if, with or
without consideration and knowing the character or content of the material, he knowingly:
(1) Sells, furnishes, presents, or distributes to a minor material that is harmful to minors without consent of a parent or guardian; or
(2) Allows a minor to review or peruse material that is harmful to minors without consent of parent or guardian. (Ord. 104, 11-11-1993)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 139/565
2-10-5: REMOVAL:
A. Any newsrack installed, used maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be subject to removal and storage by the city manager. Such
officer shall take steps to notify the permittee/owner thereof and request compliance within thirty (30) calendar days prior to removal. At any time within
said thirty (30) day period an administrative hearing to challenge the existence of a violation may be requested by the permittee. Failure to request the
hearing shall result in removal and storage of the newsrack(s) by the city manager at any time after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period.
B. If the permittee requests a hearing as provided in subsection A of this section, said hearing shall be scheduled within five (5) days of the request and
shall be administered by the city manager or his designee. The permittee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of any adverse ruling which may
result from the hearing to comply with the provisions specified in the ruling. If after thirty (30) days from thedate of decision the permittee has failed to
comply with the provision(s) of this chapter cited in the decision, the subject newsrack(s) shall be removed and stored by the city manager.
C. The cost of removal and/or storage by the city manager of any newsrack subject to this section shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the permittee
thereof and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation. In addition, the newsrack(s) in question
shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of in accordance with law.
D. In the case of violation of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachment of newsracks to property or fixed objects other than that owned by the
owner of the newsracks and restrictions upon location of newsracks, the city manager or any person designated by same, may, as an alternative to
removal, remove such attachment and/or move such condition, and thereafter the permittee shall be notified of such corrective action and shall pay the
cost thereof.
E. The city manager, or any person designated by same, may summarily remove any newsrack where its installation, use or maintenance poses a danger
to pedestrians or vehicles, or otherwise unreasonably interferes with the safe use of any public right of way or other public property. After the removal
of the newsrack, the permittee shall be notified thereof. Upon failure of the permittee, following such notice, the newsrack shall be deemed unclaimed
property in possession of the city and may be disposed of pursuant to law. (Ord. 104, 11-11-1993)
2-10-6: NONCONFORMING NEWSRACKS:
A. Effective Date And Compliance: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks whether installed and maintained prior to or after the
effective date hereof. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted herein shall be brought into compliance with said
provisions within thirty (30) days of the effective date thereof.
B. Violation: Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
C. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same section
within one year; a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of thesame section within one year. Each day that
such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 104, 11-11-
1993)
Chapter 11
RESERVED1
(Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
Chapter 12
SPECIAL EVENTS
2-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and terms defined in this section have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
APPLICANT: Any person or organization seeking a special event permit to conduct a special event as described in this chapter.
APPLICATION FEE: The fee to be paid by the applicant at the time the application is filed with the business license official. Such fee shall be set by
resolution of the city council and shall be nonrefundable.
PERMITTEE: Any person or organization that has been issued a special event permit by the city manager or his appointed designee.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any temporary, short term event with an anticipated daily attendance of less than one thousand (1,000) people held on private or public
property that may disrupt the normal expected peace of any area in the city of Mesquite or any activity outside of the established and normal use allowed
by zoning. A partial list of such events includes, but is not limited to, parades, block parties, sales in parking lots or vacant lots, circuses/carnivals, tent
sales, car shows, and foot races/walks.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 140/565
SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT: The permit to be issued by the city manager or his designated appointee in accordance with this chapter or actually issued
after the applicant has met all reviews and requirements set forth by this chapter. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person or organization desiring to conduct or sponsor a special event on private or public property, and/or which will necessitate the use of the public
right of way, shall first obtain a special event permit. Other permits and/or licenses and approvals may be necessary as otherwise required by this code.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-3: APPLICATION:
A. Filing: Any person or organization wishing to conduct or sponsor a special event shall apply for a special event permit by filing an application and
application fee with the business license official at least thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the event is to occur. A penalty fee will be applied to
any application filed after the deadline. If liquor is to be sold or served in conjunction with a special event, a current and valid city of Mesquite liquor
licensee must be identified and provide a letter of responsibility with the special event application.
B. Contents: The organizer who proposes to conduct a special event, shall file with the business license official an application, on a form furnished by the
business license official, setting forth a description of the event, to include the following information:
1. The dates and hours of the event;
2. Any admission costs to customers and attendees;
3. The nature of the event;
4. The anticipated number of customers, spectators, participants and other persons expected to attend the event for each day it is conducted;
5. The location and a map or diagram of the event including site plan, route map, proposed street closures and public right of way use;
6. The locations of special event vendors, other vendors, and temporary improvements including tents and signs;
7. The vendors name, phone number, business name, type of product to be sold;
8. A plan showing accessibility, transportation and on site traffic and parking, including the proposed means of attendee ingress and egress. The plan
must be in conformance with the requirements of the city;
9. A plan that indicates how security will be provided;
10. A plan indicating how medical needs will be addressed;
11. A plan regarding sanitation;
12. Proposed business activities including requests for alcoholic beverage sales or service;
13. Proposed entertainment and merchant activities, including a description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment or other
attention getting devices;
14. The name, address, phone number, cellphone number and any other contact information for the special event organizer;
15. The name, address, phone number and any other contact information for the person or organization to whom the permit is to be issued, if different
from that of the special event organizer;
16. The estimated number of vehicles and vendors which will participate in the event;
17. The times at which any facilities or equipment for the event will be assembled and any location of such assembly;
18. A report regarding, or plan for, neighborhood notification and, in the case of a residential block party, neighborhood input from residents
immediately adjacent to the affected right of way;
19. The type and extent of the promotional advertising specifying the type of media, the geographical area covered by the advertising and other details
of the information to be communicated to the public;
20. Insurance coverage proposed to be provided;7
21. Any such other information as may be required by the business license official.
C. Vendors: The special event organizer shall be responsible for ensuring that all special event vendors and other vendors hold such license, and health
district permits as may be required; and maintain copies of all agreements with special event vendors and other vendors, as well as other documents
related to the special event permit, for one year after the close of the last day of the special event. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-4: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DISALLOWED UNLESS SPECIFIC PERMISSION GRANTED:
A. A person who desires to sell or serve alcoholic beverages during a special event must request and be granted specific written permission to do so by
the city manager or the designee, as well as comply with any other applicable ordinance or law. If liquor is to be sold or served in conjunction with the
special event, a current and valid city of Mesquite liquor licensee must be identified and provide a letter of responsibility with the application.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 141/565
B. The city manager or their designee may grant specific permission to dispense alcoholic beverages if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The person(s) signing the permit application provide(s) all requested information.
2. The person signing the permit application agrees to be present at all times during the special event.
3. The permittee or his designee agrees to be responsible for verifying the ages of all persons to whom alcoholic beverages are dispensed. A
permittee's designee must be a coapplicant for the specific permission to dispense alcoholic beverages, and provide all information requested by the
application form.
4. The permittee pays in advance for any additional police officers the chief of the Mesquite police department or his designee feels may be appropriate
considering that alcoholic beverages will be dispensed.
5. The permittee provides a disclaimer in any and all advertising for the special event stating that the city of Mesquite is not sponsoring the event.
6. The permittee submits with his application a map or diagram depicting the area(s) within which alcoholic beverages will be dispensed.
7. The permittee promises to make a good faith and diligent effort to ensure that attendees of the special event do not drink nor possess any open
containers of any alcoholic beverages outside of the area for the special event. Unless specific permission is granted pursuant to this section, a
special events permit does not allow alcoholic beverages to be dispensed or consumed, or open containers of alcoholic beverages to be possessed.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-5: FEES:
The fee for applying for a special event permit and the fee for late applications shall be set by resolution of the city council. Application fees are
nonrefundable and applications will not be processed unless fees, including late fees if applicable, are paid in full at the time the application is submitted.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-6: SAFETY PROTECTION; BARRICADES; COST OF POLICE PROTECTION:
A. Every permittee shall, at their own expense, provide barricades and warning devices where such protection is found necessary for the public safety by
the public works department. The public works department shall determine the type and location of all barricades and warning devices.
B. Permittee shall be responsible for any and all additional police cost incurred as a consequence of a special event. The number and type of officers shall
be determined and specified by the chief of the Mesquite police department or his designee to provide for the public safety and protection of public
property in and around the area of the special event. The chief of police or his designee shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and
date of the event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or
preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If off duty personnel is determined to be necessary to police the event, the applicant shall
have the duty to pay for such police protection. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
Special event permit applications shall be forwarded to the business license official or the designee. The business license official shall consult with
appropriate city department heads to determine the possible effects or impacts the requested special event would have on the health, safety and welfare
of the city. The city manager may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application based on information gathered during the approval process.
(Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-8: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter, all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations shall be complied with and all required permits and
licenses shall be secured in connection with such special event, or the proposed activities associated therewith including, but not limited to, the sale of
food, beverages or other merchandise, or the use of candles, torches, fires, pyrotechnics or other combustibles. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-9: CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Any permit granted under this chapter may contain conditions reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare, including, but not limited to, changes in time, duration, number of participants,
or level of sound. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-10: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
A. Indemnification: The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms and corporations on whose behalf the application is made contracts and
agrees that they will jointly and severally indemnify and hold the City of Mesquite and its agents or employees, harmless against liability for any and all
claims for damages to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the special
event or its participants.
B. Insurance: No permit shall be issued, unless the applicant therefor shall obtain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in Nevada with Best's rating of A or better, with coverage for any claim, demand or action arising from
said special event. Such policy shall name the City of Mesquite as an additional insured.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 142/565
1. The policy limits of such insurance shall not be less than the following: general liability policy showing limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
comprehensive general liability, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) damage to property. If permission is granted to sell or serve alcohol, the
policy shall include a liquor liability endorsement. If the permittee is a self-insured governmental entity organized under the laws of Nevada, the City
Manager may waive the insurance requirements in this section provided that the governmental entity, through its chief executive officer or his
designee, provides a satisfactory declaration that it is self-insured. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-11: DURATION OF SPECIAL EVENT:
The event for which the applicant has received a special event permit shall be no more than five (5) continuous days in length, unless otherwise approved
in accordance with this chapter. A special event requiring a special event permit shall not occur more than one time per calendar month per applicant.
(Ord. 521, 9-12-2017, eff. 10-3-2017)
2-12-12: PROPERTY OWNER APPROVAL:
If property where the event is to occur is owned by someone other than the applicant, the applicant is required to obtain written approval from the property
owner or his duly authorized representative. Such written approval must be submitted with the special event application. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-
2013)
2-12-13: CLEANUP OF EVENT SITE:
The holder of the special event permit shall be responsible for leaving the event site free of debris, litter, signage, temporary structures, or other evidence
of the event upon completion of the event. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-14: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. The City Manager or his designee may deny any application for a permit or revoke any permit if it is determined that the applicant therefor or holder
thereof or any agent, employee, or associate of any such applicant or permittee has made any false or misleading statement in an application, has not
fully complied with the requirements of this chapter, or has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any other applicable law,
rule or regulation.
B. Any permit issued under this chapter may be summarily revoked to protect the safety of persons or property.
C. If a special event is in progress when a revocation occurs, the City Manager shall have the authority to disassemble such special event.
D. Any aggrieved applicant or permittee may appeal a decision or order of the City Manager or his designee to the City Council by filing a petition with the
City Clerk within ten (10) days of the issuance of such decision or order. The petition shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the City Council
which may affirm, modify or overrule such decision or order. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to a petitioner not less than five (5) days prior to the
hearing. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-15: INTERFERING WITH SPECIAL EVENT PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any special event conducted under permit from the city in violation of any of the terms of the permit, nor
knowingly join or participate in any permitted special event without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with the
progress or orderly conduct of any such special event. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-16: ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to bring an animal into the area designated for a special event.
B. This section shall not apply to animals authorized by the permittee or to guide or service animals assisting a handicapped person as provided in Nevada
Revised Statutes title 38, chapter 426. The permittee must notify the city of such authorization for animals in writing at the time of application. (Ord.
477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
2-12-17: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person or organization that violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day or portion of a day in which a
violation is committed constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 477, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-31-2013)
Chapter 13
VACATION HOME RENTAL
2-13-1: TITLE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 143/565
This chapter shall be referred to as the CITY OF MESQUITE VACATION HOME RENTAL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-2: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The council finds and declares as follows:
A. Vacation home rentals provide a community benefit by expanding the number and type of lodging facilities available, and assist owners of vacation
home rentals by providing revenue which may be used for maintenance upgrades and deferred costs.
B. Some communities where vacation rentals exist have experienced incidents involving excessive noise, disorderly conduct, vandalism, overcrowding,
traffic, congestion, illegal vehicle parking and accumulation of refuse at vacation home rentals which require response from police, fire, paramedic and
other public personnel.
C. The transitory nature of occupants of vacation homes makes enforcement against the occupants difficult.
D. The provisions of this chapter are deemed necessary to address potential impacts on residential neighborhoods posed by vacation rental homes.
E. This chapter is not intended to provide any owner of residential property with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions, covenants and
restrictions applicable to the owner's property that may prohibit the use of such owner's residential property for short term rental purposes as defined in
this chapter. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-3: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter apply within the incorporated portions of the city. All requirements, regulations and standards imposed by this chapter are
intended to apply in addition to any other applicable requirements, regulations and standards imposed elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this chapter have the following meanings:
GOOD NEIGHBOR BROCHURE: A document prepared by the city of Mesquite that summarizes the general rules of conduct, consideration, and respect,
including, without limitation, provisions of this code, and other applicable laws, rules or regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of vacation rental
units.
LOCAL CONTACT PERSON: A local property manager, owner, or agent of the owner, who is available twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per
week for the purpose of: a) responding, within sixty (60) minutes, to complaints regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the vacation
rental unit and b) taking remedial action to resolve any such complaints.
MANAGING AGENT OR AGENCY: A person, firm, or agency representing the owner of the vacation home rental, or a person, firm, or agency owning the
vacation home rental.
OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of a transient lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent or rental agent of any type or character, the
managing agent or the rental agent has the same duties as their principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the
managing agent or the rental agent is considered to be compliance by both.
OWNER: The person or entity that holds legal or equitable title to the private property.
PERSON: An individual, a group of individuals, or an association, firm, partnership, corporation, or other private entity, public or private as defined in
Nevada Revised Statutes 0.039.
RENT: The consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property, or other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to the tax
authorized by Nevada Revised Statutes 268.096.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: An occupant of a vacation home rental who is at least twenty one (21) years of age and who is legally responsible for ensuring
that all occupants of the vacation rental unit and/or their guests comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy
of the subject vacation rental unit.
VACATION HOME RENTAL: A privately owned residential dwelling, such as, but not limited to, a single-family detached or multiple-family attached unit,
apartment house, condominium, cooperative apartment, duplex, or any portion of such dwellings, rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period
of not less than two (2) days and not more than twenty seven (27) consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days.
VACATION HOME RENTAL LICENSE: A license issued by the city that permits the use of a privately owned residential dwelling as a vacation rental unit
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and which incorporates by consolidation a transient occupancy license and a home occupation permit otherwise
required by title 9, chapter 8, article A of this code. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-5: VACATION HOME RENTAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
No owner of a vacation rental may rent that unit for twenty seven (27) consecutive calendar days or less without a valid vacation home rental license for
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 144/565
that unit issued pursuant to this chapter. A separate license is required for each vacation home rental. The license requirements of this chapter are in
addition to any hotel or motel tax registration, or any other permit or licensing requirements. However, at the discretion of the development services
director or a designee, the processing of licenses required under this chapter may be combined with the processing of hotel or motel tax registration, or
any other permit or license process administered by the development services director or a designee. The city development services director or a
designee is authorized to prescribe forms and procedures for the processing of permits under this chapter. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-6: AGENCY:
An owner may retain an agent, representative, or local contact person to comply with the requirements of this chapter, including, without limitation, the
filing of an application for a license, the management of the vacation home rental, and the compliance with the conditions of the license. The license must
be issued only to the owner of the vacation home rental. The owner of the vacation home rental is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the failure of an agent, managing agency, or local contact person to comply with this chapter is noncompliance by the owner, the agent,
managing agency and local contact person. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-7: ZONING COMPLIANCE:
Vacation home rental units are only allowed in residential zoning districts which specifically list vacation home rental unit as a "permitted" or "conditional
use". And the use of a dwelling for a vacation home rental unit shall comply with all development regulations for the respective zone, as well as any
conditions of approval for a conditional use permit. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 559 - VACATION HOME RENTAL. Go to new ordinance.
2-13-8: APPLICATION FOR VACATION HOME RENTAL LICENSE:
An application for a license must be filed with the development services department before use of the property as a vacation home rental. License
applications for properties presently used as vacation home rental must be filed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date hereof upon
forms provided by the city and must contain the following information:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vacation home rental for which the permit is issued.
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the managing agency, agent or local contact person for the owner of the vacation home rental. This shall
also contain the landline phone number of the vacation home rental unit.
C. Proof of homeowners' and liability insurance.
D. A current copy of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or bylaws of the rental unit's community showing that they expressly permit vacation home
rentals in that subdivision or apartment/condominium project. (Note: Owners of rental units in projects whose CCRs and bylaws do not expressly permit
vacation home rentals shall first apply for and receive from the city a conditional use permit in order to make application for a vacation home rental
permit.)
E. Acknowledgment that all designated bedrooms contain a minimum of seventy (70) square feet and meet all requirements of the current international
residential code.
F. List the number of bedrooms (each containing a minimum of 70 square feet), approximate total heated square footage in the vacation home rental, and
the maximum number of overnight occupants.
G. A diagram or photograph of the premises showing and indicating the number and location of designated on site parking spaces and the maximum
number of vehicles allowed for overnight occupants.
H. Evidence of a valid transient occupancy tax remittance form issued by the city of Mesquite for the vacation home rental.
I. Acknowledgment that the owner, agent, and local contact person have read all regulations pertaining to the operation of a vacation home rental.
J. Acknowledgment that the owner, agent, and local contact person have received and read the good neighbor brochure for vacation renters provided by
the city, and a further acknowledgment that the owner will provide copies of the brochure to each renter.
K. Acknowledgment that the owner, agent, or local contact person has or will post the vacation home rental with the notice required in this chapter.
L. Other information the development services director or a designee deems reasonably necessary to administer this chapter.
If the information supplied by the property owner on the application for a vacation home rental license is not consistent with city records, an inspection
can be required prior to or after the issuance of the vacation home rental permit. An inspection fee established by resolution of the council must be
charged for any inspection. The city will provide a copy of the application to the general improvement district and homeowners' association in which the
proposed vacation home rental property is located having responsibility for streets, parking, trash and refuse pick up or any combination of these
responsibilities. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 145/565
2-13-9: APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEES:
An application for a vacation home rental business license must be accompanied by an initial fee established by resolution of the council under section 2-
1-13, special fees and regulations, of this title. An annual renewal fee will be established by resolution of the council which permit holders must pay when
renewing their license issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-10: ROOM TAX IMPOSED:
Vacation home rental units are subject to the transient lodging room tax established by resolution of the city council under chapter 2, article A of this title.
(Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-11: STANDARD LICENSE CONDITIONS AND ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS:
A. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to the following standard conditions:
1. Maximum Occupancy: The owner must by written agreement, limit overnight occupancy of the vacation home rental to a maximum of two (2)
persons per sleeping room or guestroom, plus two (2) additional persons per property, up to a maximum of twelve (12) persons, excluding children
under twelve (12) years of age.
Number Of Bedrooms Total Of Overnight Guests
0 - studio 4
1 4
2 6
3 8
4 10
5 12
2. Owner To Limit Parking: The owner must by written agreement, limit the number of vehicles of overnight occupants to the number designated in the
permit; with the number of vehicles of overnight occupants not to exceed the number of designated on site parking spaces. Parking buses on site or
on the street is prohibited.
3. Best Efforts Of Owner: The owner must use best efforts to assure that the occupants or guests of the vacation home rental do not create
unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions of this code or any state law pertaining to noise or disorderly
conduct by notifying the occupants of the rules regarding vacation home rentals and responding when notified that occupants are violating laws
regarding their occupancy. It is not intended that the owner, local agent, or contact person act as a peace officer or place him or herself in harm's
way.
4. Owner Response To Complaints: The owner must, upon notification that occupants or guests of his or her vacation home rental have created
unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or violated provisions of this code or state law pertaining to noise, or disorderly
conduct, promptly use best efforts to prevent a recurrence of such conduct by those occupants or guests.
5. Noise: No radio receiver, musical instrument, phonograph, compact disk player, loudspeaker, karaoke machine, sound amplifier, or any machine,
device or equipment that produces or reproduces any sound shall be used outside or be audible from the outside of any vacation rental unit between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
6. Conditions/Rules To Be Posted: The owner of the vacation home rental must post a copy of the permit and a copy of the conditions set forth in this
section in a conspicuous place within the vacation home rental.
7. Notice To Be Posted: Each vacation home rental must have a clearly visible and legible notice posted within the unit on or adjacent to the front door,
containing the following information:
a. The name of the managing agency, agent, property manager, local contact, or owner of the unit, and a telephone number at which that party may
be reached on a twenty four (24) hour basis;
b. The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay in the unit;
c. The maximum number of vehicles allowed to be parked on the property;
d. The number and location of on site parking spaces and the parking rules for emergency vehicle access (if any);
e. For single-family dwellings, the trash pick up day and notification that trash and refuse must not be left or stored on the interior or exterior of the
property except in ninety (90) gallon cans provided by the city from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the day prior to trash pick up to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
on the day designated for trash pick up; for multi-family projects, notification that trash and refuse must not be left or stored on the interior or
exterior of the property, but placed in solid waste bins placed on the property;
f. Notification that an occupant as a person responsible for an event, may be cited and fined for creating a disturbance or for violating other
provisions of this chapter; and
g. Notification that failure to conform to the parking and occupancy requirements of the structure is a violation of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 146/565
h. The occupants of a vacation rental home must make the notice required by this subsection available for inspection by the development services
director or a designee, police officer, or the code enforcement officer on a request made by any of these officials.
8. Parking Compliance: All permissible uses must comply with the city or applicable general improvement district parking, driveway and loading
standards, and emergency vehicle access regulations. The owner must provide sufficient parking to meet city on site parking requirements, including
the garage when applicable. All overnight occupants parking must be on site.
9. Disturbing The Peace: All residential vacation home rentals shall comply with the following standard:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully disturb the peace of any neighborhood, person, or family by loud or unusual noises or by tumultuous and
offensive conduct, threatening, quarreling, challenging to fight, or fighting. Compliance with this standard shall be in addition to compliance with all
other provisions of this code relating to nuisance, peace and safety.
10. Business License Number On Advertising: Any print or internet advertising for an owner's vacation home rental unit must contain a valid business
license number for the unit in the ad.
11. Landline Phone: Each vacation home rental must contain a landline telephone for local phone service.
12. Cleaning Service: Each property shall be cleaned at least weekly while occupied and in between tenant occupancies. Each property shall also
comply with all Southern Nevada health department (SNHD) sanitary facilities requirements.
B. The city council, at a duly noticed meeting, has the authority to impose additional standard conditions, applicable to vacation home rentals, as
necessary to achieve the objectives of this chapter. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-12: LOCAL CONTACT PERSON:
Each owner of a vacation home rental must designate a local person, property manager or agent, as a local contact person who has access and authority
to assume management of the unit and take remedial measures. An owner of a vacation home rental who resides within a forty (40) mile radius of the city
may designate him/herself as the local contact person. The local contact person is required to respond to the location of the vacation rental home within
one hour after being notified of the existence of a violation of this chapter or any other provision of this code, or any disturbance requiring immediate
remedy or abatement.
A. Guidelines For Complaints: All complaints must be substantiated before penalties will be invoked. Supporting documentation must be presented, such
as police reports, reports by other city employees, or sworn affidavits from third parties that confirm a violation, or other documentation such as
photographs, video recordings, etc.
B. False Complaints: False complaints that are not substantiated or are not relevant to compliance with this code are subject to penalties.
1. Multiple false or unsubstantiated complaints by the same person, or regarding the same issue, may be considered harassment. If, in the judgment of
the development services director, such harassment is taking place, a notice of violation will be sent to the offending party.
2. If an additional false or unsubstantiated complaint is made by the same person, after a notice of violation has been sent, a citation may be issued to
the offending party, which can result in a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-13: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. The following conduct is a violation for which the license may be suspended or revoked:
1. The owner has failed to comply with the standard conditions specified in subsection 2-13-11A of this chapter; or
2. The owner has failed to comply with additional conditions imposed pursuant to the provisions of subsection 2-13-11B of this chapter; or
3. An owner's local contact person failed to respond to a verified complaint or did not respond in a timely fashion as set forth in section 2-13-12 of this
chapter.
4. The owner has violated the provisions of this chapter; or
5. The owner has failed to collect or remit to the city the transient occupancy and lodging taxes as required by this title.
6. Any false or misleading information supplied in the application process.
B. The penalties for violations specified in subsection A of this section are as follows:
1. For the first violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty is a warning courtesy notice;
2. For the second violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty is a notice of violation or an administrative fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or both the notice and fine;
3. For a third violation within any twelve (12) month period, the penalty is a suspension of the license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days; and
4. For a fourth violation within any twelve (12) month period, the license may be revoked. An owner may petition the city manager for reinstatement of a
revoked license no sooner than twelve (12) months after revocation. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-14: PROCEDURE FOR IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 147/565
Penalties including a notice of violation must be imposed, and licenses must be revoked, in the manner provided in this section.
A. The development services director or a designee, Mesquite police department, or the code enforcement officer must conduct an investigation whenever
there is reason to believe that an owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The investigation may include an inspection of the
premises, a review of sworn affidavits from eye witnesses, and a review of any photos or other documentation if it exists. Should the investigation
reveal substantial evidence to support a finding that a violation occurred, the development services director or a designee, police officer, or the code
enforcement officer must issue written notice of the violation and intention to impose a penalty or revoke the license. The written notice must be served
on the owner, operator, agent managing agency, or local contact person and must specify the facts which constitute substantial evidence to establish
grounds for imposition of the penalties or revocation. It must specify that the penalties will be imposed or that the permit will be revoked within fifteen
(15) days from the date the notice is given unless the owner or operator files with the development services director or a designee a request for a
hearing before the city manager.
B. If the owner requests a hearing within the time specified in subsection A of this section, the development services director or a designee must serve
written notice on the owner and operator, by certified mail, of the date, time and place for the hearing which must be scheduled not less than fifteen
(15) days, nor more than forty five (45) days after receipt of the request for a hearing. The city manager or a designee may preside over the hearing or
may designate a hearing officer to take evidence and submit proposed findings and recommendations to the city council. The city council may impose
the penalties or revoke the license upon a finding that a violation has been proven by substantial evidence, and that the penalty or revocation is
consistent with the provision of section 2-13-13 of this chapter. The hearing must be conducted according to the rules normally applicable to
administrative hearings. The city council must render a decision within thirty (30) days of the hearing and the decision is appealable to the district court.
The owner may request, and the council may grant a stay of any revocation made pursuant to the provisions of subsection 2-13-13B4 of this chapter
during the time from when the appeal is filed to when the district court renders a decision.
C. The code enforcement officer may issue citations for violations of this chapter which are misdemeanors. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-15: PERMITS AND FEES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Permits and fees required by this chapter are in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code. The issuance of any
permit pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the owner of the obligation to comply with the other provisions of this code pertaining to the use and
occupancy of the vacation home rental or the property on which it is located. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter by operating a vacation home rental without a valid permit is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 464, 10-23-
2012)
2-13-17: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
The development services director or a designee is authorized and directed to establish rules and regulations as may from time to time be required to
carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter. Substantive changes to this chapter can only be made by the city council. (Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
2-13-18: VIOLATIONS BY OCCUPANTS OF VACATION HOME RENTALS:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Enforcement actions may be brought against
occupants of a vacation rental home for violations of this chapter and any other provision of this code notwithstanding that this chapter may also make the
owner of the vacation rental home, the local contact person, managing agency or agent or operator responsible for the conduct constituting the violation.
(Ord. 464, 10-23-2012)
Chapter 14
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
2-14-1: FINDINGS:
A. The City of Mesquite City Council finds:
1. In 2013, the Nevada Legislature passed, and the Governor signed into law, Senate Bill 374, now codified in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A, which
allows medical marijuana establishments within the State of Nevada; and requires such establishments to comply with all local business licensing
requirements, local land use, and Code requirements;
2. Federal law and related regulations classify marijuana as a schedule I controlled substance and prohibit its cultivation, possession, dispensing, and
use, among other things, for medical reasons or otherwise. This chapter is intended to implement Nevada Revised Statutes 453A and to establish
criteria for the issuance of licenses that are a prerequisite for the exemption from State prosecution provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A;
3. Nevada law allows the City to enact regulations to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City;
4. The operation of a medical marijuana establishment is a revocable privilege1 and there is no property right for individuals or businesses to operate
medical marijuana establishments within the corporate limits of the City. To the extent that medical marijuana establishments are registered and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 148/565
authorized by the State, the purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate them within the corporate limits of the City to protect the public
interests over medical marijuana business interests;
5. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to confer any legitimate claim of entitlement to any benefit which might otherwise devolve upon any
licensee or any person approved for suitability;
6. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize or make legal any act that Federal or State law does not permit or sanction or assist in any violation
of any Federal or State law. This chapter is intended to implement Nevada Revised Statutes 453A and to establish criteria for the issuance of
licenses that are a prerequisite for the exemption from State prosecution provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A;
7. Federal law makes it unlawful to cultivate, possess, distribute, or dispense marijuana. However, on August 29, 2013, the United States Department
of Justice ("DOJ") issued a memorandum advising that the DOJ would allow enforcement of state laws that authorize marijuana production,
distribution, and possession to be handled primarily by state and local law enforcement regulatory bodies as long as the state and local governments
enact laws that implement "strong and effective regulatory enforcement systems" to address the Federal government's identified enforcement
priorities. The following enforcement priorities were specified by the DOJ as being particularly important to the Federal government:
a. Preventing the distribution of marijuana to minors;
b. Preventing revenue from the sale of marijuana from going to criminal enterprises, gangs, and cartels;
c. Preventing the diversion of marijuana from states where it is legal under state law in some form to other states;
d. Preventing state authorized marijuana activity from being used as a cover or pretext for the trafficking of other illegal drugs or other illegal activity;
e. Preventing violence and the use of firearms in the cultivation and distribution of marijuana;
f. Preventing drugged driving and the exacerbation of other adverse public health consequences associated with marijuana use;
g. Preventing the growing of marijuana on public lands and the attendant public safety and environmental dangers posed by marijuana production on
public lands; and
h. Preventing marijuana possession or use on Federal property.
8. It is the intent of this City Council that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to pave the way for the legalization of "recreational" marijuana. The
City Council further finds that should the citizens of the State of Nevada ever vote to legalize recreational marijuana, such legalization shall not be
approved in the City of Mesquite without approval of the voters in Mesquite on a local referendum, barring any action of the legislature to make such
legalization mandatory in all Nevada's cities and towns. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires the plain meaning shall be applied to all words not specifically defined in this chapter. The following words shall be
defined as follows:
CANNABIS OR MARIJUANA: Shall have the same meaning, and as may be amended, as defined by Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 453A.
CITY: The City of Mesquite, Nevada, a Municipal corporation.
COMMUNITY FACILITY: Any of the following: a facility that provides daycare to children, a public park, a playground, a public swimming pool, a center or
facility which provides recreational opportunities or services to children or adolescents, a church, synagogue, or other building, structure or place used for
religious worship or other religious purposes.
CONVICTED: A finding of guilt as an adult offender by a jury or trial court, whether said finding is appealed or not. A person so convicted shall be deemed
convicted until such finding is overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction or by pardon.
DESIGNATED PRIMARY CAREGIVER: Shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.080.
EDIBLE MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.101.
FINDING OF SUITABILITY: Means that after investigation, a person is found to comply with the requirements of this title which are prerequisite to
involvement with a privilege license. This title authorizes the City Council to require that certain persons who are directly or indirectly involved with privilege
licenses be found suitable for such involvement so long as that relationship continues. A finding of suitability relates only to the specific involvement for
which it is made. If the nature of the involvement changes from that for which the applicant is found suitable, or if, in the judgment of the City Council, new
information concerning the applicant's suitability has become available, the applicant may be made to submit themselves for a new determination of
suitability.
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 435A.107.
JUVENILE: Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
KEY EMPLOYEE: Any executive, manager, employee, agent, officer, or director of a medical marijuana establishment having the power to exercise
significant influence or control over decisions concerning any part of the operations of the business or a manager charged with the day to day operations
of the business.
MARIJUANA: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453.096 and as used in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes
453A.120.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.056.
MARIJUANA INFUSED PRODUCTS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.112.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.115.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 149/565
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.116.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to a facility for the production of edible marijuana products or
marijuana infused products in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.105.
NEVADA REVISED STATUTES (NRS): The current codified laws of the State of Nevada.
OWNERSHIP INTEREST: Any principal, person, beneficial owner, and individual persons holding any ownership or financial interest for each business
entity including all businesses organized under or governed by title 7 of the Nevada Revised Statutes including, but not limited to, private corporations,
publicly traded corporations, close corporations, foreign corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, limited partnerships, and professional
corporations (business entities). Ownership interest in the context of publicly traded corporations shall include all corporate officers and members of any
board of directors, and also includes individuals with five percent (5%) or more ownership or financial interest in the publicly traded corporation. To the
extent that a business entity has an ownership interest in a medical marijuana establishment, the term ownership interest shall also include all individuals
with an ownership interest in such business entity. It is the intent of this chapter that all individuals with a direct or indirect ownership interest in a medical
marijuana establishment be disclosed and be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
PARAPHERNALIA: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.125.
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A certificate issued pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.322 by the State regulating authority. In accordance with
subsection 3 of Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.326, any registration certificate issued by the State regulating authority is provisional until such time as the
establishment is in compliance with all applicable City ordinances and rules, and the City has issued a business license for the operation of the
establishment.
REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.140.
SEMI-ANNUAL: A period of six (6) months commencing on January 1 and July 1 in any year.
STATE REGULATING AUTHORITY: The Division of Public and Behavioral Health of the Department of Health and Human Services of the State of
Nevada and/or any other agency assigned to administer Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.
USABLE MARIJUANA: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.160. (Ord. 534, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
2-14-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENT AND TERM OF LICENSE:
A medical marijuana establishment business license is a revocable privilege and the holder of such a license does not acquire thereby any vested right.
No license under this chapter can be assigned or transferred except with the approval of the City Council and must follow all Nevada Division of Public and
Behavioral Health policies and procedures for transferring of ownership. A medical marijuana establishment business must comply at all times with all
applicable laws, regulations or licensing requirements in the conduct of the business.
A. License Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale,
distribution, transportation, or consumption of marijuana other than those forms of businesses and commerce that are expressly contemplated by
Nevada Revised Statutes 453A and any administrative rules duly adopted by the State regulating authority and without first making application and
securing a medical marijuana establishment license to do so from the City of Mesquite.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any medical marijuana establishment in the City without a valid registration certificate duly issued by
the State regulating authority, and a license issued pursuant to this chapter and operating in compliance with any and all applicable State laws and
this Code.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide marijuana, edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products to a medical marijuana
establishment within the City without a registration certificate duly issued by the State regulating authority and a license issued by the City.
4. Except for sales pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.352(5), it shall be unlawful for any licensed medical marijuana establishment located
within the City to accept for sale any marijuana, edible marijuana products or any marijuana infused products from any person who has not obtained
a registration certificate from the State regulating authority, or who is not duly licensed under this chapter for the provision of such products.
5. A license is required for each medical marijuana establishment registration certificate an individual holds to operate in each location where that
activity is to occur as required under this chapter.
6. A person operating more than one type of medical marijuana establishment in the same location must have a separate license for each type of
medical marijuana establishment registration certificate.
7. The license requirement set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by
any other Federal, State or local law.
8. A license issued pursuant to this section does not provide any exception, defense or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal
liability the person may have for the production, distribution or possession of marijuana.
B. Posting License; Failure As Grounds For Revocation: All licenses issued for medical marijuana establishments shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in order that they may be readily available for inspection by authorized State and City officials. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection
shall constitute grounds for revocation of any such license so not posted.
C. Location Transfer: A medical marijuana establishment business license may not be transferred to a new location within the City unless it is in
accordance with this chapter and title 9 of this Code requirements and approved by City Council. The new location shall be inspected and approved by
the Fire Department and the Building and Zoning Department to ensure safety and compliance with applicable City ordinances and regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 150/565
D. License; Corporation, Partnership, Limited Liability Company; Changes In Membership: In the case of a corporate licensee, any and all changes in the
officers of such corporation must be reported to the business license official within thirty (30) days of such change. Such new officers shall be required
to qualify for a license as required in this chapter. Any new manager of a corporate licensee shall be required to qualify for a license as required in this
chapter. In the case of a partnership or limited liability company, any change in ownership of the partnership or limited liability company must be
reported to the business license official within thirty (30) days of such change. Any new partners or managers shall be required to qualify for a license
as required in this chapter.
E. Notice Of Change To Key Employee: It shall be a condition of the license to inform the business license official of any change in the employment status
of a registered employee or volunteer who serves in a management position, or as a key employee within ten (10) days of the effective date of the
change in employment status. A change of employment status includes termination, leave of absence, and promotion to a management position or key
employee.
F. Limitation Of Sales: Medical marijuana dispensaries are prohibited from offering for sale items other than products defined in this chapter as "medical
marijuana", "edible marijuana products", or "marijuana infused products" and "paraphernalia". Any paraphernalia offered for sale must be designed for
individual use only. A medical marijuana dispensary is limited to ten percent (10%) of the retail space for paraphernalia, not to include the lobby area.
G. Transportation Of Marijuana Products: Transportation must meet all requirements of the State regulating authority. Product must be placed in
unmarked, nontransparent transportation containers. All required transportation logs must be in the vehicle and made available to law enforcement
upon being stopped by a law enforcement officer within the City, each driver must identify to the officer that the product contained within the vehicle is
medical marijuana, edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products, as the case may be, from a licensed medical marijuana establishment
and must present to the officer a State agent registration card, the route the vehicle was authorized to travel and the actual travel log. (Ord. 530, 11-14-
2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-4: LAND USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS; CONFORMANCE WITH TITLE 9 OF THIS CODE:
A. No medical marijuana establishment license will be issued unless the location is in accordance with title 9 of this Code.
B. Approval of a location or of a use permit pursuant to title 9 of this Code does not guarantee or constitute approval of any medical marijuana
establishment license. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell medical marijuana at a licensed medical marijuana dispensary at any time other than between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. daily. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-6: FACILITIES NOT LOCATED WITHIN THE CITY JURISDICTION:
Marijuana testing establishments and marijuana distribution establishments located outside the City of Mesquite, but which have obtained business
licenses in a jurisdiction other than the City, need not apply for a City of Mesquite license to only provide testing of marijuana, or medical marijuana and/or
merely deliver marijuana or medical marijuana products to a marijuana or medical marijuana establishment located within the City. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017,
eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-7: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION:
A. The City Council may issue licenses for the following types of medical marijuana establishments:
1. Medical Marijuana Dispensary: A medical marijuana dispensary license allows the licensee to acquire, possess, supply and sell or dispense usable
marijuana, edible marijuana products, marijuana infused products, and marijuana paraphernalia exclusively to State regulating authority designated
medical marijuana registry cardholders.
2. Cultivation Facility: A cultivation facility license allows the licensee to acquire, possess, cultivate, deliver, transfer, transport, supply and sell
wholesale marijuana and related supplies to a marijuana dispensary, marijuana production facility, or to other cultivation facilities only.
3. Independent Testing Laboratory: An independent testing laboratory license allows the licensee to independently test marijuana, edible marijuana
products and marijuana infused products that are to be sold at medical marijuana establishments operating in accordance with the requirements of
Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.
4. Medical Marijuana Production Facility: A medical marijuana production facility license allows the licensee to acquire, process, manufacture, deliver,
transfer, transport, package, and label usable marijuana and marijuana infused products for sale at wholesale to marijuana dispensaries only. (Ord.
530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-8: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND FEES:
Each application for a medical marijuana establishment business license must include, without limitation:
A. Completed Application: A complete medical marijuana application:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 151/565
1. The mailing address of the applicant;
2. The applicant's date of birth;
3. The name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the proposed key employee;
4. The telephone number of the applicant, including cellphone number;
5. If applying for a medical marijuana dispensary license, the proposed hours of operation;
6. The e-mail address of the applicant;
7. An attestation that the information provided to the City to apply for the medical marijuana establishment license is true and correct according to the
information known by the applicant at the time of signing; and
8. The signature of the natural person for the proposed medical marijuana establishment;
B. Application Fee: Onetime, nonrefundable application fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
C. Type Of License: Whether the applicant is applying for a medical marijuana establishment license for an independent testing laboratory, cultivation
facility, a facility for production of edible marijuana products, marijuana infused products, or a medical marijuana dispensary;
D. Name Of Establishment: The name of the proposed medical marijuana establishment, as reflected in the articles of incorporation or other documents
filed with the Secretary of State;
E. Type Of Business Organization: The type of business organization of the applicant, such as individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, association or cooperative, joint venture or any other business organization. It is the intent of this chapter that all individuals with a direct or
indirect ownership interest in a medical marijuana establishment be disclosed and be subject to the requirements of this chapter;
F. List Of Persons Receiving Registration Card: A list of persons associated with the medical marijuana establishment who have received, or will request, a
medical marijuana establishment agent registration card from the State regulating authority;
G. Other Ownership Interests: The name and physical address of any other medical marijuana establishment within the City which any owner, officer,
manager or director has ownership interest in, a contractual relationship with or is otherwise associated with;
H. Information Of Providing Facility Or Laboratory: The name and location of the off site medical marijuana cultivation facility providing the medical
marijuana, if applicable. The name and location of the medical marijuana testing laboratory providing laboratory services, if applicable;
I. Address Of Establishment And Owners: The physical address where the proposed medical marijuana establishment will be located and the physical
address of any owner, co-owner, or person otherwise affiliated with the medical marijuana establishment;
J. Description Of Products: A complete description of the products and services to be produced or sold by the medical marijuana establishment;
K. Accompanying Documents: A complete and accurate copy of the application and all accompanying documents to be filed with the State regulating
authority pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.322 including, but not limited to:
1. All proposals for operations, business plans, attestations, financial documentation, and required tax reports;
2. All documents detailing proposed organizational structure, all narratives, and resumes;
3. All documentation required concerning the adequacy of the proposed building and construction plans with supporting details in the form specified by
the City building official and the payment of all required review and inspection fees;
4. All testing, transportation, policy, operations manuals, financial plan, environmental plan, and procedures manual to ensure the use of adequate
security measures;
L. Sign And Advertising Plan: A sign and advertising plan including all proposed interior signage;
M. Floor Plan: The floor plan of the establishment;
N. Copy Of Contracts: A copy of all contracts, proposed contracts for consulting, management, renting or leasing the premises for the proposed medical
marijuana establishment, including written documentation stating that the property owner of the proposed location for the establishment is fully aware of
the property's intended use or a copy of the deed to such property showing ownership vested in the applicant;
O. Statement Acknowledging Federal Laws: A written statement acknowledging that the applicant understands applicable Federal laws, any guidance, or
directives issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, the laws of the State of Nevada and the laws and regulations of the City applicable thereto,
concerning the operation of a medical marijuana establishment. The written statement shall also acknowledge that any violation of any laws or
regulations of the State of Nevada, or of the City, or any activity in violation of any guidance or directives issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, in
such place of business, or in connection therewith, or the commencement of any legal proceeding relating to such medical marijuana establishment by
Federal authorities, may render such license subject to immediate suspension or revocation;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 152/565
P. Statement Holding City Harmless; Bond: A written statement to the business license official that the applicant will hold harmless, indemnify, and defend
the City against all claims and litigation arising from the issuance of a license, including any claims and litigation arising from the establishment,
operation, or ownership of the medical marijuana establishment, and a bond to secure such obligation in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00) will be provided prior to the issuance of any license;
Q. Suitability Of Persons Holding Ownership Interest: An acknowledgment that the applicant is seeking a privilege license and understands that each
person with an ownership interest must be found suitable to hold such license by the City Council prior to the issuance of any license; that the applicant
understands and acknowledges that the burden of proving qualifications to receive such a permit or license is at all times on the applicant; that the
granting of a medical marijuana establishment license is at the discretion of the City Council; and that the applicant agrees to abide by the decision;
R. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a medical marijuana establishment license with the City of Mesquite are required to
provide the City of Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the Mesquite Police Department. In all cases where the
applicant for medical marijuana is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, all the members, principal officers, directors, stockholders, and/or
managers shall present themselves to the City Police Agency for fingerprinting. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct State and national criminal
records checks. Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the City Police Agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada Department of
Public Safety to conduct State criminal records checks. The Nevada Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the State and national criminal checks will be
disseminated to the City Police Agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Agency shall prepare and submit a report containing findings
and a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the City Council. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a)
and Public Law 92-544;
S. Investigation Fees:
1. Fees Enumerated:
a. Investigation And Fingerprinting Fee: Each application for a license filed pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by an investigation and
fingerprinting fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per person to be investigated. This fee is nonrefundable and is in addition to other fees
collected pursuant to this title;
b. Actual Cost: In addition to the fees required to accompany the application, the applicant shall be required to pay the City the actual cost incurred
by the City or its designated agent to complete the necessary investigations;
T. Confidentiality Required: All information, other than the criminal history information, of a confidential nature supplied under the terms of this chapter shall
be maintained by the business license officer, in a confidential file, to be opened for inspection only by City officials and law enforcement officers;
provided, however, the applicant may waive the requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-9: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
To prevent unauthorized access to the marijuana, each medical marijuana establishment must submit, maintain, and follow a security plan that includes
customer, building and product security measures. The security plan must meet all the criteria established by the State regulating authority and the
following minimum requirements:
A. Each licensed premises must have a security system which monitors all perimeter entry points, windows, and controlled areas by a centrally monitored
alarm company properly licensed with the City, and whose agents are properly licensed and registered under applicable laws;
B. Immediate automatic or electronic notification to alert the Mesquite Police Department of an unauthorized breach of security at the medical marijuana
establishment in the interior of each building of the establishment;
C. All recorded images must clearly and accurately display the time and date. Time is to be measured in accordance with the U.S. National Institute of
Standards and Technology standards;
D. The surveillance system's data storage device must be secured on site in a lockbox, cabinet, closet, or secured in another manner to protect from
employee or third party tampering or criminal theft;
E. At least one 19-inch, or greater call-up monitor;
F. A video printer capable of immediately producing a clear still photo from any video camera image;
G. Video cameras with a recording resolution of at least 704x480 or the equivalent providing coverage of all entrances to and exits from limited access
areas and all entrances to and exits from the building, capable of identifying any activity occurring in or adjacent to the building;
H. A video camera at each point of sale location allowing for the identification of any person who holds a valid State registry identification card or his or her
designated primary caregiver purchasing medical marijuana;
I. A video camera in each grow room capable of identifying any activity occurring within the grow room in low light conditions;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 153/565
J. A method for storing video recordings from the video cameras for at least thirty (30) calendar days from the date recorded;
K. Sufficient battery backup for video cameras and recording equipment to support at least five (5) minutes of recording in the event of a power outage;
L. A sign must be posted in any customer areas that the customer is under video surveillance;
M. The establishment shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all local and State regulations regarding the facility and must monitor parking
areas and outdoor areas of the licensed premises for loitering, unlawful sale of medical marijuana by customers, and consumption of medical
marijuana;
N. Any theft of items containing marijuana or the observance of any unauthorized transactions of medical marijuana on the licensed premises must be
reported to the Mesquite Police Department;
O. In addition to complying with all requirements set by the State regulating authority, any licensed cultivation facility shall secure the cultivation facility with
full video surveillance capable of clearly identifying any activities occurring within twenty feet (20') of the exterior of the building and any parking,
fenced, or loading areas. A motion detection lighting system may be employed to illuminate the gate area in low light conditions;
P. In addition to complying with all requirements set by the State regulating authority, any licensed medical marijuana dispensary shall have a lobby waiting
area at the entrance to the dispensary to receive clients, and a separate and secure designated area for dispensing medical marijuana to patients or
designated primary caregivers with a valid State registry card. The primary entrance and exit shall be separated and shall be located and maintained
clear of barriers, landscaping and similar obstruction so that it is clearly visible from the public street, sidewalk, or site parking area.
Q. All medical marijuana, edible marijuana products, or marijuana infused products, during nonbusiness hours, must be stored in a separated and secured
area.
1. The area must meet the building official's standards for odor control and the Southern Nevada Health District regulations.
2. The area must be under surveillance by the camera system at all times.
3. One area may store both product and legal tender, however separate storage devices must be maintained and both must be under video
surveillance. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-10: PRELIMINARY FINDING; CITY COUNCIL ACTION ON APPLICATION; DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
Concurrently with title 9 of this Code, Unified Development Code approval process, the business license official shall upon completion of the preliminary
finding of suitability refer the application to the City Council for consideration.
A. Preliminary Finding Of Suitability: The preliminary finding of suitability will be based on the information submitted to the business license official as
outlined in section 2-14-8 of this chapter.
B. Notification Of Denial; Registration Certificate Required: Applicants found unsuitable by the license official shall be notified in writing within ten (10)
business days after the close of the application period. All applicants that satisfy the preliminary finding of suitability will move forward to the City
Council for the preliminary approval. At the conclusion of the State provisional certification process all applicants that have received a provisional
medical marijuana establishment registration certificate and a ranking by the Nevada Division of Public and Behavioral Health will be submitted to the
City Council for final approval.
C. City Council Action: City Council shall consider the following criteria that will include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Ranking provided by the Nevada Division of Public and Behavioral Health;
2. Information regarding any bankruptcy proceedings involving owners or board members;
3. The identity, character, and background of the applicant, capacity, capitalization;
4. Operational plan, organizational structure, environmental sustainability and mitigation plans, interior floor plans of the buildings, odor control systems
and suitability of the building for the use proposed, site plan as to parking, traffic movement and aesthetics;
5. Impact on the surrounding neighborhood; the type and degree of security and facilities and any other factors that in his or her discretion are deemed
necessary to the safety, peace, order and welfare of the public.
D. Other Inspections: All applicants selected by the City Council must satisfy all required building, fire inspection criteria, and applicable food safety
inspections by the Southern Nevada Health District before commencing operations.
E. Denial: The following persons are declared not to be qualified to hold a medical marijuana establishment license under the provisions of this chapter:
1. A person who does not possess, or who does not have a reputation for possessing a good moral character;
2. A person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
3. A person who has been convicted of a felony;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 154/565
4. A person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude which includes, but is not limited to: possession of a controlled substance,
theft, fraud, falsification in official matters, offenses against privacy, lewdness, voyeurism, or violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or
property;
5. A person who is currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject
to a tracking device;
6. A person who has been incarcerated in a Federal or State prison;
7. A person who illegally resides in the United States;
8. A person who at the time of renewal of any license issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
9. A partnership, limited partnership, association or limited liability company, unless all the partners, managers and members of such partnership,
limited partnership, association or limited liability company required to submit to a background investigation under the provisions of section 2-14-8 of
this chapter are found to be suitable;
10. A corporation, if any principal officer required to submit to a background investigation under the provisions of section 2-14-8 of this chapter is not
found suitable;
11. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease or provisional lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be used.
No license shall be issued to any person who has violated any provision of this chapter, this title, or the Act, or who has violated any provision of a
license to sell medical marijuana issued by the City or any other governmental agency, or who has had such a license revoked. (Ord. 530, 11-14-
2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-11: COMMENCEMENT; NONOPERATIONAL STATUS OF BUSINESS:
The licensee must commence operation of the business within ninety (90) days after the license has been approved by the State regulating authority and
may not discontinue operation of the business for more than a three (3) month period without City Council approval. The City Council may approve
nonoperational status of the business beyond the initial three (3) month period in time increments not to exceed one year but in no event shall the City
Council approve any nonoperational status beyond a maximum of one year. A license shall be automatically revoked at the expiration of the time periods
provided by this section unless City Council approval has been granted pursuant to this section. All license fees must be paid notwithstanding the
licensee's nonoperational status. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-12: ON SITE USE PROHIBITED:
No medical marijuana shall be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed on the premises of any medical marijuana establishment. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017,
eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-13: AGE LIMITATION:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age shall be allowed in a medical marijuana establishment unless the person holds a valid registry
identification card or is accompanied by a parent or guardian. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-14: JUVENILE EMPLOYEE:
It shall be unlawful for any business licensed under this chapter to employ a juvenile. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-15: FEES:
Medical marijuana establishment licenses, are not prorated, are fixed, and established, and must be paid in advance to the Business License Department
by all persons receiving such licenses as follows:
A. Origination Fees: Origination license fees, in addition to the semi-annual renewal fee listed in this section, are imposed for the following and are payable
prior to the issuance of the medical marijuana establishment license:
License Category Origination Fee
Dispensary $20,000.00
Cultivation facility 20,000.00
Production facility 20,000.00
Other marijuana establishments 10,000.00
B. License Fees:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 155/565
License Category Semi-Annual Revenue Fees
Dispensary 3% of the gross revenue
Cultivation facility 3% of the gross revenue
Production facility 3% of the gross revenue
Other marijuana establishments 3% of the gross revenue
C. Fees Nonrefundable: License fees are nonrefundable.
D. Modification Of Fees: License origination and semi-annual fees may be modified from time to time by amendment.
E. Marijuana Distributors: Marijuana distributors should be licensed in accordance to section 2-1-13 of this title similar to a delivery service, however, the
license will be considered privileged due to the nature of the business and business owners will be required to undergo a background check. (Ord. 534,
4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
2-14-16: RENEWAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE; LATE PAYMENT; PENALTY; REINSTATEMENT:
A. Renewal Notification:
1. All applications for renewal of a City medical marijuana establishment business license shall be notified, before the due date, of each license fee
required, however, the failure to notify any lawful business shall not be held to waive the payment of the business license fee; nor is the actual receipt
of such notice required.
2. All applications for renewal of a City medical marijuana establishment business license shall be accompanied by a copy of the renewed medical
establishment registration certificate from the State regulating authority. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
B. File Renewal Application: Every medical marijuana establishment license shall file, together with the license fees and taxes required by section 2-14-15
of this chapter, an application for renewal which shall be certified by the licensee, manager or officer thereof. The application for renewal shall contain
an accurate report of all gross revenue for the preceding six (6) months. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017; amd. Ord. 534, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-
2018)
C. Certification: The form shall include the following certification:
I, (name of certifier), certify and declare under the penalties of perjury that I am the owner, partner, (president, treasurer, other {describe}) of the
business named above, that this is a true, correct and complete report to the best of my knowledge, information and belief, and that this application and
report is made with the knowledge and consent of all other individuals named on the medical marijuana establishment license.
Signed: Dated: Title:
I hereby certify that there has been no unreported change in ownership, management or location of the medical marijuana establishment license,
during the license period; and that the establishment has a valid state license which has not been revoked or suspended, conditioned or limited during
the licensing period. I further certify there have been no revenues that have not been reported as required by law or ordinance of the State of Nevada,
Clark County, or the City of Mesquite.
Signed: Dated: Title:
D. Renewal Processing Fee: The licensee shall pay, in addition to all other fees, a license renewal processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
E. Late Renewal Fee; Penalty: Medical marijuana establishment licenses are delinquent if not paid by the due date, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%)
of the amount due or two hundred dollars ($200.00) whichever is greater is assessed if such amount is not paid by the fifteenth day after the due date.
If payment is not made by the fifteenth day, the penalty increases to fifty percent (50%) of the fee due or four hundred dollars ($400.00) whichever is
greater is assessed.
F. Reinstatement: License fees not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date are automatically revoked. Any such license shall not be reinstated until a
fifty percent (50%) penalty fee and a twenty five percent (25%) reinstatement fee shall have been paid.
G. No License Issuance: No license shall be issued until all penalties have been paid in full. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-17: CONSENT TO INSPECTIONS:
The applicant or licensee shall consent to any and all reasonable inspections of the medical marijuana establishment business operations and premises
with or without notice for the purpose of ascertaining such compliance with the laws and regulations of the City and State in areas of health, fire
prevention, safety, and consumer protection, together with such examination of the business books and records as may be necessary to ascertain the
basis for determining the payment of fees. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 156/565
2-14-18: REVOCATION OF LICENSES, SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION; NOTICE OF HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Events Causing Revocation: All medical marijuana establishment business licenses may be revoked if one or more of the following events occur, but is
not limited to the following:
1. A licensee has violated, or permitted, allowed, or caused a violation of any provision of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to this chapter,
any condition of approval imposed upon the issuance of the license, or any State law or regulation relating to operation;
2. If the State registration certificate has been surrendered, suspended or revoked;
3. Based on ascertainable facts, the operation substantially aggravates the crime problems in the City, makes law enforcement unduly difficult, or is
detrimental to the public, health, safety or welfare of the City;
4. A licensee has made fraudulent statements as to a material fact on an application form, as to any other information presented as part of the
application process, or in connection with any other information required to be submitted to the Business License Office;
5. The licensee has failed to maintain the premises in compliance with the requirements of the building, fire, health, and environmental agencies;
6. Having committed a felony offense;
7. Dispensing, delivering or otherwise transferring marijuana to a person other than a medical marijuana establishment agent, another medical
marijuana establishment, a patient who holds a valid registry identification card or the designated primary caregiver of such a patient;
8. Any act or omission committed by any employee, agent, or independent contractor that occurs in the course of his or her employment, agency, or
contract with the licensee shall be imputed to the licensee for the purposing suspension or revocation of the license.
B. City Council May Revoke, Suspend Or Cancel: The City Council at any regular or at any special meeting convened and held for that purpose upon a
show cause order for any willful violation or omission of this chapter may revoke, suspend, or cancel the medical marijuana establishment licenses by a
majority vote. If a license is revoked, suspended, or canceled pursuant to this provision, it shall be unlawful for the licensee to maintain or conduct such
business under the license, or at all. Upon such revocation, suspension or cancellation, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the
licensee and the licensee shall immediately cease all business at all places under such license.
C. Notice Of Hearing; Hearing Procedures: Notice and the procedure of a hearing scheduled for the purposes set forth in this chapter shall be in
accordance with section 2-1-14 of this title, as amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-19: ACTION UPON SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR CLOSURE:
A. In the event of a suspension, revocation or closure of any license, the establishment shall not remove any marijuana from the premises except under
the supervision of the Police Department and must dispose of it in a manner and location approved by the State regulating authority and/or the Police
Department.
B. In the event that the medical marijuana establishment is closing either temporarily, or permanently, the establishment shall notify the business license
official of the closing fifteen (15) days before the medical marijuana establishment is closed and in the case of an emergency, the establishment must
notify the business license official within twenty four (24) hours of such closure. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-20: DISPOSAL OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA WASTE:
A. Disposal of waste must meet all State and Federal guidelines. Waste must be maintained in a secure location until removal from the location. All waste
must be deposited at the disposal site operated by the City or its authorized contractor.
B. Medical marijuana and any waste including wastewater must be stored, secured and managed in accordance with applicable State Statutes and
regulations and with a State approved disposal plan. A medical marijuana establishment must dispose of medical marijuana that is not usable
marijuana within ten (10) calendar days of expiration of use. Medical marijuana waste must be made unusable prior to leaving a licensed medical
marijuana facility.
1. Wastes that must be rendered unusable prior to disposal include, but are not limited to:
a. Marijuana plant waste, including roots, stalks, leaves, and stems that have not been processed with solvent.
b. Solid marijuana sample plant waste possessed by third party laboratories certified by the State regulating authority for quality assurance that must
be disposed of.
2. The allowable method to render marijuana plant waste unusable is by grinding and incorporating the marijuana plant waste with nonconsumable
solid waste or other ground materials so the resulting mixture is at least fifty percent (50%) nonmarijuana waste by volume. Other methods to render
marijuana waste unusable must be approved by the State regulating authority before implementing.
3. Marijuana waste rendered unusable following an approved method in the facility disposal plan may be delivered to a franchised or licensed solid
waste facility for final disposition.
4. Disposal cannot include medical marijuana product including plant material entering the City wastewater collection system, storm drain system or
any unsecure rubbish disposal system.
5. A medical marijuana establishment shall not transfer, share, give, sell or deliver any unused medical marijuana in the establishment's possession to
any other person, regardless of whether they are licensed as a medical marijuana establishment.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 157/565
6. A medical marijuana establishment shall not dispose of medical marijuana in any manner other than permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 530, 11-14-
2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
2-14-21: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof such
person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowable under Nevada Revised Statutes, or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a term not
to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such conviction shall also subject the permittee or licensee to have his permit or license
revoked. Thereafter, any person adjudged guilty of a violation of this chapter or any of the terms, conditions or provisions thereof may, in the discretion of
the City Council, be denied a permit or license. Each violation or instance of noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further,
each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense. (Ord. 530, 11-14-2017, eff. 12-6-2017)
Chapter 15
PUBLIC UTILITIES
2-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as the CITY OF MESQUITE PUBLIC UTILITIES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-2: FINDINGS:
The city of Mesquite city council makes the following findings:
A. Public utilities are regulated by the state of Nevada public utility commission or by other elected officials who provide oversight and are mindful of the
public's interest.
B. Public utilities are also regulated by multiple layers of county, state and federal laws.
C. Public utilities within the city of Mesquite provide the everyday essential services to the public at large in order to sustain life.
D. The city desires a uniform system for regulating all public utilities operating in the city.
E. While some public utilities utilize the public right of way, others use different methods of delivering service. Regardless of the method of delivery, like
utilities should be treated equally and fairly under this code.
F. In order to eliminate confusion among the varying sections of this code, regulations pertaining to public utilities are being consolidated into one chapter
of this code.
G. Requirements set forth in this section do not eliminate the need to comply with other related applicable portions of this code (e.g., obtaining
encroachment permits). (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE: Cellular phone service and as defined in 47 CFR section 20.3 on the effective date hereof, or as may be
amended. It is one type of telecommunications service.
CUSTOMER: A customer whose physical address is within the boundaries of the city.
FEE: A charge imposed upon a public utility for a business license, a franchise or a right of way over streets or other public areas, except any paid
pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 709.110, 709.230 or 709.270.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a public utility system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: An agreement entered into between the city and the public utility for the privilege of providing service.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A business that provides:
A. Electric or gas service, whether or not the business is subject to regulation by the public utilities commission of Nevada;
B. A video service as that term is defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 711.141 on the effective date hereof, as may be amended or renumbered;
C. A telecommunication service, if the business holds a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the public utilities commission of
Nevada and derives intrastate revenue from the provision of that service to retail customers; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 158/565
D. A commercial mobile radio service as that term is defined in 47 CFR section 20.3 on the effective date hereof, or as may be amended. (Ord. 503,
10-25-2016)
2-15-4: FEE STRUCTURE:
Every person engaged in the business of furnishing to the public telecommunications service, or commercial mobile radio service, gas, electricity, or video
service shall pay a quarterly fee to carry on each of such businesses as follows:
A. Telecommunications and commercial mobile radio service.
1. The fee to engage in telecommunications shall be five percent (5%) of its gross revenue. "Gross revenue" means any and all local and intrastate
revenue for any telecommunication services regulated by the public utilities commission of Nevada.
2. The fee to engage in a commercial mobile radio service business shall be five percent (5%) of all revenue received from the first fifteen dollars
($15.00) charged monthly for each line of access for each of its customers located within the city. For purposes of calculating revenue received within
the city, the customer's billing address shall be determinative.
B. Natural gas service.
1. The fee to provide gas service shall be five percent (5%) of its gross revenue.
C. Electric service.
1. The fee to provide electric service shall be two percent (2%) of its gross revenue.
2. The fee denoted herein is not applicable to gross sales of electric service to governmental subdivisions, agencies or entities within the city.
3. Fee revenue received in relation to electric service shall be exclusively used by the city to repair, maintain and improve rights of way within the city.
D. Video service.
1. A video service provider, as defined per Nevada Revised Statutes 711.151 and as may be amended or renumbered, shall pay, on a quarterly basis,
a fee of five percent (5%) of its gross revenue, as that term is defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 711.066 and as may be amended or renumbered,
from its video service subscribers within the city.
E. In no case, shall the amount of fees paid to the city by a public utility exceed those set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-5: TIMING OF PAYMENTS AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION:
A. The quarterly fees specified in section 2-15-4 of this chapter will be due the thirtieth day of the first month following the end of each calendar quarter.
B. A fee not received or postmarked within thirty (30) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter shall be subject to subsection 2-1-5C of this
title.
C. As part of their quarterly payment, each public utility that is subject to this chapter shall provide to the city a statement of the amount of revenue derived
during that calendar quarter from the sale of applicable services to each of its customers located within the city.
D. No later than thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar year, each public utility shall furnish to the city manager an audited financial statement
outlining the total amount of gross revenues and all payments, and computations for the period covered by the payments.
E. On an annual basis, with at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice to public utility, the city shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of
the public utility's records reasonably related to the administration or enforcement of this chapter, in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. If the audit shows that fees have been underpaid by four percent (4%) or more, the public utility shall pay the total cost of the audit. Any
determined underpayments shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the audit.
F. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord by the city that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall any acceptance
of payments be construed as a release of any claim city may have for further or additional sums payable or for the performance of any other obligation.
(Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-6: NECESSITY FOR FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
A. Gas service, telecommunication service and any other public utility or like entity that utilizes the public right of way shall be required to enter into a
franchise agreement with the city, excepting any prohibitions hereto provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes.
B. Virgin Valley water district and Overton power district no. 5 shall not be required to enter into a franchise agreement for use of the public right of way.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 159/565
C. Video service providers shall only be required to enter into a franchise agreement with the state of Nevada, not the city. Video service providers shall
still be subject to the requirements and fees set forth in this chapter, excepting any prohibitions hereto provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord.
503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-7: INSURANCE COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Required Coverage: Every public utility subject to this chapter that utilizes the public right of way, shall continuously maintain, at its own expense, each
of the following insurance coverages with limits as provided, which limits shall not be deemed to be a limit of liability on an obligation or such public
utility:
1. Commercial general liability insurance: Occurrence policy which is primary coverage in the event of any claim or suit, with limits of not less than:
a. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence,
b. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general aggregate,
c. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) personal and advertising injury,
d. Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) fire damage (any 1 fire), and
e. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) products/completed operations aggregate;
2. Automobile liability insurance with limits of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence and coverage for "any auto";
3. Workers' compensation insurance valid in the state of Nevada in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes, chapters 616A, 616B, 616C, 616D and
617 or as may be amended from time to time; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident/disease.
B. Waiver Of Subrogation: Every public utility subject to this chapter that utilizes the public right of way, shall deliver to the city manager, within ten (10)
days of the commencement of service and annually thereafter, a waiver of a subrogation.
C. Evidence Of Insurance Coverage: Every public utility subject to this chapter that utilizes the public right of way, shall deliver to the city manager, within
ten (10) days of the commencement of service and annually thereafter, evidence of the above insurance by: 1) providing certificates of insurance, 2)
providing forms that list the city as a certificate holder, and 3) attaching an additional insured endorsement for commercial general liability. The
certificate shall show the name, address, and telephone number of the insurer and list all companies providing coverage (all such companies must be
at least AM Best Company key rated at A VIII or higher).
D. Policy Cancellation: In the event that a policy is canceled, terminated or altered by the insurer, the public utility shall immediately notify the city manager.
In no case shall there be a lapse of coverage.
E. Requirements Must Be Met: Public utility shall secure and maintain all insurance coverages for the minimum limits required herein. No work shall
commence in the city rights of way without meeting the insurance requirements. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-8: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. Each public utility to which this chapter applies or which intends to derive revenue from customers located within the city shall not later than sixty (60)
calendar days after the effective date hereof or thirty (30) calendar days before the public utility begins to provide service to those customers,
whichever occurs later, provide to the city:
1. An acknowledgement that the public utility is operating or intends to operate within the city; and
2. The date that the public utility began or intends to begin to derive revenue from customers located within the city. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
2-15-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2017. (Ord. 503, 10-25-2016)
Chapter 16
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
2-16-1: FINDINGS:
A. The City of Mesquite finds that:
1. In 2017, the people of the State of Nevada approved Ballot Question #2 legalizing the use of marijuana for persons twenty one (21) years of age or
older, now codified in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D, which allows recreational marijuana establishments and sales within the State of Nevada and
requires such establishments to comply with all local business licensing requirements, local land use and Code requirements;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 160/565
2. Federal law and related regulations classify marijuana as a schedule I controlled substance and prohibit its cultivation, possession, dispensing, and
use, among other things, for medical reasons or otherwise. This chapter is intended to implement Nevada Revised Statutes 453D and to establish
criteria for the issuance of licenses that are a prerequisite for the exemption from State prosecution provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D;
3. Nevada law allows the City to enact regulations to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City;
4. The operation of a marijuana establishment is a revocable privilege and there is no property right for individuals or businesses to operate marijuana
establishments within the corporate limits of the City. To the extent that marijuana establishments are registered and authorized by the State, the
purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate them within the corporate limits of the City to protect the public interests over marijuana business
interests;
5. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to confer any legitimate claim of entitlement to any benefit which might otherwise devolve upon any
licensee or any person approved for suitability;
6. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize or make legal any act that Federal or State law does not permit or sanction or assist in any violation
of any Federal or State law. This chapter is intended to implement Nevada Revised Statutes 453D and to establish criteria for the issuance of
licenses that are a prerequisite for the exemption from State prosecution provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D;
7. Federal law makes it unlawful to cultivate, possess, distribute, or dispense marijuana. However, on August 29, 2013, the United States Department
of Justice ("DOJ") issued a memorandum advising that the DOJ would allow enforcement of state laws that authorize marijuana production,
distribution, and possession to be handled primarily by state and local law enforcement regulatory bodies as long as the state and local governments
enact laws that implement "strong and effective regulatory enforcement systems" to address the Federal government's identified enforcement
priorities. The following enforcement priorities were specified by the DOJ as being particularly important to the Federal government:
a. Preventing the distribution of marijuana to minors;
b. Preventing revenue from the sale of marijuana from going to criminal enterprises, gangs, and cartels;
c. Preventing the diversion of marijuana from states where it is legal under state law in some form to other states;
d. Preventing state authorized marijuana activity from being used as a cover or pretext for the trafficking of other illegal drugs or other illegal activity;
e. Preventing violence and the use of firearms in the cultivation and distribution of marijuana;
f. Preventing drugged driving and the exacerbation of other adverse public health consequences associated with marijuana use;
g. Preventing the growing of marijuana on public lands and the attendant public safety and environmental dangers posed by marijuana production on
public lands; and
h. Preventing marijuana possession or use on Federal property. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
CANNABIS OR MARIJUANA: "Marijuana" has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
CITY: The City of Mesquite, Nevada, a Municipal corporation.
COMMUNITY FACILITY: Any of the following: a facility that provides daycare to children, a public park, a playground, a public swimming pool, a center or
facility which provides recreational opportunities or services to children or adolescents, a church, synagogue, or other building, structure or place used for
religious worship or other religious purposes.
CONVICTED: A finding of guilt as an adult offender by a jury or trial court, whether said finding is appealed or not. A person so convicted shall be deemed
convicted until such finding is overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction or by pardon.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Taxation.
DIVISION: The Division of Public and Behavioral Health of the Department of Health and Human Services.
DUAL LICENSEE: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
EDIBLE MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.101.
FINDING OF SUITABILITY: Means that after investigation, a person is found to comply with the requirements of this title which are prerequisite to
involvement with a privileged license. This title authorizes the City Council to require that certain persons who are directly or indirectly involved with
privileged licenses be found suitable for such involvement so long as that relationship continues. A finding of suitability relates only to the specific
involvement for which it is made. If the nature of the involvement changes from that for which the applicant is found suitable, or if, in the judgment of the
City Council, new information concerning the applicant's suitability has become available, the applicant may be made to submit themselves for a new
determination of suitability.
JUVENILE: Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
KEY EMPLOYEE: Any executive, manager, employee, agent, officer, or director of a marijuana establishment having the power to exercise significant
influence or control over decisions concerning any part of the operations of the business or a manager charged with the day to day operations of the
business.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
MARIJUANA DISTRIBUTOR: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, a marijuana
distributor, or a retail marijuana store.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 161/565
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
NEVADA REVISED STATUTES (NRS): The current codified laws of the State of Nevada.
OWNERSHIP INTEREST: Any principal, person, beneficial owner, and individual persons holding any ownership or financial interest for each business
entity including all businesses organized under or governed by title 7 of the Nevada Revised Statutes including, but not limited to, private corporations,
publicly traded corporations, close corporations, foreign corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, limited partnerships, and professional
corporations (business entities). Ownership interest in the context of publicly traded corporations shall include all corporate officers and members of any
board of directors, and also includes individuals with five percent (5%) or more ownership or financial interest in the publicly traded corporation. To the
extent that a business entity has an ownership interest in a marijuana establishment, the term ownership interest shall also include all individuals with an
ownership interest in such business entity. It is the intent of this chapter that all individuals with a direct or indirect ownership interest in a marijuana
establishment be disclosed and be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
PARAPHERNALIA: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.125.
PUBLIC PLACE: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
RETAIL MARIJUANA STORE: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
SEMI-ANNUAL: A period of six (6) months commencing on January 1 and July 1 in any year. (Ord. 534, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
2-16-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENT AND TERM OF LICENSE:
A recreational marijuana establishment business license is a revocable privilege and the holder of such a license does not acquire thereby any vested
right. No license under this chapter can be assigned or transferred except with the approval of the City Council and must follow all Nevada Department of
Taxation policies and procedures for transferring of ownership. A recreational marijuana establishment business must comply at all times with all
applicable laws, regulations or licensing requirements in the conduct of the business.
A. License Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale,
distribution, transportation, or consumption of marijuana other than those forms of businesses and commerce that are expressly contemplated by
Nevada Revised Statutes 453A and 453D and any administrative rules duly adopted by the State regulating authority, without first making application
and securing a marijuana establishment license to do so from the City of Mesquite.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any marijuana establishment in the City without a valid registration certificate duly issued by the State
regulating authority, and a license issued pursuant to this chapter and operating in compliance with any and all applicable State laws and this Code.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide marijuana, edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products to a marijuana establishment within
the City without a registration certificate duly issued by the State regulating authority and a license issued by the City, except as provided in section
2-16-6 of this chapter.
4. Except for sales pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes, it shall be unlawful for any licensed recreational marijuana establishment located within the
City to accept for sale any marijuana, edible marijuana products or any marijuana infused products from any person who has not obtained a
registration certificate from the State regulating authority, or who is not duly licensed under this chapter for the provision of such products, except as
provided in section 2-16-6 of this chapter.
5. A license is required for each marijuana establishment registration certificate an individual holds to operate in each location where that activity is to
occur as required under this chapter.
6. A person operating more than one type of marijuana establishment in the same location must have a separate license for each type of marijuana
establishment registration certificate.
7. The license requirement set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by
any other Federal, State or local law.
8. A license issued pursuant to this section does not provide any exception, defense or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal
liability the person may have for the production, distribution or possession of marijuana.
B. Posting License; Failure As Grounds For Revocation: All licenses issued for marijuana establishments shall be posted in a conspicuous place in order
that they may be readily available for inspection by authorized State and City officials. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall
constitute grounds for revocation of any such license so not posted.
C. Location Transfer: A marijuana establishment business license may not be transferred to a new location within the City unless it is in accordance with
this chapter and title 9 of this Code requirements and approved by City Council. The new location shall be inspected and approved by the Fire
Department and the Building and Zoning Department to ensure safety and compliance with applicable City ordinances and regulations.
D. License; Corporation, Partnership, Limited Liability Company; Changes In Membership: In the case of a corporate licensee, any and all changes in the
officers of such corporation must be reported to the business license official within thirty (30) days of such change. Such new officers shall be required
to qualify for a license as required in this chapter. Any new manager of a corporate licensee shall be required to qualify for a license as required in this
chapter. In the case of a partnership or limited liability company, any change in ownership of the partnership or limited liability company must be
reported to the business license official within thirty (30) days of such change. Any new partners or managers shall be required to qualify for a license
as required in this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 162/565
E. Notice Of Change To Key Employee: It shall be a condition of the license to inform the business license official of any change in the employment status
of a registered employee or volunteer who serves in a management position, or as a key employee within ten (10) days of the effective date of the
change in employment status. A change of employment status includes termination, leave of absence, and promotion to a management position or key
employee.
F. Transportation Of Marijuana Products: Transportation must meet all requirements of the State regulating authority. Product must be placed in unmarked,
nontransparent transportation containers. All required transportation logs must be in the vehicle and made available to law enforcement upon being
stopped by a law enforcement officer within the City, each driver must identify to the officer that the product contained within the vehicle is medical
marijuana, edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products, as the case may be, from a licensed medical marijuana establishment and must
present to the officer a State agent registration card, the route the vehicle was authorized to travel and the actual travel log. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff.
10-18-2017)
2-16-4: LAND USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS; CONFORMANCE WITH TITLE 9 OF THIS CODE:
A. No marijuana establishment license will be issued unless the location is in accordance with title 9 of this Code.
B. Approval of a location or of a use permit pursuant to title 9 of this Code does not guarantee or constitute approval of any marijuana establishment
license. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell marijuana at a licensed marijuana dispensary at any time other than between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. daily. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-6: FACILITIES NOT LOCATED WITHIN THE CITY JURISDICTION:
Marijuana testing establishments and marijuana distribution establishments located outside the City of Mesquite, but which have obtained business
licenses in a jurisdiction other than the City, need not apply for a City of Mesquite license to only provide testing of marijuana, or medical marijuana and/or
merely deliver marijuana or medical marijuana products to a marijuana or medical marijuana establishment located within the City. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017,
eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-7: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION:
A. The City Council may issue licenses for the following types of marijuana establishments:
1. Retail Marijuana Store: A retail marijuana license allows the licensee to acquire, possess, supply and sell or dispense usable marijuana, edible
marijuana products, marijuana infused products, and marijuana paraphernalia.
2. Marijuana Cultivation Facility: A cultivation facility license allows the licensee to acquire, possess, cultivate, deliver, transfer, transport, supply and
sell wholesale marijuana and related supplies to a marijuana dispensary, marijuana production facility, or to other cultivation facilities only.
3. Marijuana Testing Facility: Marijuana testing facility license allows the licensee to test marijuana, edible marijuana products and marijuana infused
products that are to be sold at marijuana establishments operating in accordance with the requirements of Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.
4. Marijuana Product Manufacturing Facility: A marijuana product manufacturing facility license allows the licensee to acquire, process, manufacture,
deliver, transfer, transport, package, and label usable marijuana and marijuana infused products for sale at wholesale to marijuana dispensaries only.
5. Marijuana Distributor: A marijuana distributor license allows the licensee to transport marijuana from a marijuana establishment to another marijuana
establishment. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-8: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND FEES:
Each application for a marijuana establishment business license must include, without limitation:
A. Completed Application: A complete marijuana application:
1. The mailing address of the applicant;
2. The applicant's date of birth;
3. The name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the proposed key employee;
4. The telephone number of the applicant, including cell phone number;
5. If applying for a marijuana dispensary license, the proposed hours of operation;
6. The e-mail address of the applicant;
7. An attestation that the information provided to the City to apply for the marijuana establishment license is true and correct according to the
information known by the applicant at the time of signing; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 163/565
8. The signature of the natural person for the proposed marijuana establishment;
B. Application Fee: Onetime, nonrefundable application fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
1. Medical marijuana facilities existing prior to Nov. 8, 2016 wishing to add recreational marijuana for each license classification, application fees are as
follows:
a. One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per application unless the businesses are located on the same property and owned by the same
owners, then one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the first application and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional
application.
C. Type Of License: Which type of marijuana establishment the applicant is applying for (i.e., retail marijuana store, marijuana product manufacturing
facility, marijuana distributor, marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana testing facility, etc.).
D. Name Of Establishment: The name of the proposed marijuana establishment, as reflected in the articles of incorporation or other documents filed with
the Secretary of State;
E. Type Of Business Organization: The type of business organization of the applicant, such as individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, association or cooperative, joint venture or any other business organization. It is the intent of this chapter that all individuals with a direct or
indirect ownership interest in a recreational marijuana establishment be disclosed and be subject to the requirements of this chapter;
F. Other Ownership Interests: The name and physical address of any other recreational marijuana establishment within the City which any owner, officer,
manager or director has ownership interest in, a contractual relationship with or is otherwise associated with;
G. Information Of Providing Facility Or Laboratory: The name and location of the offsite marijuana cultivation facility providing the marijuana, if applicable.
The name and location of the marijuana testing laboratory providing laboratory services, if applicable;
H. Address Of Establishment And Owners: The physical address where the proposed marijuana establishment will be located and the physical address of
any owner, co-owner, or person otherwise affiliated with the marijuana establishment;
I. Description Of Products: A description of the nature of the products and services to be produced or sold by the marijuana establishment;
J. Accompanying Documents: A complete and accurate copy of the application and all accompanying documents to be filed with the State regulating
authority pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 453D including, but not limited to:
1. All proposals for operations, business plans, attestations, financial documentation, and required tax reports;
2. All documents detailing proposed organizational structure, all narratives, and resumes;
3. All documentation required concerning the adequacy of the proposed building and construction plans with supporting details in the form specified by
the City building official and the payment of all required review and inspection fees;
4. All testing, transportation, policy, operations manuals, financial plan, environmental plan, and procedures manual to ensure the use of adequate
security measures;
K. Sign And Advertising Plan: A sign and advertising plan including all proposed interior signage, must meet all requirements pursuant to title 9 of this
Code;
L. Floor Plan: The floor plan of the establishment;
M. Copy Of Contracts: A copy of all contracts, proposed contracts for consulting, management, renting or leasing the premises for the proposed marijuana
establishment, including written documentation stating that the property owner of the proposed location for the establishment is fully aware of the
property's intended use or a copy of the deed to such property showing ownership vested in the applicant;
N. Statement Acknowledging Federal Laws: A written statement acknowledging that the applicant understands applicable Federal laws, any guidance, or
directives issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, the laws of the State of Nevada and the laws and regulations of the City applicable thereto,
concerning the operation of a recreational marijuana establishment. The written statement shall also acknowledge that any violation of any laws or
regulations of the State of Nevada, or of the City, or any activity in violation of any guidance or directives issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, in
such place of business, or in connection therewith, or the commencement of any legal proceeding relating to such marijuana establishment by Federal
authorities, may render such license subject to immediate suspension or revocation;
O. Statement Holding City Harmless; Bond: A written statement to the business license official that the applicant will hold harmless, indemnify, and defend
the City against all claims and litigation arising from the issuance of a license, including any claims and litigation arising from the establishment,
operation, or ownership of the marijuana establishment, and a bond to secure such obligation in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00) will be provided prior to the issuance of any license;
P. Suitability Of Persons Holding Ownership Interest: An acknowledgment that the applicant is seeking a privileged license and understands that each
person with an ownership interest must be found suitable to hold such license by the City Council prior to the issuance of any license; that the applicant
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 164/565
understands and acknowledges that the burden of proving qualifications to receive such a permit or license is at all times on the applicant; that the
granting of a marijuana establishment license is at the discretion of the City Council; and that the applicant agrees to abide by the decision;
Q. Fingerprint Based Background Checks: All applicants applying for a marijuana establishment license with the City of Mesquite are required to provide
the City of Mesquite with a full set of fingerprints. Fingerprinting shall be completed at the Mesquite Police Department. In all cases where the applicant
for marijuana is a firm, partnership, association or corporation, all the members, principal officers, directors, stockholders, and/or managers shall
present themselves to the City Police Agency for fingerprinting. Fingerprint data will be used to conduct State and national criminal records checks.
Upon receipt of the fingerprint data, the City Police Agency is authorized to transmit the fingerprint data to the Nevada Department of Public Safety to
conduct State criminal records checks. The Nevada Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation to conduct national criminal records checks. The results of the State and national criminal checks will be disseminated to the
City Police Agency. Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Agency shall prepare and submit a report containing findings and a
recommendation of approval or disapproval to the City Council. This provision is enacted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 239B.010(1)(a) and
Public Law 92-544;
R. Investigation Fees:
1. Fees Enumerated:
a. Investigation And Fingerprinting Fee: Each application for a license filed pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by an investigation and
fingerprinting fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per person to be investigated. This fee is nonrefundable and is in addition to other fees
collected pursuant to this title;
S. Confidentiality Required: Information of a confidential nature acquired under the terms of this chapter shall be maintained by the business license
official, in a confidential file, available only to City officials and law enforcement officers; provided, however, that such application constitutes a waiver of
confidentiality and privacy as to those matters disclosed by the investigation and by such waiver permits the interrogation of the applicant at any
meeting of the City Council concerning any matters contained in the application or information obtained in the course of an investigation concerning
suitability for licensing. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-9: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
To prevent unauthorized access to the marijuana, each marijuana establishment must submit, maintain, and follow a security plan that includes customer,
building and product security measures. The security plan must meet all the criteria established by the State regulating authority and the following
minimum requirements:
A. Each licensed premises must have a security system which monitors all perimeter entry points, windows, and controlled areas by a centrally monitored
alarm company properly licensed with the City, and whose agents are properly licensed and registered under applicable laws;
B. Immediate automatic or electronic notification to alert the Mesquite Police Department of an unauthorized breach of security at the marijuana
establishment in the interior of each building of the establishment;
C. All recorded images must clearly and accurately display the time and date. Time is to be measured in accordance with the U.S. National Institute of
Standards and Technology standards;
D. The surveillance system's data storage device must be secured on site in a lockbox, cabinet, closet, or secured in another manner to protect from
employee or third party tampering or criminal theft;
E. At least one 19-inch, or greater call-up monitor;
F. A video printer capable of immediately producing a clear still photo from any video camera image;
G. Video cameras with a recording resolution of at least 704x480 or the equivalent providing coverage of all entrances to and exits from limited access
areas and all entrances to and exits from the building, capable of identifying any activity occurring in or adjacent to the building;
H. A video camera at each point of sale location allowing for the identification of any person who holds a valid State registry identification card or his or her
designated primary caregiver purchasing marijuana;
I. A video camera in each grow room capable of identifying any activity occurring within the grow room in low light conditions;
J. A method for storing video recordings from the video cameras for at least thirty (30) calendar days from the date recorded;
K. Sufficient battery backup for video cameras and recording equipment to support at least five (5) minutes of recording in the event of a power outage;
L. A sign must be posted in any customer areas that the customer is under video surveillance;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 165/565
M. The establishment shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all local and State regulations regarding the facility and must monitor parking
areas and outdoor areas of the licensed premises for loitering, unlawful sale of marijuana by customers, and consumption of marijuana;
N. Any theft of items containing marijuana or the observance of any unauthorized transactions of marijuana on the licensed premises must be reported to
the Mesquite Police Department;
O. In addition to complying with all requirements set by the State regulating authority, any licensed cultivation facility shall secure the cultivation facility with
full video surveillance capable of clearly identifying any activities occurring within twenty feet (20') of the exterior of the building and any parking,
fenced, or loading areas. A motion detection lighting system may be employed to illuminate the gate area in low light conditions;
P. In addition to complying with all requirements set by the State regulating authority, any licensed marijuana dispensary shall have a lobby waiting area at
the entrance to the dispensary to receive clients, and a separate and secure designated area for dispensing marijuana to customers. The primary
entrance and exit shall be separated and shall be located and maintained clear of barriers, landscaping and similar obstruction so that it is clearly
visible from the public street, sidewalk, or site parking area.
Q. All marijuana, edible marijuana products, or marijuana infused products, during nonbusiness hours, must be stored in a separated and secured area.
1. The area must meet the building official's standards for odor control and the Southern Nevada Health District regulations.
2. The area must be under surveillance by the camera system at all times.
3. One area may store both product and legal tender, however separate storage devices must be maintained and both must be under video
surveillance. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-10: PRELIMINARY FINDING; CITY COUNCIL ACTION ON APPLICATION; DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
Concurrently with title 9 of this Code, Unified Development Code approval process, the business license official shall upon completion of the preliminary
finding of suitability refer the application to the City Council for consideration.
A. Preliminary Finding Of Suitability: The preliminary finding of suitability will be based on the information submitted to the business license official as
outlined in section 2-16-8 of this chapter.
B. Notification Of Denial; Registration Certificate Required: Applicants found unsuitable by the license official shall be notified in writing within ten (10)
business days of the close of the background investigation. All applicants that satisfy the preliminary finding of suitability will move forward to the City
Council for the preliminary approval. At the conclusion of the State provisional certification process all applicants that have received a provisional
marijuana establishment registration certificate and a ranking by the Nevada Department of Taxation will be submitted to the City Council for final
approval.
C. City Council Action: City Council shall consider the following criteria that will include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Ranking provided by the State regulating authority;
2. Information regarding any bankruptcy proceedings involving owners or board members;
3. The identity, character, and background of the applicant, capacity, capitalization;
4. Operational plan, organizational structure, environmental sustainability and mitigation plans, interior floor plans of the buildings, odor control systems
and suitability of the building for the use proposed, site plan as to parking, traffic movement and aesthetics;
5. Impact on the surrounding neighborhood; the type and degree of security and facilities and any other factors that in his or her discretion are deemed
necessary to the safety, peace, order and welfare of the public.
D. Other Inspections: All applicants selected by the City Council must satisfy all required building, fire inspection criteria, and applicable food safety
inspections by the Southern Nevada Health District before commencing operations, and any other applicable agency.
E. Denial: The following persons are declared not to be qualified to hold a marijuana establishment license under the provisions of this chapter:
1. A person who does not possess, or who does not have a reputation for possessing a good moral character;
2. A person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
3. A person who has been convicted of a felony;
4. A person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude which includes, but is not limited to: possession of a controlled substance,
theft, fraud, falsification in official matters, offenses against privacy, lewdness, voyeurism, or violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or
property;
5. A person who is currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject
to a tracking device;
6. A person who has been incarcerated in a Federal or State prison;
7. A person who illegally resides in the United States;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 166/565
8. A person who at the time of renewal of any license issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
9. A partnership, limited partnership, association or limited liability company, unless all the partners, managers and members of such partnership,
limited partnership, association or limited liability company required to submit to a background investigation under the provisions of section 2-16-8 of
this chapter are found to be suitable;
10. A corporation, if any principal officer required to submit to a background investigation under the provisions of section 2-16-8 of this chapter is not
found suitable;
11. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease or provisional lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be used.
No license shall be issued to any person who has violated any provision of this chapter, this title, or the Act, or who has violated any provision of a
license to sell marijuana issued by the City or any other governmental agency, or who has had such a license revoked. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-
18-2017)
2-16-11: COMMENCEMENT; NONOPERATIONAL STATUS OF BUSINESS:
The licensee must commence operation of the business within ninety (90) days after the license has been approved by the State regulating authority and
may not discontinue operation of the business for more than a three (3) month period without City Council approval. The City Council may approve
nonoperational status of the business beyond the initial three (3) month period in time increments not to exceed one year but in no event shall the City
Council approve any nonoperational status beyond a maximum of one year. A license shall be automatically revoked at the expiration of the time periods
provided by this section unless City Council approval has been granted pursuant to this section. All license taxes must be paid notwithstanding the
licensee's nonoperational status. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-12: ON SITE USE PROHIBITED:
No marijuana shall be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed on the premises of any marijuana establishment nor in a public place, unless otherwise
provided in Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-13: AGE LIMITATION:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age shall be allowed in a recreational marijuana establishment, unless a medical and recreational
facility are one, then the person under twenty one (21) years of age must be a valid medical marijuana cardholder or be accompanied by a parent or
guardian. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-14: JUVENILE EMPLOYEE:
It shall be unlawful for any business licensed under this chapter to employ a juvenile. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-15: FEES AND TAXES:
Recreational marijuana establishment license fees and taxes, are not prorated, are fixed and established, and must be paid in advance to the Business
License Department by all persons receiving such licenses as follows:
A. Origination Fees: Origination license fees are imposed for the following and are payable prior to the issuance of the recreational marijuana
establishment license:
License Category Origination Fee
Dispensary $20,000.00
Cultivation facility 20,000.00
Production facility 20,000.00
Other marijuana establishments 10,000.00
B. License Taxes:
License Category Semi-Annual Revenue Taxes
Dispensary 3% of the gross sales
Cultivation 3% of the gross sales
Production facility 3% of the gross sales
Other marijuana establishments 3% of the gross sales
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 167/565
C. Dual License: A new applicant wishing to apply for a dual license shall be subject to the fees as follows:
License Category Origination Fee
Dispensary $30,000.00
Cultivation facility 30,000.00
Production facility 30,000.00
Other marijuana establishments 15,000.00
D. Exemption Of Origination Fees: A marijuana facility may be exempted from having to pay origination fees if the business existed as a medical marijuana
facility prior to November 8, 2016 and then later add recreational sales to its services.
E. Marijuana Distributors: Marijuana distributors should be licensed in accordance to section 2-1-13 of this title similar to a delivery service, however, the
license will be considered privileged due to the nature of the business and business owners will be required to undergo a background check. (Ord. 534,
4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
2-16-16: RENEWAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE; LATE PAYMENT; PENALTY; REINSTATEMENT:
A. Renewal Notification:
1. All applications for renewal of a City recreational marijuana establishment business license shall be notified, before the due date, of each License
Tax required, however, the failure to notify any lawful business shall not be held to waive the payment of the Business License Tax; nor is the actual
receipt of such notice required.
2. All applications for renewal of a City recreational marijuana establishment business license shall be accompanied by a copy of the renewed
establishment registration certificate from the State regulating authority. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
B. File Renewal Application: Every recreational marijuana establishment license shall file, together with the license fees and taxes required by section 2-
16-15 of this chapter, an application for renewal which shall be certified by the licensee, manager or officer thereof. The application for renewal shall
contain an accurate report of all gross revenue for the preceding six (6) months. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017; amd. Ord. 534, 4-10-2018, eff.
5-1-2018)
C. Certification: The form shall include the following certification:
I, (name of certifier), certify and declare under the penalties of perjury that I am the owner, partner, (president, treasurer, other {describe}) of the
business named above, that this is a true, correct and complete report to the best of my knowledge, information and belief, and that this application and
report is made with the knowledge and consent of all other individuals named on the marijuana establishment license.
Signed: Dated: Title:
I hereby certify that there has been no unreported change in ownership, management or location of the marijuana establishment license, during the
license period; and that the establishment has a valid state license which has not been revoked or suspended, conditioned or limited during the
licensing period. I further certify there have been no revenues that have not been reported as required by law or ordinance of the State of Nevada,
Clark County, or the City of Mesquite.
Signed: Dated: Title:
D. Renewal Processing Fee: The licensee shall pay, in addition to all other fees, a license renewal processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
E. Late Renewal Fee; Penalty: Marijuana establishment licenses are delinquent if not paid by the due date, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the
amount due or two hundred dollars ($200.00) whichever is greater is assessed if such amount is not paid by the fifteenth day after the due date. If
payment is not made by the fifteenth day, the penalty increases to fifty percent (50%) of the fee due or four hundred dollars ($400.00) whichever is
greater is assessed.
F. Reinstatement: License fees not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date are automatically revoked. Any such license shall not be reinstated until a
fifty percent (50%) penalty fee and a twenty five percent (25%) reinstatement fee shall have been paid.
G. No License Issuance: No license shall be issued until all penalties have been paid in full. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-17: CONSENT TO INSPECTIONS:
The applicant or licensee shall consent to any and all reasonable inspections of the recreational marijuana establishment business operations and
premises with or without notice for the purpose of ascertaining such compliance with the laws and regulations of the City and State in areas of health, fire
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 168/565
prevention, safety, and consumer protection, together with such examination of the business books and records as may be necessary to ascertain the
basis for determining the payment of fees. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-18: REVOCATION OF LICENSES, SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION; NOTICE OF HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Events Causing Revocation: All recreational marijuana establishment business licenses may be revoked if one or more of the following events occur,
but is not limited to the following:
1. A licensee has violated, or permitted, allowed, or caused a violation of any provision of this chapter, any regulation issued pursuant to this chapter,
any condition of approval imposed upon the issuance of the license, or any State law or regulation relating to operation;
2. If the State registration certificate has been surrendered, suspended or revoked;
3. Based on ascertainable facts, the operation substantially aggravates the crime problems in the City, makes law enforcement unduly difficult, or is
detrimental to the public, health, safety or welfare of the City;
4. A licensee has made fraudulent statements as to a material fact on an application form, as to any other information presented as part of the
application process, or in connection with any other information required to be submitted to the Business License Office;
5. The licensee has failed to maintain the premises in compliance with the requirements of the building, fire, health, and environmental agencies;
6. Having committed a felony offense;
7. Dispensing, delivering or otherwise transferring marijuana to a person other than a marijuana establishment agent, another medical marijuana
establishment, a patient who holds a valid registry identification card or the designated primary caregiver of such a patient;
8. Any act or omission committed by any employee, agent, or independent contractor that occurs in the course of his or her employment, agency, or
contract with the licensee shall be imputed to the licensee for the purposing suspension or revocation of the license.
B. City Council May Revoke, Suspend Or Cancel: The City Council at any regular or at any special meeting convened and held for that purpose upon a
show cause order for any willful violation or omission of this chapter may revoke, suspend, or cancel the recreational marijuana establishment licenses
by a majority vote. If a license is revoked, suspended, or canceled pursuant to this provision, it shall be unlawful for the licensee to maintain or conduct
such business under the license, or at all. Upon such revocation, suspension or cancellation, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made
to the licensee and the licensee shall immediately cease all business at all places under such license.
C. Notice Of Hearing; Hearing Procedures: Notice and the procedure of a hearing scheduled for the purposes set forth in this chapter shall be in
accordance with section 2-1-14 of this title, as amended or renumbered from time to time. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-19: ACTION UPON SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR CLOSURE:
A. In the event of a suspension, revocation or closure of any license, the establishment shall not remove any marijuana from the premises except under
the supervision of the Police Department and must dispose of it in a manner and location approved by the State regulating authority and/or the Police
Department.
B. In the event that the recreational marijuana establishment is closing either temporarily, or permanently, the establishment shall notify the business
license official of the closing fifteen (15) days before the recreational marijuana establishment is closed and in the case of an emergency, the
establishment must notify the business license official within twenty four (24) hours of such closure. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
2-16-20: DISPOSAL OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA WASTE:
A. Disposal of waste must meet all State and Federal guidelines. Waste must be maintained in a secure location until removal from the location. All waste
must be deposited at the disposal site operated by the City or its authorized contractor.
B. Recreational marijuana and any waste including wastewater must be stored, secured and managed in accordance with applicable State Statutes and
regulations and with a State approved disposal plan. A recreational marijuana establishment must dispose of marijuana that is not usable marijuana
within ten (10) calendar days of expiration of use. Marijuana waste must be made unusable prior to leaving a licensed recreational marijuana facility.
1. Wastes that must be rendered unusable prior to disposal include, but are not limited to:
a. Marijuana plant waste, including roots, stalks, leaves, and stems that have not been processed with solvent.
b. Solid marijuana sample plant waste possessed by third party laboratories certified by the State regulating authority for quality assurance that must
be disposed of.
2. The allowable method to render marijuana plant waste unusable is by grinding and incorporating the marijuana plant waste with nonconsumable
solid waste or other ground materials so the resulting mixture is at least fifty percent (50%) nonmarijuana waste by volume. Other methods to render
marijuana waste unusable must be approved by the State regulating authority before implementing.
3. Marijuana waste rendered unusable following an approved method in the facility disposal plan may be delivered to a franchised or licensed solid
waste facility for final disposition.
4. Disposal cannot include marijuana product including plant material entering the City wastewater collection system, storm drain system or any
unsecure rubbish disposal system.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 169/565
5. A recreational marijuana establishment shall not transfer, share, give, sell or deliver any unused medical marijuana in the establishment's
possession to any other person, regardless of whether they are licensed as a medical marijuana establishment.
6. A marijuana establishment shall not dispose of marijuana in any manner other than permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-
2017)
2-16-21: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof such
person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowable under Nevada Revised Statutes, or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a term not
to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such conviction shall also subject the permittee or licensee to have his permit or license
revoked. Thereafter, any person adjudged guilty of a violation of this chapter or any of the terms, conditions or provisions thereof may, in the discretion of
the City Council, be denied a permit or license. Each violation or instance of noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further,
each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense. (Ord. 524, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
Title 3
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
3-1-1: OBSTRUCTIONS OR ENCROACHMENTS DECLARED NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Nuisance Declared: Any obstruction or encroachment in any manner, in whole or in part or at all, upon or over any street, alley, sidewalk, court, public
park or grounds of the city, within the city, is hereby declared a public nuisance.
B. Exceptions: Except as provided in this subsection, it is unlawful for any person to obstruct or encroach in any manner, in whole or in part or at all, upon
or over any street, alley, sidewalk, court, public park or grounds of the city, within the city, but the city council may permit:
1. Merchants, tradesmen and the proprietors of any established business or commercial enterprise the use of sidewalks and alleys for the receiving,
shipping or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise; provided, however, such use does not exceed six (6) hours' duration, and a space of not less
than six feet (6') of such sidewalk is kept clear for the free passage of pedestrians and the accommodation of the public.
2. Property owners the temporary use of sidewalks and alleys when making improvements to property.
Such permissible uses of the sidewalks and alleys shall be such as not to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic thereon. (Ord. 11,
8-16-1984)
3-1-2: NOTICE TO ABATE OR REMOVE NUISANCE; LIMITATION ON COSTS:
A. Upon complaint of any city resident to the city council, or from the personal observation and knowledge of a council member, that a nuisance of the
nature specified in section 3-1-1 of this chapter exists, the city council shall notify the property owner or occupant of the premises causing or permitting
the nuisance to exist that unless such nuisance is abated or removed within a reasonable time, which time shall be determined and stated by the city
council in the notice served on the owner or occupant, the city council shall cause to be abated or removed, at the expense of the owner of theproperty,
the nuisance complained of or found to exist.
B. Notice to abate or remove any nuisance shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises, or agent of the owner of the property or premises,
responsible for the nuisance. If the owner of the property is unknown or absent, with no known representative or agent upon whom notice can be
served, then the city council shall cause to be posted a written or printed notice upon the premises, setting forth that unless the nuisance is abated or
removed within the stated, reasonable time, the city council will cause it to be abated or removed at the expense of the owner and property. (Ord. 11, 8-
16-1984)
C. In carrying out the provisions of this section, no charge, debt or claim against any individual owner or any one piece of real property shall exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 69, 4-9-1991)
3-1-3: RECOVERY OF UNPAID COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
Any unpaid sum of money against the property or owner accrued in abating or removing "nuisances", as provided in section 3-1-2 of this chapter, is a
claim against the property and may be recovered in an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The amount recovered shall be disbursed to pay the
expenses of abating or removing the nuisance and court costs. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL CEMETERY
3-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 170/565
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MESQUITE CITY MUNICIPAL CEMETERY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 19, 1-3-1985)
3-2-2: CEMETERY TRANSFER:
The city council, by the passage of this chapter, does hereby accept the dedication of the cemetery property as contained in dedicatory deed from the
Clark County cemetery; and cemetery property to be used for cemetery purposes only and in accordance with public law 439, 79th congress 2nd session,
chapter 473 of the public laws of the United States of America. The city council further, by passage of this chapter, accepts the cemetery fund from Clark
County cemetery association. (Ord. 19, 1-3-1985)
3-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given therein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ADMINISTRATOR OF THE MUNICIPAL CEMETERY: The city clerk.
MUNICIPAL CEMETERY OR CEMETERY: The municipal cemetery of the city of Mesquite.
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE MUNICIPAL CEMETERY: The city employee designated by the city manager. (Ord. 426, 5-12-2009, eff. 6-4-2009)
3-2-4: AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall fix the following by resolution:
A. Value (sale price) of all unsold lots as presently exist or are provided in the future.
B. Interment fee.
C. Fee for opening and closing of grave.
D. Monument setting fee.
E. Disinterment fee.
F. Such other fees or charges as may be required. (Ord. 19, 1-3-1985)
3-2-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The administrator, with the approval of the city council, shall establish the rules and regulations for operation, administration and use of the cemetery. The
rules and regulations shall be adopted by resolution. (Ord. 426, 5-12-2009, eff. 6-4-2009)
3-2-6: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR AND SUPERINTENDENT:
A. Administrator: Duties of the administrator of the municipal cemetery are as follows:
1. Development: Develop the municipal cemetery expansion plan for inclusion in the community facilities and services plan of the Mesquite city
comprehensive plan.
2. Records Maintained: Maintain the administrative records of the municipal cemetery, to include:
a. Lot records of each deceased interred.
b. Lot records of each reserved lot.
c. Mailing of invoice for quarterly payments for reserved lots purchased on an installment basis.
d. Issue cemetery lot deeds on final payment of lots.
e. Update the municipal cemetery map semiannually.
B. Superintendent Of Municipal Cemetery: Duties of the superintendent of the municipal cemetery are as follows:
1. Operation And Maintenance: The superintendent shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the municipal cemetery, subject to any
limitations and restrictions set forth herein, or contained in any applicable law or rules or regulations promulgated by the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 171/565
2. Supervise Interment: The superintendent shall see that each lot is properly used or occupied, and shall cause graves to be dug to properly enter the
deceased when called upon to do so.
3. Monument Setting: The superintendent shall see that monuments are properly set on the lots in accordance with the current rules and regulations.
(Ord. 19, 1-3-1985)
3-2-7: RULES FOR INTERMENT AND DISINTERMENT:
A. Interment: No deceased person shall be interred in the cemetery until the administrator has found:
1. A burial permit has been obtained from the public health officer as required by law.
2. The lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for, or that satisfactory arrangement has been made to assure full payment for the lot and all
other interment fees.
3. The person to be interred has the right to the use of such lot.
4. The lot is not used beyond its capacity as set forth in the rules and regulations.
B. Disinterment: No deceased persons shall be disinterred from a lot in the cemetery until the administrator has found:
1. A request for disinterment has been processed through a local mortuary of the next of kin's choice.
2. A disinterment permit has been obtained from the public health officer if the deceased is to be removed from the municipal cemetery.
3. If reinterment is to be in the municipal cemetery, all provisions of this chapter and any cemetery rules and regulations have been met. (Ord. 19, 1-3-
1985)
3-2-8: SALE OR RESALE OF LOTS:
A. The city clerk shall record the sale of all lots on the municipal cemetery map to include reserved lots. The cemetery map shall be available for public
inspection in the city clerk's department. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of lots, on any basis.
B. Plots may not be resold to a third party. Plots may be resold to the city at the original purchase price. Notice of change of plot shall be noted by the
cemetery administrator. (Ord. 426, 5-12-2009, eff. 6-4-2009)
3-2-9: CEMETERY FUND:
The established cemetery fund shall be a self-supporting special activity fund. All fees and charges collected in connection with the cemetery, as well as
the cemetery lot sale proceeds, shall be deposited to said fund. All expenses and disbursements in connection with the cemetery shall be paid out of the
cemetery fund. (Ord. 19, 1-3-1985)
3-2-10: CEMETERY COLLECTIONS AND ACCOUNTS:
All fees and charges in connection with the cemetery shall be collected by the city. The city shall keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and
expenditures of cemetery funds, and shall make appropriate financial reports as required. (Ord. 19, 1-3-1985)
3-2-11: OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE REPORT:
The superintendent shall make an annual report during the annual budget to the city council which shall include:
A. Condition of cemetery.
B. Current fiscal year operation and maintenance expenditures. (Ord. 426, 5-12-2009, eff. 6-4-2009)
Chapter 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
3-3-1: PREAMBLE AND SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The department of sanitation is a duly and regularly created governmental subdivision of the city. The city council is obligated to establish schedules
showing all rates for services performed or products furnished and is further obligated to hold a public hearing after thirty (30) days' notice to all users of its
services whenever it proposes to change any rates.
Whenever reference is made to any portion of this chapter, such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto hereafter made. (Ord. 51, 6-
19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 172/565
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically indicated otherwise, the meanings and definitions of terms in this chapter shall be as follows:
ANNUAL SEWER CHARGE: Total annual charge which includes the user charge rate, debt service for capital, construction and service charge
components.
APPROVED: Approval by the sanitation director and/or board as a result of investigation and tests conducted by them, or by reason of accepted principles
or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20oC), expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BOILER BLOW OFF: The condensed steam or hot water from a boiler when "blown off" to remove scale and slime or "blow down" from cleaning and
repair.
CESSPOOL OR DRY WELL: An excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a house sewer and which is constructed as required by uniform
plumbing code, chapter XIV.
CHIMNEY PIPE: A vertical section of a house sewer extending from a vertical tee or wye in the main sewer or from a long radius one-fourth (1/4) bend set
vertically in the house sewer at the property line and in either case suitably reinforced with concrete.
CONNECTION FEE: A one time charge for connection to the treatment works.
DEBT SERVICE FOR CAPITAL: A component of the annual sewer charge which includes principal interest and reserve for capital projects financed
through bonds.
DEPARTMENT: Mesquite city sanitation department.
DEPARTMENT ENGINEER: The department director of Mesquite city sanitation, or his designee or his authorized representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Sewage derived solely from residences, business buildings or institutions.
EFFLUENT: Partially or completely treated sewage flowing out of any sewage treating device.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The typical wastewater flows from a single-family residential household.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: An accounting system mandated to be included in the user charge system which conforms with GAAP (generally
accepted accounting principles) and accurately accounts for revenues generated by the system and expenditures for operation and maintenance
(including replacement) (O&M+R), including line item breakout of income sources and expense items, and provisions for adjusting operation cost data to
reflect operating changes, wage escalation and staffing changes.
FISCAL PROGRAM: Total financial program for wastewater treatment works, including both the revenue and expense programs.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A device for retaining grease or oil by gravity differential separation from waste effluent and shall be of design and capacity as
outlined in the uniform plumbing code, chapter 10, and as approved by the sanitation director, or his designee, authorized representative or inspector.
HOUSE SEWER: That part of the horizontal piping beginning twenty four inches (24") from the exterior wall of the building or structure and extending to its
connection with the public sewer or cesspool, or septic tank or sewage treatment plant through which is discharged domestic or industrial liquid waste.
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE: Any waterborne waste from a manufacturing process of industry, except domestic sewage, swimming pool backwash or
drainage and uncontaminated cooling water.
INDUSTRIAL LIQUID WASTE PRETREATMENT PLANT: Any works or device for pretreatment of industrial liquid wastes prior to discharge into the public
sewer.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW: Water other than wastewater entering a sewer system through such means as faulty pipes, pipe joints, connections, etc., and
such sources as surface runoff, storm drains, manhole covers, street drainage, etc.
INSPECTOR: The authorized inspector, deputy, agent or representative of the department director.
INTERCEPTOR: A device for retaining sand, silt, grit and mineral material, petroleum solvent, grease or oil by gravity differential separation from waste
effluent and shall be of design and capacity as outlined in the uniform plumbing code, chapter 10, and as approved by the sanitation director, or his
designee, authorized representative or inspector.
LOT: Any piece or parcel of land bounded, defined or shown upon a plot or deed recorded in the office of the county recorder, Clark County, Nevada,
which conforms to the boundaries of such lot as shown upon such recorded map, plot or deed; provided, however, that in the event any building or
structure covers more area than a "lot" herein defined, the term "lot" shall include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which said building or structure is
wholly or partly located.
MAIN SEWER: Any sewer in which changes of alignment and grade occur only at manholes that provide access for cleaning and inspection. Such sewers
are usually eight inches (8") or more in diameter.
NORMAL DOMESTIC USER: Wastewater that has a biochemical oxygen demand concentration and a suspended solids concentration that is typical of
residential strength wastewater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: Those functions that result in expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities
and other items which are necessary for managing and for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance"
includes "replacement", as defined in this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 173/565
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, municipality, district or public subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular
number.
PUBLIC SEWER: The main sewer or trunk sewer, constructed in a street, highway, alley, place or right of way dedicated to public use. "Public sewer" does
not include house sewer.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. Said term does not include expenditures
for major rehabilitation or reconstruction upon expiration of the useful life of the treatment works.
RESIDENTIAL USER: Any contributor to the treatment works whose lot, parcel or real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.
RUNNING TRAP: A depressed section of the house sewer constructed of fittings so as to create a water seal to prevent the passage of gas from the
public sewer.
SS (DENOTING SUSPENDED SOLIDS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
SEPTIC TANK: A structure for treating sewage before disposal in a cesspool, seepage hole or leaching system and shall be constructed as required by
the uniform plumbing code, appendix K.
SERVICE CHARGE: A component of the annual sewer charge which is associated with billing costs for each account, including postage, labor, supplies,
etc.
SEWAGE: The waterborne waste from dwellings, kitchens, restaurants, institutions, stables, dairies, business buildings, and other similar structures, but
excluding any storm water, rainwater, surface water, ground water, roof or yard drainage.
SEWAGE PUMPING PLANT OR EJECTOR: Any works or device used to raise sewage from a lower to a higher level, or to overcomefriction in a pipeline.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any works or device for treating sewage, except any septic tank, settling tank or cesspool designed to dispose of
domestic sewage from one lot.
SEWER FEE SCHEDULE: The billing statement presented to customers of the wastewater treatment works, including the user charge rate and other
charges as noted in section 3-3-6 of this chapter.
SEWER USE REGULATIONS: Federally mandated, legally binding documents which establish parameters for new connections, inflow sources and limits
on the toxicity and the levels of other pollutants in the wastewater which is introduced into the treatment works.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
SHORT TITLE: This chapter shall be known as the MESQUITE CITY SANITATION DEPARTMENT CODE and may be cited as such.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Standard specifications for the construction of sanitary sewers and appurtenances in the Mesquite city sanitation
department adopted by the Mesquite city council.
TEE OR T: A fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90o).
TREATMENT WORKS: Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid
industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extension improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral part of the treatment process or
is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composing sludge, temporary storage of such compost and land
used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating,
reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer
systems.
UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE: Publication of the uniform plumbing code adopted as standard code by the Mesquite city council.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated.
USER: The legal owner of each parcel of land upon which is located any billing units or equivalent residential units (ERUs) and is a recipient of wastewater
treatment services.
USER CHARGE: The federally mandated rate charged treatment works users proportionate to their usage for the cost of O&M+R of such works. Said term
includes department charge rates.
USER CHARGE RATE: That portion of the annual sewer service charge which is levied to users in a proportional and adequate manner to meet the cost
of O&M+R of the wastewater treatment works.
USER CHARGE SYSTEM: The federally mandated accounting of O&M+R expenses and corresponding rates charged to users to produce revenue to
meet those expenses. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF SEWER USER:
A user receives sewer services at all times during which there is any billing unit or ERU upon the user's parcel of land which may contribute to the sewer
system, except for periods during which the user qualifies for the emergency relief rate. Each user is responsible for all charges applicable to the user's
land, whether for connection fee charges or annual sewer charges. It is the responsibility of the user to inform the district of any changes in ownership,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 174/565
billing address, installation or removal, or any billing units or ERUs within thirty (30) calendar days after each such change. The user may be held liable for
unpaid charges. Removal of any billing unit or ERU must be to the satisfaction of the department. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-
1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-4: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Requirements: A connection to department facilities shall be granted when the following requirements are met:
1. Submission of a completed application for a building permit provided by the building and zoning department, which shall include a legal description
of the property to be served, including address and assessor's parcel number; and submission of complete plans showing the number and type of
billing units to be connected to the sewer system.
2. Approval by the building and zoning department of the completed building permit application and plans in accordance with sanitation department
design and construction standards, as amended.
3. Payment of the connection fee charges for the number andtype of billing units shown on the plans.
4. Payment of connection fee charges for all billing units on the property for which charges were not previously paid.
5. Payment of all delinquent charges related to that property for sewer charges, emergency relief, and lien or lien release recording and processing,
interest penalties and other charges.
For the number of ERUs calculated from the number and type of billing units shown on the plans submitted with the building permit application,
connection fee charges for connection shall be due and payable in advance, and at the rate pursuant to the system summary of rates and charges.
The department will keep a record of the total number of billing units or ERUs for which each user has paid connection fee charges and a record of
the type or location of any billing units upon the user's land. Before a user installs billing units or ERUs in addition to those for which charges have
been paid, a tenant improvement permit for the additional billing units or ERUs must be obtained from the building and zoning department.
It is unlawful for any person, without first satisfying city ordinances and the building and zoning permit issuance process, to connect or otherwise use
department facilities. The department may at any time, but is not obligated to, inspect the billing units located upon any user's land for the purpose of
calculating ERUs which have been installed. Connection fee charges for billing units or ERUs in addition to the type for which charges have been
paid are due and payable at the rate in effect at the date of discovery by the department of such additional billing units or ERUs. Penalties at the
maximum amount permitted by law shall be added to the amount due when connection fee charges are not paid prior to installation of additional
billing units pursuant to applicable sections of Nevada Revised Statutes 318. Additional ERUs shall be billed to the legal owner of the property.
B. Abandonment Of Project: For projects which will be connected to facilities, if "construction", as defined by the city, is not commenced within one year
from date of issuance of the building permit, or if construction is discontinued for a period of one year, the project shall be deemed to have been
abandoned and any subsequent proposal to resume construction shall be treated as a new project. In the event of abandonment of a project, prepaid
connection fee charges shall be refunded proportionate to the extent of completion of construction or installation of the billing units paid as determined
by the department, upon written request of the owner. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff.5-20-1999)
3-3-5: CALCULATION OF CHARGES:
A. Schedule Of ERUs: The number of ERUs from which all charges will be calculated shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set forth below:
SCHEDULE
Customer Class Billing Unit ERU
Residential:
Single-family Each dwelling
unit
1.00
Trailer estates* Each trailer lot
1.00
Multiple-residential Each dwelling
unit
0.70
Other Each dwelling
unit
1.00
Commercial And Other:
Trailer courts* Each trailer
space
0.70
Hotel and motel Each room 0.60
Plus fixtures outside
of rooms
Each fixture 1.50
Casino Each fixture 1.50
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 175/565
Restaurant Each fixture 1.33
Business Operations Separately Rated:
Type A-Includes dry cleaners, markets with garbage disposals, bars/taverns with food sales, motor vehicle sales with
automated wash facilities
Each fixture 1.00
Type B-Includes bars and taverns, retail sales, drugstores, service stations, food sales without cooking facilities, miscellaneous
businesses not separately rated
Each fixture 0.65
Type C-Includes offices,
office warehouses,
laundromats, maintenance
and repairs and theaters
Each fixture 0.45
Type D-Includes beauty and
barbershops, and all types
of medical or dental clinics
Each fixture 0.25
School, both public and private
facilities**
Each student 0.10
Hospital Each bed 1.20
Convalescent and rest homes Each bed 0.75
Church Each fixture 0.50
Laundry and car washes+
(annual water use) 0.85 = Total ERUs
90,000 gallons
Large commercial*** +
(annual water use) = Total ERUs
90,000 gallons
* Trailers which contain more than one dwelling unit shall be classedt as multiple-residential.
** The number of students from which the number of ERUs shall be calculated shall be the average daily attendance for the twelve (12) month period
ending June 30 of each year, where reporting of such information is required by the state. Should the information not be available, ERUs shall be
calculated by the number of full time students for which the school is licensed by Clark County, if licensed, or the number of full time students which the
school is designed to accommodate, if not licensed.
*** Where application of this definition would create an inequity; i.e., where substantial quantities of water used are not returned to the sewer, the
discharger can petition the city council to reduce annual water use quantities (for the purpose of computing ERUs) to that portion which is estimated to be
discharged to the sewer system.
+ Customers in these classes must have meters on all sources of water.
Customer Class Billing Unit ERU
Swimming pools, including nonresidential spas, hot tubs and jacuzzis.
30,000 gallons and less 0.10
30,001 gallons to 99,999 gallons 0.25
100,000 gallons to 149,999 gallons 0.50
150,000 gallons to 199,999 gallons 0.65
200,000 gallons to 249,999 gallons 0.85
250,000 gallons to 299,999 gallons 1.00
300,000 gallons or more; for each
additional 50,000 gallons or fraction
thereof, in this category add
0.25
All nonresidential decorative fountains 0 .10
To calculate total ERUs, multiply the number of billing units by the ERU factor for the applicable customer category.
Examples:
1 Single-family home x 1.00 per dwelling unit = 1.00 ERU
8 Multiple-residential apartments x 0.70 per dwelling unit = 5.60 ERUs
20 Laundromat fixtures x 0.45 per plumbing fixture = 9.00 ERUs
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 176/565
10 Fixtures in dental office x 0.25 per plumbing fixture = 2.50 ERUs
B. Definitions: The following definitions apply to the customer classes set forth above:
CASINO: A place where the main function is to provide games of chance or gambling devices that are made available for play by the public.
CHURCH: A structure primarily used for religious services by a religious organization.
CONVALESCENT AND REST HOMES: Establishments used or designed to provide personal and healthcare supervision to convalescents, invalids,
aged or infirm persons.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters for one family and having facilities for the preparation of food.
FAMILY: One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FIXTURE: A plumbing device or appliance that is permanently connected to the hot or cold water supply system, or both, and that is connected to
the wastewater collection system of the department either directly or through a drain. Examples of the definition of "fixture" include, but are not
limited to, the following (each of these examples is considered to be one fixture):
Bathtub (with or without overhead shower)
Bedpan washer
Bidet
Clothes washing machine
Combination sink and tray, with or without food
Dipwell
Dishwashing machine
Disposal unit
Faucet head in conjunction with a floor drain*
Kitchen sink
Laundry (1 or 2 compartments)
Lavatory
Pot filler (with adjacent trough)
Shower stall (domestic)*
Showers (group) per head*
Sink
Steam table
Urinal
Urinal trough (each 2 foot section)
Wash sink
Water closet, tank operated or valve operated
Water supply outlet in conjunction with drain
Wok
*Faucet heads or shower heads that flow into a single drain.
Devices and appliances expressly excluded from the definition of "fixture" are contained in, but not limited to, the following list:
Air conditioner
Boiler
Coffee urn
Drinking fountain
Garbage disposal unit
Glass filler
Ice machine
Refrigerator
Soft drink machine
Water softener
X-ray machine
HOSPITAL: An establishment staffed and equipped to provide diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness or injury and which provides twenty four
(24) hour professional nursing services under the direction of physicians.
HOTEL: A structure containing two (2) or more rooms, each of which is designed or used for sleeping quarters for one family and contains one or
more fixtures.
LARGE COMMERCIAL: An establishment of single ownership or operation which uses more than two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gallons of
water per day and does not otherwise fall under any of the other user classifications.
LAUNDRY: An establishment where clothing is washed for remuneration by the employees or agents of the establishment.
MULTIPLE-RESIDENTIAL: A structure or trailer containing two (2) or more dwelling units under one ownership.
PERSON: An individual, not a partnership or corporation.
RESTAURANT: A place which is not a part of a hotel, which has cooking facilities and whose primary business is serving food to the public. A
restaurant may or may not include a bar/tavern.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 177/565
SCHOOL: An establishment, whether public or private, in which is offered a full time academic, vocational or technical course of study or other
educational services, whether elementary, secondary, or post secondary, and includes childcare facilities.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A structure or trailer containing only one dwelling unit and each individually owned unit in a structure containing two
(2) or more dwelling units.
TRAILER: A vehicular structure which is built on a chassis or frame, which is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation and which
may be used as living quarters for persons, whether drawn by a motor vehicle or propelled by its own power.
TRAILER COURT: A place which is used or intended for use to park two (2) or more trailers for occupancy as living quarters for persons for less than
thirty (30) days.
TRAILER ESTATES: A place which is used or intended for use to park two (2) or more trailers for occupancy as living quarters for persons for thirty
(30) days or more.
C. Authority Of Director To Make Changes:
1. All commercial user classifications shall be based on the primary use of the structure as determined by the department. The department may use the
classification of the business license issued by the department of business license in determining the primary use.
2. The department director shall have the authority to change the customer class, change the number of ERUs, or change the number or type of billing
units applicable to any user, or adjust charges or establish credit against future charges, if the user demonstrates that the customer class, the
number of ERUs, the number or type of billing units or the charges were not in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 51, 6-14-89, eff. 7-1-89; amd. Ord.
219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-6: ANNUAL SEWER CHARGES:
A. Each user shall pay sewer service charges according to the following:
Annual sewer charge = number of ERUs times unit rate per ERU plus annual service charge.
B. The unit rate per ERU and the annual service charge shall be reflected in the department's schedule of charges and shall be in such amounts as
established by the city council by resolution, and may be changed from time to time by resolution. A current sanitation rate schedule shall remain on file
in the office of the city clerk.
C. Revenue generated through sale of effluent and/or other treatment related byproducts from an environmental protection agency grant funded treatment
works will be used to offset costs of O and M plus R. (Ord. 51, 6-14-1989, eff. 7-1-1989)
D. Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill or in a mailed statement, of that portion of the bill attributable to the costs of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the sewer system. (Ord. 83, 3-17-1992; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-7: EMERGENCY RELIEF QUALIFICATION:
A user who performs the following becomes eligible for the emergency relief rate on the date determined under subsection B of this section:
A. Demonstrates that the structure located on the user's land has been damaged or destroyed so that ninety percent (90%) or more of the total ERUs
cannot reasonably be used to contribute water to the department's treatment works. The user shall provide, upon request, a copy of a fire or demolition
report or other appropriate documentation to substantiate the user's claim.
B. Upon demonstration of the user's claim to the satisfaction of the department, the account shall be removed from service effective the last day of the
month in which damage or demolition occurred. The user will be required to pay the per ERU per fiscal year charge for AWT debt service and the
service charge.
C. The structure on the user's land will be returned to service when twenty percent (20%) of the repairs are determined to have been completed. The
ERUs will be returned to service in ten percent (10%) increments until the repairs are completed, at which time one hundred percent (100%) of the
ERUs will again be chargeable. (Ord. 51, 6-14-1989, eff. 7-1-1989)
3-3-8: BILLING AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Advance Quarterly Billings: Sewer charges shall be billed in advance of the service and on a quarterly basis to all existing users on record with the
department. The billing periods are established to reflect the quarterly recovery costs, and the advanced billing is generally on June 25, September 25,
December 26, and March 25 of each year. At its discretion, the department may vary these billing dates.
B. User Not Of Record: Users who are not of record during the beginning of the normal quarterly billing period defined in subsection A of this section, will
be billed on a prorated level of service after any of the following, whichever occurs first, and to the end of the quarterly billing period, less fifteen (15)
days for processing and notification allowance:
1. The department's receipt of a certificate of occupancy;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 178/565
2. After the residence or location has become occupied; or
3. When water service is established to the location by the Virgin Valley water district.
C. Council Right To Modify Charges: Payment does not constitute a contract for service for the entire fiscal year. The city council retains the right to modify
the sewer charges at any time in accordance with applicable law.
D. Residential Users; Payment Through Association:
1. Any number of residential users may elect to be billed and to pay through an association, property manager or other agent.
2. The association, property manager or other agent must submit to the department a list of the residential users represented, covenants, conditions
and restrictions as recorded, and a surety bond or cash deposit in the amount of one-fourth (1/4) of the total charges for all represented users.
If a cash deposit is submitted, the department will not hold the deposit in the user charge fund or pay interest on the deposit. The deposit is
refundable during the first quarter following one year of timely payment, provided the association requests such refund in writing. The deposit is not
an advance payment of any charges imposed under this chapter. If a surety bond is submitted, it shall be executed by a surety insurance company
qualified to do business in the state. The bond shall run to the department as obligee and provide that the association, property manager or other
agent will comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of thischapter and will make payments in a timely manner required under subsection D3
of this section on behalf of all represented users. The bond shall further provide that in the event the penal sum is not paid within sixty (60) days after
demand by the department, the department will file suit to collect the penal sum. If judgment is entered in favor of the department, the surety will pay
all attorney fees, costs and expenses incurred by the department in securing the judgment. No cash deposit or surety bond is required if the
association, property manager or other agent demonstrates that the charges for the users represented have consistently been paid in a prompt and
timely manner for the preceding fiscal year.
3. Upon compliance with all of the requirements of subsection D2 of this section, the association, property manager or other agent will be billed in
advance for the quarterly billing. Failure of the association, property manager or other agent to pay the amount billed within thirty (30) days after
presentation of the bill shall constitute an election by the represented users to be billed and to pay their charges (including the account service
charge) on an individual basis. The department will apply the cash deposit or the proceeds of the surety bond toward payment of the charges due.
E. Bills Due; Delinquency:
1. Payment Required: Bills are due and payable upon presentation and shall be conclusively deemed to have been presented five (5) days after
mailing. The department cannot guarantee receipt of any bill, and failure to receive a bill does not relieve a user of the obligation to pay.
2. Delinquent Bills, Penalty: Bills shall be delinquent on the thirtieth day after presentation and shall be assessed a five dollar ($5.00) penalty.
Delinquent bills not paid within sixty (60) days of presentation are subject to lien and will be assessed a ten percent (10%) monthly penalty until paid
in full in addition to other application fees and charges.
3. Notice Of Lien: The department may cause a notice of lien to be recorded at any time after a bill has become delinquent. The department shall
cause a release of lien to be recorded after it has received payment of the amount for which the lien was claimed, which shall include the cost of
recording the notice of lien and release of lien, plus a five dollar ($5.00) service charge.
4. Discontinue Service For Nonpayment Of Bill: If a bill is delinquent for a period in excess of sixty (60) days, the department may disconnect service
after notice and hearing. The cost of disconnection and reconnection shall be paid before service to the property is restored. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff.
7-1-1989)
5. Request For Disconnection Of Water Service For Nonpayment Of Sanitation Bill: The city sanitation department will request the Virgin Valley water
district to disconnect water service to a city served location when the city sanitation department has not been paid for sanitation services to such
location for ninety (90) days or longer. Upon receipt of such a request to disconnect water service from the city sanitation department, the district will
send a notice with its next billing to such address, notifying the users that the water service to the property will be disconnected if city sanitation
department fees are not paid within twenty five (25) days and the user will be responsible for all reconnect fees to the subject property caused by the
interruption of water services.
F. User Responsible For Cost Of Increased Discharge: Each user who discharges pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent
from the treatment works, shall pay for the increased cost. (Ord. 83, 3-17-1992; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999; Ord. 255, 7-16-2001)
3-3-9: FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM MAINTAINED:
The department shall maintain a financial management system and prepare an annual audit in accordance with applicable federal laws and Nevada
Revised Statutes. The financial management system shall provide at minimum, a biennial cash flow projection of user charge revenue and operation,
maintenance and replacement expenses. The department will review the user charge system and revise user charge rates biennially as necessary to
ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the cost of O&M+R and that the system continues to provide for the proportionate distribution
of O&M+R costs among users and user classes. Additionally, the department shall maintain accurate account records including revenues by source
received, the application of those revenues, and all financial transactions. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989)
3-3-10: CONNECTION FEE:
A. Schedule Of Charges: The department's schedule of charges shall be in such amounts as established by the city council by resolution, and as modified
from time to time by resolution. A current sanitation rate schedule shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk.
B. Connection Fee: Any developments causing an impact on the sewer system will be required to pay a connection fee. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989;
amd. 1991 Code; Ord. 83, 3-17-1992; Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 179/565
3-3-11: ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS:
A. Sanitation Director:
1. Administer Provisions: The sanitation director shall administer the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise specified herein, and for such purpose
shall have the powers of a peace officer.
2. Delegation Of Powers: Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the sanitation director or any other public officer, the power may
be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of said officer or a person authorized by said officer.
3. Exception Granted: The sanitation director may grant an exception to any requirement of this chapter if he finds that literal compliance with such
provision is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions in no way the fault of the person requesting such exception and that the
purposes of this chapter will be accomplished and public safety secured by an alternative construction or procedure.
B. City Council: The city council members are hereby designated officers of the department, authorized and directed to take all action necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-12: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Main Sewers:
1. All main sewers constructed under contract with the city shall meet the requirements of the design standard specifications, unless otherwise
specifically excepted by the sanitation director.
2. All main sewers constructed by any person, including a municipally owned public utility, shall meet the requirements of the standard specifications.
B. House Sewers:
1. Compliance Standards And Codes:
a. All house sewers from the main sewer to the property line, or easement line, constructed under contract with the department shall meet the
requirements of the standard specifications unless otherwise specifically excepted.
b. All house sewers from the main sewer to the property line, or easement line constructed by any person, including a municipally owned public
utility, shall meet the requirementsof the standard specifications.
c. All house sewers from the property line to within twenty four inches (24") of the exterior wall of the building or structure shall meet the
requirements of the uniform plumbing code.
2. Existing House Sewers: The following requirements shall apply to existing house sewers:
a. If the construction of a new house sewer on a lot is to include any portion of an existing house sewer on such lot, such construction shall be
included and accepted only when it meets all the requirements for new house sewers and is of a material acceptable to the department engineer.
b. When it is found necessary to replace any portion of an existing house sewer between the street curb and lot line, all that portion of the house
sewer between these limits shall be replaced to meet the requirements for new house sewers.
c. When it is found necessary to replace any portion of an existing house sewer between the curb and public sewer, all that portion of the house
sewer between these limits shall be replaced to meet the requirements for new house sewers.
3. Trunk Sewer Connections: All house sewers which are to be connected to a trunk sewer shall include a running trap, the type and location of which
shall meet the approval of the department engineer.
4. Unnecessary Bends Or Fittings: All house sewers shall be laid by the most direct route feasible, free of pinched joints, changes of grade or
unnecessary bends or fittings.
5. House Sewer In Undedicated Street: No person shall connect or cause to be connected any sewer which has been or may hereafter be, constructed
in any street, highway, alley, right of way or other public place prior to the dedication and acceptance of such street, alley, right of way or other public
place by the department on behalf of the public, with any public sewer of the department, unless such sewer first mentioned shall have been laid
under the supervision and/or to the satisfaction of the department and in accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
C. Excavations: All excavations shall have sufficient width to allow proper workmanship and permit adequate inspection and shall be supported in the
manner set forth in the rules, orders, and regulations prescribed by the city and the state. Sheet piling and other timbers shall be withdrawn in such a
manner as to prevent caving of the walls of the excavation or disturbance of the sewer pipe.
D. "Y" Or "T" Saddle:
1. The "Y" or "T" saddle shall be installed by cutting a hole in the main line sewer pipe and fitting the saddle snugly in place with heavy 12-gauge
galvanized asphalt painted iron wire bound around the main line pipe and the flange of the saddle. The "Y" saddle shall be placed in the side of the
main line pipe with the "Y" branch upward at approximately forty five degrees (45o) from the horizontal and so as to direct the flow from the house
connection sewer downstream into the main sewer. The "T" saddle shall be placed in the top of the main line sewer pipe. The "T" saddle shall be
used only for the construction of a chimney pipe.
2. After the saddle is in place, an imbedment of cement concrete shall be placed under and around the main line sewer pipe and saddle as shown on
standard drawing in the standard specifications.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 180/565
E. Connection Prohibited Through Adjoining Property:
1. No connection from any building or other structure shall hereafter be made to any public sewer if such connection or any portion thereof be in, under
or upon any lot other than the lot on which such building or structure is located, except a house court or an auto trailer court.
2. If a lot or parcel of land requiring a sewer connection is so situated that access to the public sewer is not possible except across some other lot or
parcel of land, a sewer connection may be placed in a recorded public easement to the lot or parcel of land to be served by such sewer connection.
3. Each building having separate frontage or a public street on which there is a public sewer must be separately connected to the public sewer.
F. Cesspools And Septic Tanks1:
1. Connecting To Public Sewer: No person shall connect or cause to be connected, any cesspool or septic tank to any public sewer or to any house
sewer leading thereto.
2. Abandoned Cesspools, Septic Tanks, Seepage Holes Or Dry Wells: Upon connection of a house sewer to the public sewer, every septic tank,
cesspool, seepage hole or dry well which was not constructed of brick or concrete, and every dry pit privy hole which has been abandoned and
discontinued from use, shall be backfilled solidly with earth to the satisfaction of the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative.
G. Backwater Traps And Valves: In every case where a plumbing outlet or plumbing fixture is installed or located below theelevation of the curb or property
line, an approved type of backwater trap or an approved type of backwater sewer valve shall be installed between the outlet and public sewer in such a
manner as to prevent sewage from flowing back or backing up into any such outlet or plumbing fixture. Every such trap or valve shall be installed in the
basement, or in a box or manhole of concrete, or cast iron, or other material approved by the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized
representative so that it will be readily accessible at all times. The trap or valve shall be placed only in the drain line serving the fixtures that are located
below the elevation of the above mentioned curb or property line and no drainage from fixtures located above this elevation shall pass through such
trap or valve.
H. Interceptors:
1. Capacity Interceptors: Every interceptor shall be of proper design and of an adequate size to prevent sand, silt, grit, mineral material, petroleum,
solvent, grease or oil from entering the sewer. All interceptors shall be designed in accordance to the uniform plumbing code, chapter 10, as
amended and adopted by the city council.
2. Interceptor Shall Retain Residuum: Every interceptor shall be so constructed and arranged that flowing wastes will not wash out or carry away any of
the grease, sand or petroleum solvents previously collected in such interceptors. The sanitation director, or his designee, authorized representative
or inspector may require screens to be placed in interceptors to prevent rags from entering the public sewer.
3. Existing Interceptors: Existing interceptors which are found upon inspection to be of inadequate size or of improper design shall be revised as
directed by the sanitation director, his designee or authorized representative, within thirty (30) days after notice upon penalty of immediate
disconnection from the sewer and fined as provided in section 3-3-17 of this chapter. Notice of inadequate interception facilities shall be given by
registered mail and shall be deemed effective as of the fifth day after receipt of said notice.
4. Special Type Of Interceptor: In the event a special type of interceptor is required to adequately protect the sewer, a competent engineer shall be
retained to fully investigate the processes at the plant and provide adequate facilities for the retention of undesirable wastes by interceptors or other
suitable means. The proposed design shall be submitted to the sanitation director, his designee or authorized representative for his approval prior to
installation and connection to the sewer.
5. Testing Interceptors: The sanitation director, his designeeor his authorized representative may adopt, in writing, such test requirements as he finds
necessary to determine the collecting efficiency of various types and kinds of interceptors and to establish the rate of flow, grease or sand retention
capacity or other rating thereof. The sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative may revise from time to time as he finds
necessary, such test requirements.
I. Special Structures: All industrial liquid waste pretreatment plants, grease interceptors, sand interceptors, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping
plants or ejectors, septic tanks, cesspools, dry wells, dilution chambers, and neutralization tanks shall be constructed in accordance with the uniform
plumbing code unless otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-13: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Discharge Of Objectionable Materials:
1. Prohibited Discharges: Except as otherwise provided by this section, it shall be unlawful to place, deposit or discharge, or to cause, suffer or permit
to be placed, deposited or discharged, either directly or indirectly, into any public sewer of the department or into any house sewer connection there
within said department, or on or upon any street, alley or public place, or on or upon any private property or any other place in said department in
such a manner that will be permitted to run into any public sewer or house sewer, any of the following substances:
a. Any oil, petroleum, naphtha, liquid asphaltum or petroleum product or any fatty matter, rags, sand, earth or stone dust.
b. Dead animals, fish, fruit or vegetable matter in any form except garbage deposited into the sanitary sewer by means of garbage grinders as in this
chapter provided.
c. Any refuse or industrial liquid waste other than domestic sewage that will not readily disintegrate in the sewage treatment plant or that will cause or
tend to cause obstructions in the sewer system or sewage treatment plant, or interfere or tend to interfere with the efficient and successful
operation of said system or said plant, or cause a potential hazard or objectionable odor.
d. Any chemicals or waste destructive to masonry.
e. Grease, except in quantities commonly contained in domestic sewage.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 181/565
f. Any effluent of a temperature exceeding one hundred fortydegrees Fahrenheit (140oF). (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989)
g. Any radioactive waste except where special permit has been granted by the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative, and
in types and amounts as specified from time to time by the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative. Permission to
discharge radioactive waste shall be terminated immediately at the discretion of the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized
representative, if in his opinion said discharge constitutes, or may constitute, a public health hazard.
h. Any industrial waste, including, but not limited to, mineral salts, molds or wastes resulting from their manufacture and other products which will
tend to sterilize activated sludge, trickling filter slimes, or slime growth on artificial or natural slow sand filters.
2. Limitations:
a. The following listed material shall not exceed the corresponding limitations for a twenty four (24) hour composite sample of industrial liquid waste
discharged to the sanitation department:
pH (units) 6.0 - 8.5
DO Not less than 1 mg/l
BOD Not more than 250 mg/l
SS Not more than 250 mg/l
P (as P) Not more than 4 mg/l
N (as p) Not more than 4 mg/l
SO4 Not more than 400 mg/l
COD Not more than 300 mg/l
TDS Not more than 1500 mg/l
Cl (Chloride) Not more than 300 mg/l
Cl (Chloride) Not more than 0.5 mg/l
Arsenic Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Barium Not more than 1.00 mg/l
Boron Not more than 1.00 mg/l
Cadmium Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Chromium Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Copper Not more than 1.00 mg/l
Iron Not more than 10.00 mg/l
Lead Not more than 0.10 mg/l
Manganese Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Mercury Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Selenium Not more than 0.10 mg/l
Zinc Not more than 5.00 mg/l
Oil and grease Trace
Chlorinated phenol Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Pesticides:
Aldren Not more than 0.02 mg/l
Chloradane Not more than 0.005 mg/l
DDT Not more than 0.05 mg/l
Dieldrin Not more than 0.02 mg/l
Endrin Not more than 0.001 mg/l
Heptachlor Not more than 0.02 mg/l
Lindane Not more than 0.01 mg/l
Mathoxychoir Not more than 0.04 mg/l
Tosaphene Not more than 0.001 mg/l
Herbicides:
2, 4, D plus Not more than 0.1 mg/l
2, 4, 5, T plus Not more than 0.1 mg/l
2, 4, 5 T.P. Not more than 0.1 mg/l
Radioactivity Pc/l
Gross beta 1000
Radium 226 3
Strontium 90 10
b. Holding reservoirs may be required by the department of the dischargee at the dischargee's expense to permit examination of the wastes by the
department prior to discharge.
3. Reduce BOD: Before any person may discharge alkalis, acids or other corrosive or harmful wastes into the public sewer, he shall reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand and control the pH to the extent which the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative finds
adequate, taking allcircumstances into consideration.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 182/565
4. Connection To Public Sewer Restricted: Except as provided in subsection A5 of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain
any connection with any part of the public sewer for the purpose of discharging sewage or waste which contains any of such objectionable
substances mentioned in this section.
5. Permit To Connect:
a. Whenever any person desires to make or maintain any connection with any part of the public sewer for the purpose of discharging sewage or
waste which contains any of such objectionable substances mentioned in this section, a permit must be issued by the sanitation director, his
designee or his authorized representative.
b. Said permit shall be revocable whenever it shall appear to the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative that the holder
thereof has violated any provision of this chapter, or when such intercepting appliance does not prevent such objectionable substance or
substances from entering the public sewer. Said permit shall be revoked by registered mail to the permittee at the address set forth in said permit.
Said permit shall be deemed revoked as of the fifth day after receipt of said notice.
c. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit issued pursuant to this subsection to fail to maintain such appliance in a satisfactory working
condition.
d. Permits issued under this subsection shall be nontransferable.
e. Before granting a permit to any applicant to discharge any industrial liquid waste or industrial sewage in the public sewer, the sanitation director,
his designee or his authorized representative shall determine either that the waste is one which will not damage or destroy the public sewer or
cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of maintenance of the public sewer or retard or inhibit the treatment of the sewage, or is one that can
be made acceptable by pretreatment.
B. Rain And Surface Water Prohibited:
1. No person shall connect or cause or permit to be connected any roof drain, yard drain or other conduit used for carrying off rain or surface water,
with any public sewer or house sewer leading thereto.
2. No person shall cause or permit any indirect connection to the public sewer or house sewer leading thereto by means of which rain or surface waters
are permitted to enter said public sewer without written permission from the sanitationdirector, his designee or his authorized representative.
C. Unpolluted Waters:
1. Unpolluted waters from swimming pools shall be discharged into public sewers or house sewers leading thereto only during the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Pacific Standard Time.
2. Unpolluted water from refrigeration systems, air conditioning systems or industrial cooling operations shall not be discharged into public sewers,
house sewers or house connections leading thereto, unless such waters first mentioned are connected in a manner that meets all the requirements
of the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative. The sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative may
adopt, in writing, other requirements deemed necessary for the disposal of waters if, in his opinion, their continued discharge to the public sewer
constitutes or may constitute a hazard.
D. Authority To Stop Overflow: Whenever it shall come to the attention of the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative that sewage
is overflowing from any plumbing fixture which is below manhole grade in street or right of way due to the backing up of sewage in the public sewer, or
due to pressure in the public sewer, or due to any cause whatsoever, except a temporary stoppage in any such plumbing fixture, said sanitation
director, his designee or his authorized representative may order and require that a backwater trap or backwater sewer valve, required by subsection 3-
3-12G of this chapter, be installed to prevent such overflow.
E. Discharge Garbage:
1. Garbage resulting from the preparation of any food or drink prepared and served or proposed to be served on the premises may be ground and
discharged into the public sewer upon approval of the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative as to the fineness of content
determined by analysis made with United States standard sieves and based on drained weights in accordance with the following: no less than forty
percent (40%) shall pass a no. 8 sieve; not less than sixty five percent (65%) shall pass a no. 3 sieve; not less than one hundred percent (100%)
shall pass a one-fourth inch (1/4") screen.
2. The method of discharge permitted under this subsection shall be by flushing with water directly into a trapped outlet into the house plumbing leading
to the public sewer. The sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative may limit the permissible quantity of garbage to be
disposed of through garbage grinders.
F. Automobile Washing Areas: No person engaged in washing motor vehicles or other equipment, exclusive of or incidental to any other business, shall
permit any water or effluent from such operation to flow into any public sewer or house sewer unless the washing area is equipped with an approved
interceptor. Such washing area shall be roofed over and be so constructed as to prevent any water from flowing over any street, public property or any
storm or surface water from entering any public sewer.
G. Cellar And Shower Drainage: Cellar drains and showers in basements or yards shall be protected to prevent the admission of sand, detritus and storm
and surface water into the public sewer or into any house sewer leading thereto. When necessary, in the opinion of the sanitation director, his designee
or his authorized representative such appurtenances shall be equipped with an approved interceptor.
H. Steam Exhaust And Boiler Blow Off: No person shall cause or permit the exhaust from any steam engine, steam traps or the blow off from any boiler to
be discharged directly into any public sewer or into any house sewer leading thereto. Such exhaust or blow off shall first be discharged into a watertight
sump which may, in turn, be connected to the public sewer.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 183/565
I. Cesspools And Privies2:
1. Cesspools Prohibited:
a. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain or suffer, or permit to be used or maintained, upon
any premises owned, controlled or occupied by him or it, any cesspool when a public sewer is, and for sixty (60) days has been, available to such
premises.
b. For the purpose of this subsection, a public sewer shall be deemed available to any premises if it shall be in the street, alley or easement within
four hundred feet (400') of said premises. In the application of this subsection, any rear portion of any lot, regardless of the matter of ownership,
shall be deemed to be a part of the premises included within the lot as shown by the recorded subdivision of which it is a part. Should any sewer in
front of any premises be of insufficient depth to serve the rear portion of such lot by gravity, any person desiring to install plumbing thereon shall
make provision for conveying sewage therefrom to the public sewer by pumping or by transmission to some other public sewer; it being the intent
hereof that when any portion of the department has been sewered, cesspools therein shall be prohibited, even though it may not be physically
possible to provide gravity sewer service.
2. Privies: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained
at or upon any premises in the department owned, occupied or controlled by him or it, any privy or dry closet for the reception of human excrement or
fecal matter. It is not the intent of this subsection to govern or control the use of temporary privies or chemical toilets used for the convenience of
workers on construction projects or other temporary like projects.
J. Laundries To Be Connected With Sewers: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use or suffer or permit to be
used in the department for the purpose of a laundry or wash house, any building or premises unless the same shall be connected with a public sewer,
or to convey or suffer or permit to be conveyed, any slops, wash water or refuse substance from any laundry or wash house within said department into
any sink, cesspool, pit, or on the ground, or in any manner disposing of same except by conducting the same into a public sewer, provided such sewer
is available as stated in subsection I1 of this section. Where no such public sewer is available, such wastes shall be discharged into a cesspool
constructed according to requirements of the uniform plumbing code.
K. Flushing Sewer Connection: Every industrial waste pretreatment plant shall be equipped with an adequate freshwater supply easily available for diluting
and flushing, and all sewer connections shall be thoroughly flushed after discharge of each batch of industrial liquid wastes.
L. Maintenance Of Industrial Waste Pretreatment Facilities: Every industrial waste pretreatment facility shall be adequately maintained to accomplish its
intended purpose. Abandonment or failure to properly maintain such equipment shall be cause for immediate revocation of the industrial connection
sewer permit and disconnection from the public sewer.
M. Interceptors:
1. Cleaning Interceptors: Every interceptor shall be cleaned by the operator thereof as often as necessary to prevent objectionable materials from
entering the public sewer.
2. Inspection Of Interceptors Or Other Installations: The sanitation director, his designee, authorized representative or inspector may make inspections
at any reasonable time of all interceptors, or other installation be used and maintained as required by this chapter and be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and may prosecute any person managing, operating or having control of any such premises, or portion thereof, for failing, refusing or
neglecting to comply with the provisions of this chapter, using the penal provisions of this chapter for any such prosecution.
N. Maintenance Instructions: The sanitation director, his designee, authorized representative or inspector may inspect, as often as he deems necessary,
every sewage pumping plant, industrial liquid waste pretreatment plant, house sewer, interceptor, dilution basin, neutralization basin, backwater trap or
valve, or other similar appurtenances to ascertain whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
All persons shall permit the sanitation director, his designee, authorized representative or inspector to have access to all such facilities at all reasonable
times.
O. Removal Of Or Damage To Sewer: No person shall remove or cause to be removed, or damage or cause to be damaged, any portion of any public
sewer, or any house sewer in a public easement, or use or cause to be used or cause to be taken, any water from any sewer or flushing apparatus for
any use whatever.
P. Manholes:
1. Opening Manholes: No person shall open or enter, or cause to be opened or entered, any manhole in any public sewer, to dispose of garbage or
other deleterious substances or storm or surface waters, or for any other like purpose.
2. Dumping Cesspool Effluent: Cesspool effluent which originates within the department and does not contain concentrations of industrial liquid wastes,
oil, greases or other deleterious substances may be dumped into certain specific manholes when permission in writing is secured from the sanitation
director, his designee or his authorized representative. No person shall dump cesspool effluent in any manholes other than those designated by the
sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative, nor do so without permission in writing. Such permission may be granted only upon
application in writing by a person engaged in the business of disposing of such effluent. Such application shall state the street address of each
location from which such effluent is to be obtained. The permit shall give the date, time and location of the manhole to be used. The sanitation
director, his designee or his authorized representative may refuse to grant such permission to any person who fails to comply with provisions of this
subsection.
3. Cleaning Manholes: When cesspool effluent is dumped into a specified manhole under permission from the sanitation director, his designee or his
authorized representative, it shall be discharged through a pipe or hose in such a manner that none of the effluent shall be left adhering to the sides
or shelf of the manhole, and if any such effluent is inadvertently allowed to adhere to the sides or shelf of the manhole, the manhole shall be
thoroughly cleaned with clear water. This subsection shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any devices or
safeguards onexisting facilities unless authorized in writing by the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 184/565
Q. Maintenance:
1. House Sewers: All house sewers and appurtenances thereto, now existing or hereafter constructed, shall be maintained by the owner of the property
served in a safe and sanitary condition and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof shall be maintained
in good working order.
2. Plants, Interceptors And Other Facilities:
a. The requirements contained in this chapter covering the maintenance of sewage pumping plants, industrial liquid waste pretreatment plants,
screen chambers, interceptors or other appurtenances shall apply to all such facilities now existing or hereafter constructed. All such facilities shall
be maintained by the owner thereof in a safe and sanitary condition and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the
operation of such facilities shall be maintained in good working order.
This subsection shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any devices or safeguards on existing facilities unless
authorized in writing by the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-
27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-14: HOUSE SEWER CLOSING PROCEDURE:
Whenever the use of a house sewer is discontinued by reason of connection to another house sewer or by reason of moving, wrecking or burning of a
building or for any other reason, such house sewer shall be sealed at the property line or easement line or at the public sewer. Whenever the sanitation
director, his designee or his authorized representative shall find that a house sewer has not been sealed as required herein, he shall serve notice and post
the property. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-15: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS; DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
A. Authority To Disconnect; Notification: The sanitation director, his designee or his authorized representative may disconnect from the public sewer any
industrial sewer connection which is constructed or connected without permit or which is used contrary to the provisions of the chapter governing
industrial liquid waste. The sanitation director,his designee or his authorized representative shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner or
occupant of the premises affected by any proposed disconnection and may grant a reasonable time for elimination of the violation.
B. Violator To Reimburse Department For Disconnection: Whenever a house sewer has been disconnected from the public sewer by the sanitation
director, his designee or his authorized representative as provided in subsection A of this section for failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, reconnection shall be made only upon issuance of a permit in writing therefor by the sanitation director, his designee or his authorized
representative. Before such permit is issued, the applicant shall reimburse the department for the cost of the disconnection made, and the sanitation
director, his designee or his authorized representative may require the installation of a manhole for the purpose of measuring the flow, or for making
periodic tests of the wastes from such connection. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. Ord. 219, 4-27-1999, eff. 5-20-1999)
3-3-16: VIOLATOR TO REIMBURSE DEPARTMENT FOR REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
Whenever a house sewer connection permittee or any other person by reason of violation of this chapter causes obstruction, damage or destruction of a
public sewer, he shall reimburse the department for the cost of flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconnection of such sewer made necessary by such
violation within thirty (30) days after the department shall render an invoice for same. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989)
3-3-17: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as provided
in this chapter. (Ord. 51, 6-19-1989, eff. 7-1-1989; amd. 1991 Code)
Chapter 4
TREATED WASTEWATER EFFLUENT FOR BENEFICIAL REUSE
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to add to the city municipal code regarding use of treated wastewater effluent for beneficial reuse to establish civil and
criminal penalties and other matters properly related thereto. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND - 5 DAY (BOD): A standard test used for assessing wastewater strength.
BOUNDARIES: The land area that makes up the city limits of the city of Mesquite.
CITY: City of Mesquite, a consolidated municipality of the state of Nevada.
CITY REPRESENTATIVE: The director of the city of Mesquite sanitation department or his duly authorized representative.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 185/565
COUNCIL: The Mesquite city council.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Mesquite sanitation department.
DIRECTOR: The sanitation department director or designee.
DISSOLVED OXYGEN (DO): Atmospheric oxygen dissolved in water or wastewater.
EFFLUENT: Wastewater, partially or completely treated or in its natural state, flowing out of a treatment process ortreatment plant.
EFFLUENT MANAGEMENT PLAN: A plan for operations, maintenance and control of effluent irrigation facilities that has been reviewed and approved by
the city of Mesquite and the Nevada division of environmental protection (NDEP) in accordance with the NDEP guidance document, dated February 4,
1993, and any subsequent updates.
EFFLUENT WATERING FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES: Use of effluent for compaction and dust control at construction sites that are approved
through the city of Mesquite sanitation department permitting process.
FECAL COLIFORM: A group of bacteria predominantly inhabiting the intestines of man and animals. They are nonpathogenic and are used in the
laboratory as indicator organisms.
IRRIGATION: The application of water or wastewater or both for growing agricultural crops or for landscaping purposes.
PERMIT: A written authorization to transport and discharge treated wastewater effluent within the city limits.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative or the state
of Nevada.
PROJECT SITE: The designated area where treated wastewater effluent is applied for compaction and/or dust control purposes.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The city's storm drainage system that transports storm water to the Virgin River.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids in suspension in wastewater or effluent.
TREATED WASTEWATER EFFLUENT: The wastewater associated with human habitation, domestic, manufacturing, processing or business operation
which has been processed through the Mesquite wastewater treatment facilities and has met all standards for proper disinfection.
URBAN IRRIGATION: Irrigation of golf courses, landscaped areas, parks, playgrounds, highway median strips and any other area accessible to the public.
USER: The person or party that has acquired the permits for the use of effluent for purposes under the terms and requirements of this chapter.
VEHICLE: The means by which treated wastewater effluent is transported to the project site.
WASTEWATER: A combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with groundwater, surface water or storm water that may be present. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-3: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
It is the intent and desire of the city sanitation department to make effluent available for appropriate substitutive beneficial reuse, including spray irrigation.
Each application for use of effluent under this chapter shall be reviewed to consider not only beneficial use, but also the terms and conditions of the city
national pollution discharge and elimination system (NPDES) permit, as well as the policies and regulations of all environmental and regulatory agencies
with interest and jurisdiction in this area. The city retains the right to reserve quantities of effluent for any public or governmental use. (Ord. 118, 1-10-
1995)
3-4-4: EFFLUENT USE PERMIT; OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
The terms and conditions of each issued permit shall provide for the following:
The permit may be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part during its term for cause, including, but not limited to:
A. Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit or of this chapter.
B. Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-5: REGULATORY COMPLIANCE:
Users of effluent shall be obligated to comply with all statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, resolutions and laws pertaining to use of effluent which are
now in effect or which may come into effect during any time that effluent is being used for irrigation in urban or rural areas or effluent watering for
construction purposes. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-6: APPLICATION FOR BENEFICIAL REUSE OF EFFLUENT:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 186/565
A. Parties interested in purchasing effluent must file an application for use with the city stating the intended beneficial use of the effluent, the location of
intended use, the expected date of beginning use, the means of putting the effluent to a beneficial use, and the approximate (within25,000 gallons)
volume of effluent to be used on a daily basis. The city will inform the interested party if there is the required amount of effluent available for use.
B. Upon receipt of notice of availability of effluent, the interested party will be required to file an application with the state engineer of Nevada, requesting a
secondary use permit in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 533. The notice of availability shall be effective for ninety (90) days from the date of
issuance in compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes section 533.440(2).
C. Upon approval of a secondary use permit by the Nevada state engineer, the interested party will be required to file an effluent management plan (EMP)
with the city and the Nevada department of environmental protection describing means of delivery, control, operation and maintenance of its facilities.
The applicant will be granted one year from the time of receiving the secondary use permit, to initiate delivery and use of the effluent. If the applicant
does not take delivery within one year, its application shall be deemed voidable at the city's option. The applicant must comply with all terms and
conditions of the secondary permit. The applicant shall do nothing which would violate or cause the city to violate the terms of its reservoir permit or the
terms of its NPDES permit. The applicant shall be responsible for acquiring any discharge permits required by law and the terms of any such permit
shall be deemed conditions of applicant's use hereunder. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-7: DELIVERY OF EFFLUENT FOR BENEFICIAL REUSE:
It shall be the user's responsibility to provide for the design, installation, ownership and maintenance at user's own expense, of all pumps, pipes, valves,
and other such appurtenances as may be necessary for the conveyance of effluent water from the city wastewater treatment facility site to the point of
delivery at the user's point of use, including applicable easements unless otherwise stated in individual effluent reuse agreements. The design of all
facilities provided by the user shall be subject to review and approval by the city and the Nevada department of environmental protection. The construction
of said facilities shall be in strict accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-8: STORAGE AND USE REGULATIONS FOR IRRIGATION WITH TREATED EFFLUENT:
The following regulations apply to all users of treated effluent for urban or rural irrigation:
A. There shall be no objectionable odors allowed at occupiedbuildings surrounding the area of effluent use.
B. Hours of irrigation for golf courses: Generally, after the last golfer leaves the course to one hour before the first golfer tees off, but in strict accordance
with an EMP approved by the Nevada division of environmental protection. For all other public facilities, irrigation should occur during hours of
nonpublic use. This provision does not apply for the use of effluent with a quality as stated in subsection L1 of this section.
C. Notification to patrons either by posted signs, handouts or information on golf score cards that effluent is being used for irrigation.
D. No standing water permitted (except for established water hazards).
E. Reasonable monitoring of groundwater down gradient from the irrigation site shall be required.
F. Use shall be contained within boundary sites specified in the application.
G. Runoff from irrigation shall be prohibited or properly contained on the application site and discharge to surface waters will not be permitted.
H. The use of effluent for irrigation purposes must be restricted during periods when any meteorological conditions would carry odors or aerosols to nearby
occupied buildings. Spray irrigation shall not be permitted during high wind conditions greater than fifteen (15) mph wind speed. This provision does not
apply to the use of effluent with a quality as stated in subsection L1 of this section.
I. The method of operation shall preclude objectionable odors from being released to the atmosphere when a sprinkler system is first turned on.
J. When storage reservoirs are used, the pump intake shall be designed such that water is not drawn from the surface or bottom, unless city approved
aeration system is utilized.
K. Adequate provision shall be made for maintaining a minimum 2.0 mg/l dissolved oxygen level in any storage reservoir.
L. The quality of effluent that may be used for irrigation purposes must maintain quality levels as stated in the Nevada Revised Statutes section 445.1765
and as described below:
1. Irrigation within one hundred feet (100') of occupied building:
Geometric mean 2.2 cfu (colony forming units) per 100 ml(in any 30 day period)
Single maximum value 23 cfu per 100 ml.
2. Between one hundred (100) and four hundred feet (400'):
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 187/565
Geometric mean 23 cfu/100 ml (in any 30 day period)
Single maximum value 200 cfu/100 ml.
3. Beyond four hundred feet (400'):
Geometric mean 200 cfu/100 ml (in any 30 day period)
Single maximum value 400 cfu/100 ml.
For parks and playgrounds (human contact sites)
Bacterial criteria: (fecal coliform)
Geometric mean 2.2 cfu/100 ml (in any 30 day period)
Single maximum value 23 cfu/100 ml.
M. Comply with all conditions and provisions of any discharge permits required by other government entities.
N. An effluent management plan (EMP) must be submitted for review and approval by the city and the Nevada division of environmental protection and
must be complied with to assure compliance with the above listed conditions. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-9: USE OF TREATED WASTEWATER EFFLUENT FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES:
The following requirements apply to the use of treated wastewater effluent for construction purposes:
A. Vehicles used for hauling and applying treated wastewater effluent shall be equipped with signs and lettering which:
1. Are located on both sides and rear of the vehicle.
2. Are marked prior to issuance of a permit, with contrasting lettering at least two inches (2") high and readable from at least a one hundred foot (100')
distance; and
3. State: "Treated Wastewater Effluent - Avoid Contact".
B. The vehicle transporting treated wastewater effluent shall not spill or leak during transportation.
C. All transportation and usage of treated wastewater effluent shall be restricted to within the boundaries of the city.
D. Treated wastewater effluent shall not be discharged except at the permitted project site as designated for compaction and dust control. No ponding or
runoff shall occur.
E. To prevent treated wastewater effluent from leaving the site or entering the city storm drainage system during contractor street washdowns, potable
water shall be used in accordance with the municipal code.
F. Unused treated wastewater effluent shall be disposed of at the wastewater treatment facility receiving area and shall not be used for any other
purposes.
G. Persons at the project site must be informed, and the project site posted, that treated wastewater effluent is being used and that all persons shall avoid
contact with said treated wastewater effluent.
H. Any spills of treated wastewater effluent require oral notification within two (2) hours of the spill to the city sanitation department and a written report,
detailing the circumstances and probable cause of the spill, within five (5) days of the spill.
I. The permit shall expire on the completion of the construction project. The contractor shall notify the sanitation department in writing when the
construction project is completed.
J. A separate application must be filed with the wastewater treatment facility for each project site and for each vehicle that transports treated wastewater
effluent to each project site.
K. Permits issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable from one vehicle to another and/or from one project site to another.
L. No direct connections are allowed between the vehicle and any part of a domestic (potable) water system, unless the transporting vehicle complies with
the municipal code and approval to use potable water has been granted by the sanitation department director or designee.
M. Prior to connecting to a potable water supply, vehicles used for hauling treated wastewater effluent shall comply with the municipal code and are
required to:
1. Have the vehicle disinfected at the city wastewater treatment facility; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 188/565
2. Possess documentation of disinfection signed by the sanitation department director or designee; and
3. Use of a hose that has not contacted treated wastewater effluent or other contaminants.
N. Penalties for violations of this section are found in this code. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-10: EMERGENCY POWERS:
A. Whenever the director finds that any person is engaged, or is about to engage, in any act or practice which violates any provision of this chapter or
permit, the director may issue an order:
1. Stating the provision or provisions of the ordinance, permit or order alleged to be violated or about to be violated;
2. Stating the facts which constitute a violation thereof; and
3. Stating the necessary corrective action to be taken and, if appropriate, a reasonable time for completing the corrective action.
B. Such remedies and sanctions for the violation of this chapter, or permit or order issued hereunder are cumulative, and the institution of any proceedings
or action seeking any one of such remedies or sanctions does not bar any simultaneous or subsequent action or proceeding seeking any other of such
remedies or sanctions. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-11: VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. The director may seek injunctive relief in the appropriate court to prevent the continuance or occurrence of any act or practice which violates this
chapter, or any permit or order issued hereunder.
B. Any person who violates or aids or abets in the violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any permit or order issued hereunder shall pay a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
C. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection B of this section, the department may recover from such person actual damages to the city resulting
from the violation of this chapter or permit or final order. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
3-4-12: VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Any person who intentionally or with criminal negligence violates this chapter, or permit or order issued hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation, or by
imprisonment in the city jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 118, 1-10-1995)
Chapter 5
PARKS AND RECREATION AREA USE
3-5-1: REGULATIONS:
A. Within the limits of any park or recreational use area, no person shall:
1. Bring in any intoxicating liquors, nor shall any person while in any such area be in possession of any such intoxicating liquors, nor shall any person
drink any intoxicating liquor while in any such area, without the express permission of the city council.
2. Remain, stay or loiter, in any public park between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and four o'clock (4:00) A.M. of the following day,
without the written permission of the director of athletics and leisure services; provided that this provision shall not interfere with a person camping
overnight where such park or recreational use area is explicitly designated to allow camping overnight by the city council or permission for overnight
camping has been granted by the director of athletics and leisure services.
B. Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as a misdemeanor.
C. Except as provided otherwise in title 9, chapter 10 of this code the director of athletics and leisure services may post signs in parks and recreation areas
explaining these provisions and the potential criminal penalties attached. (Ord. 480, 5-13-2014)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
MESQUITE FIRE AND RESCUE DEPARTMENT
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 189/565
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the Fire and Rescue Department of the City. (Ord. 306, 2-4-2005)
4-1-2: FIRE AND RESCUE CHIEF:
A. Established; Appointment: The Manager of the Fire and Rescue Department shall be the Fire and Rescue Chief, who shall be appointed by the City
Council in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The Fire and Rescue Chief serves as an "at will" employee of the City.
B. Compensation: The Fire and Rescue Chief shall receive an annual salary as set from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 448, 10-25-2011, eff. 11-17-
2011)
4-1-3: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
The Fire and Rescue Department shall have the following duties:
A. Fire Calls: It shall be its duty to answer any and all fire calls and do whatever is in its power to minimize the loss of property and life occasioned by fires.
B. Fire Prevention Assistance: It shall be the further duty to assist in the prevention of fires or fire hazards by all means necessary, including establishing a
Fire Prevention Program for the purpose of instilling fire safety awareness to the general public.
C. Recruit, Train Firefighters: It shall also be its duty to recruit and train firefighters to act as auxiliaries to the regularly appointed fire personnel as may be
approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 306, 2-4-2005)
D. Emergency Medical Response: It shall be the duty to serve as the primary and exclusive provider of emergency medical services pursuant to Southern
Nevada Health District Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 306, 2-4-2005; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
E. Other Duties: And all other duties properly pertaining to the above. (Ord. 306, 2-4-2005)
4-1-4: DUTIES OF FIRE AND RESCUE CHIEF:
The Fire and Rescue Chief, or, in his/her absence or inability to act, the Assistant Chief or senior officer of the department, shall have command at all fires,
drills, parades, etc., over all officers, members and employees of the Fire and Rescue Department, and all apparatus and appurtenances of the same.
During any fire or similar emergency, it shall be his/her duty, and is hereby authorized and empowered to take any steps and to perform any act, which, in
his/her judgment, is necessary for the preservation of life and property. The Fire and Rescue Chief is hereby vested with the power and authority to
suspend any subordinate officer or any employee of the Fire and Rescue Department who, during the process of any fire, refuses or neglects to perform
the duties assigned to him. He/she shall, subject to the orders of the City Manager, have full control and general supervision of all fire apparatus at all
times, inspect hydrants and order all drills of the firefighters at such times as he may deem proper. He/she must inquire into the cause of every fire
occurring in the City and keep a record of the same and make a report thereof when requested by the City Manager. He/she shall enforce all fire
ordinances, examine all buildings in the progress of erection, report violations of ordinances relating to the prevention and extinguishment of fires, institute
prosecution for the enforcement of ordinances when necessary and perform such other duties as may, by proper authority, be imposed. (Ord. 306, 2-4-
2005)
4-1-5: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
A. Established: There is hereby established in the fire and rescue department of the city, a bureau of fire prevention, which shall be operated under the
supervision of the fire and rescue chief.
B. Members: The fire and rescue chief shall appoint such other members of the fire and rescue department to be members of the bureau of fire prevention
as shall, from time to time, be necessary.
C. Duties: The duty of the members of the bureau of fire prevention shall be to enforce all laws and ordinances covering the following:
1. The prevention of fires;
2. The storage and use of explosives and flammables;
3. The installation and maintenance of automatic and other private fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment;
4. The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;
5. The maintenance of exits and emergency escapes in buildings and structure used or intended for use by human occupancy;
6. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 190/565
D. Other Powers And Duties: The members of the bureau of fire prevention shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in
the fire prevention code and as shall be covered and imposed from time to time by ordinance. (Ord. 306, 2-4-2005)
4-1-6: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Parking Nearby: The fire chief, in cooperation with the chief of police, shall designate the restricted area for parking adjacent to a fire hydrant, which
prohibited parking shall be a minimum of five feet (5') and such further distance as shall be determined to be reasonably safe, and if a greater distance
than five feet (5') is required, the curb line shall be properly marked. Any person parking a vehicle or placing any other property within the prohibited
parking area next to a fire hydrant shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Fire Hydrants On Private Property:
1. Authority: The city shall be authorized to place fire hydrants on private property on location facing a street whenever it is deemed advisable by the
city council.
2. Easement Required: No fire hydrant shall be placed upon private property without first having secured an easement from the property owner
allowing the fire hydrant to be so placed, and said easement shall specifically indemnify the city for the liability incurred, by so placing said fire
hydrant and shall further free the city from any and all liability from said placement.
3. Conditions For Placement: Fire hydrants shall be placed on private property only under the following conditions:
a. Said fire hydrants are immediately adjacent to a street fifty feet (50') or less in width.
b. There is no available ample fire protection from any other source.
c. The water main serving the street will provide sufficient water to adequately provide for any fire hydrant installed.
4. Laying Of Pipe: In the event fire hydrants are placed as herein contemplated, the city shall lay sufficiently large pipe from the water main to the
hydrant to serve the same. (Ord. 22, 2-14-1985)
4-1-7: FIRE SAFETY REGULATIONS FOR BUILDINGS:
A. Public Buildings: It shall be the duty of the fire chief, subject to the approval of the city council, to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary
for the prevention of fire in theaters, schools, churches and other places of assemblage or public amusements. Such rules and regulations shall be
printed and posted in conspicuous places as designated by the fire chief, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, obstruct or deface the
same. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or person having control of such building to cause and bring about compliance with all rules
and regulations.
B. Dangerous And Defective Structures: Whenever, in the judgment of the fire inspector, any building or structure, or any portion thereof, is deemed
defective or unsafe, and such defect or unsafe condition is such as to create a danger from fire; or whenever the owner or occupant of such buildings
or structure keeps or stores any explosive, combustible, inflammable material, waste or rubbish of any description in such manner that the same
creates a danger from fire, the fire inspector or his deputies shall give the owner, or person having control of such building or structure not exceeding
five (5) days' notice of required changes, alterations or repairs necessary to render the same safe to life and property from fire, and any person refusing
or neglecting to comply with such notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Unoccupied Buildings: Whenever any unoccupied building is not properly secured or enclosed, the fire chief, or his deputies, shall immediately visit the
premises and notify the owner, or person having control of the same, forthwith to secure and enclose the same, and the person so notified as aforesaid
shall, within forty eight (48) hours, comply therewith. (Ord. 22, 2-14-1985)
4-1-8: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES; INSPECTION:
The fire chief or his deputies shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection of the same. (Ord. 22, 2-
14-1985)
4-1-9: INVESTIGATION AFTER FIRE; REPORT; CERTAIN INVESTIGATORS DESIGNATED AS PEACE OFFICERS:
A. The chief, or in his absence, his assistant in charge of the fire shall, after its extinguishment, make a prompt and thorough investigation of the cause of
the fire, the time of breaking out, the amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other
useful information and data available, and record the same in a book kept for that purpose in the office of the department, and shall report the same to
the city council at such time as it may direct.
B. The chief may appoint qualified members of his department to investigate suspected crimes of arson. Investigators so designated shall be peace
officers. (Ord. 441, 11-9-2010, eff. 12-2-2010)
4-1-10: RIGHT OF WAY, FIRETRUCKS:
It is hereby provided that the firetrucks of the city and the cars of members of the fire department of the city shall have the right of way over all other
vehicles of every kind in the city and it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to drive or operate the same closer than five hundred feet
(500') to any firetruck or car of a firefighter during times of fires. (Ord. 22, 2-14-1985)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 191/565
4-1-11: FIRE APPARATUS:
A. Kept In Proper Condition: All engines, hoses and other fire equipment shall be kept at such place or places as the city council shall provide and
designate, and shall be kept in proper condition for immediate use.
B. Interference With Apparatus: Any person who may use or in any way interfere with any of the fire apparatus, without the consent of the chief, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment
not exceeding six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 22, 2-14-1985)
4-1-12: FALSE ALARMS AND PRACTICE RUNS:
All provisions of this chapter shall apply not only to times when the fire department is answering a fire alarm but also when answering false alarms and
while making practice runs. (Ord. 22, 2-14-1985)
4-1-13: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Unlawful Interference With Officers, Apparatus: Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer or firefighter in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in
any manner injure, deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the city, or in any way interfering with the water or its source
of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Combustibles: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the accumulation of empty boxes, waste or other inflammable substance on any premises
within the city limits or carry on any business in or about any premises in such a manner as to endanger such premises or buildings or other building or
premises to danger by fire or explosion.
C. Wilfully Or Negligently Causing Fire: Any person who wilfully or negligently sets on fire, causes to be set on fire or procures to be set on fire, any trees,
shrubs, bushes, grass, undergrowth, cultivated crops or other property on any land, public or private, not his own property, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Throwing Lighted Object From Vehicle: It shall be a misdemeanor to throw from a moving vehicle, or otherwise throw or place any lighted cigarette,
cigar, firecracker, ashes or other flaming or glowing substance which may cause a fire on streets or adjoining property.
E. Driving Over Fire Hose1: It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge or control of any motor vehicle or for anyone driving or operating any
other type of vehicle or to drive the same over any fire hose on any street in this city.
F. False Alarm: Any person who shall, without cause, give an alarm of fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
G. Burning Of Trash: It shall be unlawful to burn trash within the limits of the city except in accordance with the law. (Ord. 22, 2-14-1985)
4-1-14: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PROVIDER:
A. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 268.081, the city fire and rescue department shall be the primary and exclusive provider of emergency
medical services treatment and transportation of the sick and injured for the city.
B. "Emergency medical service treatment and transport" is defined as any public or private agency, organization or business which provides medical care
and treatment and/or transportation to the sick and/or injured via ambulance, aircraft or other such vehicle which requires the use of medically trained
personnel.
C. The fire and rescue department may request mutual aid from other emergency medical service treatment and transportation providers as may be
necessary for specific incidents. (Ord. 306, 2-4-2005)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
COMPACTED: Reduced in volume but not weight by mechanical equipment.
DEAD ANIMALS: All dead animals or parts thereof (including condemned meats), not intended to be used as food for man or animal.
DIRT: Includes loose earth, ashes and manure, which is permitted to accumulate in mounds or piles on property, but does not include sand and gravel to
be used in construction work.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 192/565
GARBAGE: Solid waste, refuse, animal and vegetable matter from a kitchen, market or store, including every kind of refuse, accumulation of animal, fruit
or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends preparation, use, cooling, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS: Apartments and any other collection of two (2) or more residences which are grouped together under the management of one
person, and which do not require separate individual collection of garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals from each residence.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place of business in the city, other than multiple dwellings, to conduct or carry on principally or exclusively any pursuit or
occupation for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Office buildings, clubs, churches, schools, hospitals or other places of similar character.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation owning, controlling or occupying any real property, lot, part of a lot,
or land within the city of Mesquite.
RUBBISH: Old tin and iron cans and containers, old wood and paper boxes, scrap iron, wire, rope, cordage, bottles, bags and bagging, rubber and rubber
tires, scrap automobile bodies and parts thereof, paper, wood shavings, and all used or castoff articles of material, including scrap lumber, plaster,
concrete, brick, cement, glass, other building materials, branches, leaves and yard trimmings.
SCAVENGER: A person, other than the duly authorized agents or contractors with the city, or their employees, in the business of collecting, hauling or
transporting through the streets of the city any garbage, rubbish or dead animals, bones or any noisome or offensive material or matter, for disposal or for
any other purpose.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building or dwelling wherein not more than one family resides or dwells and where no business of any kind is conducted;
limited to single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and other dwellings participating in the ninety (90) gallon automated system. (Ord. 47, 1-26-1989; amd.
Ord. 167, 5-20-1996; Ord. 209, 6-23-1998; Ord. 218, 5-25-1999, eff. 6-17-1999)
4-2-2: GARBAGE CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Containers Provided By The City: The city will provide the necessary containers to be used in connection with the ninety (90) gallon automated
collection system for city residents and others living in the city participating in said system. The city will collect, or cause to be collected, an annual
rental fee for the use of each container. All applicable fees will be billed and collected quarterly. If a container is lost or destroyed, it will be the
responsibility of the resident to replace the container. The purchase price of a replacement container will be prorated after the first year of service at the
rate of a four dollar ($4.00) reduction per year. The containers provided for rental by the city are the property of the city. Commercial containers and
containers for accounts located outside the city, shall be supplied by the city's solid waste contractor and are the property of the city's solid waste
contractor.
B. Size Of Receptacles: The city will provide ninety (90) gallon containers for those participating in the ninety (90) gallon automated collection system. No
person authorized by the city to collect, remove or dispose of refuse within the city shall be required to empty any receptacle not approved by the city.
Account holders are responsible for any damage to ninety (90) gallon containers not caused by the city or city's contractor and are required to keep
ninety (90) gallon containers clean and odor free.
C. Removal Of Contents Of Receptacles: No person shall remove any garbage, rubbish, dirt or dead animals from receptacles after it has been deposited
therein, except the city, its authorized agents or contractors, or their employees.
D. Garbage To Be Placed In Receptacles; Exceptions: All garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals should be placed in a receptacle; however, residents
may bundle tree trimmings, scrap lumber and other rubbish which can be bundled, if securely tied in bundles not to exceed six feet (6') in length, nor
weigh more than seventy five (75) pounds. Those items shall be picked up by the contractor with whom the city has contracted to haul the same, not
less than each month nor more than every two (2) weeks. Any such pick ups shall be deemed special pick ups with charges to be determined by the
contractor on a will call basis.
E. Trash Enclosures: Trash enclosures shall be provided for all developments in nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts in accordance with the
following:
1. Trash enclosures shall be six feet (6') high (plus or minus ±8 inches), constructed of masonry, cement or concrete block and shall have screened
gates. The floor of the trash enclosure shall be a concrete pad which shall extend thirty feet (30') beyond the opening of the trash enclosure.
2. A six foot (6') high cyclone fence with a six foot (6') high solid landscape hedge and/or berm may be substituted in lieu of a wall where appropriate,
with approval by the city council.
3. Clear visibility for all interior drive aisles shall be maintained.
4. Trash enclosures shall be located so as to minimize disturbance to single-family residential development. Trash enclosures shall be at least fifty feet
(50') away from any single-family residential zoning district, unless the adjacent property is undeveloped and the city council determines that the
setback will not fulfill its intended purpose at the present time. (Drawings detailing requirements follow at the end of this section.) Projects requiring
trash enclosures must be designed to city standards and all locations must be approved by the sanitation department before approval of construction
plans.
5. These provisions apply only to solid waste collection accounts not required to participate in the ninety (90) gallon automated collection system. (Ord.
218, 5-25-1999, eff. 6-17-1999)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 193/565
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 194/565
(Ord. 167, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 181, 4-8-1997)
4-2-3: PAYMENT OF CHARGES AND FEES:
A. Charges:
1. Single-Family Residence And Others Participating In Ninety Gallon Automated System: Charges for rental fees, collecting, hauling and disposing of
solid waste, garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals from single-family residences and others participating in the ninety (90) gallon automated
system on a once a week basis shall be established by the city council by resolution and may be changed from time to time by resolution. A current
solid waste collection rate schedule shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk.
2. Multiple Dwellings Not Participating In Ninety Gallon Automated System And Commercial Accounts: The charge for collecting, hauling and disposing
of solid waste, garbage, rubbish, dirt, and dead animals from multiple dwellings not participating in the ninety (90) gallon automated system and
commercial accounts shall be determined by the city's contractor and the account holder pursuant to contract. Ninety (90) gallon automated system
account holders may haul their own normal excess garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals, such as discarded household items or lawn and garden
clippings, to the city landfill free of additional charge. Account holders, other than ninety (90) gallon automated system account holders, may haul
their own normal excess solid waste, garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals to the city landfill subject to payment of an additional yardage fee.
Account holders may arrange with the city's solid waste contractor, for an extra charge to be negotiated with the contractor, to haul excess solid
waste, garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals to the city landfill. Due to the varying needs and requirements of account holders, charges for hauling
excess solid waste, garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals shall be negotiated between the account holder and the city's contractor on a case by
case basis. If the account holder and the city's solid waste collection contractor (the parties) are unable to negotiate a rate for solid waste collection
service, the sanitation director shall determine the rate after considering the position of each party. The decision of the sanitation director will be
issued in writing to the parties. Either party may object to the determination of the sanitation director by filing a written appeal to the city council within
ten (10) days of issuance of the sanitation director's written decision. If such an appeal is submitted to the city council, the decision of the council
shall be binding.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 195/565
3. Persons Living Outside Of City Participating In Ninety Gallon Automated System: Charges for collecting, hauling and disposing of solid waste,
garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals from locations outside the city, whether residential or commercial, shall be established by the city council by
resolution and may be modified from time to time by resolution. A current schedule of solid waste collection charges shall be kept on file in the office
of the city clerk.
B. Billing; Charges Due And Payable; Liens: All charges for single-family residences and for multiple dwellings participating in the ninety (90) gallon
automated system shall be billed in advance on a quarterly basis to all existing users of record with the department. Bills normally will be issued to all
current account holders on March 25, June 25, September 25 and December 26 of each year. At its discretion, the department may vary billing dates.
Any past due charges, including any accrued penalties, shall constitute a debt and obligation of the responsible party. The responsible party includes
the person who opened the account, any person who is listed on the account as a responsible party, the owner of the property, the lessee or renter of
the property, the occupier of the property, or the person who has been given legal control of the property by a court of competent jurisdiction or by
written instrument. The responsible party or parties, and each of them, shall be liable for payment of all accrued charges, penalties and statutory
interest. In addition to liability for any past due charges and accrued penalties, any delinquent account will accrue interest at the statutory rate from the
date the account becomes delinquent until fully paid. Special solid waste pick up by call and charges for such service will be determined by the city's
solid waste collection contractor. Multiple dwellings not participating in the ninety (90) gallon automated system and commercial accounts shall be
charged in accordance with their respective agreements with the city's solid waste contractor to provide solid waste collection service for those
accounts. Any amounts past due, including any accrued penalties and statutory interest, shall constitute a debt and obligation of the responsible party
or parties as defined above and such party or parties shall be liable therefor in a civil action commenced by either the city or the city's solid waste
collection contractor in any court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such charges and penalties. In the event a collection action is filed by
either the city or the city's solid waste contractor to collect past due amounts, including penalties, the city or the city's solid waste contractor is entitled
to receive reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees necessitated in bringing the collection action in addition to past due amounts and penalties.
Also, any amounts past due for more than thirty (30) days, entitle the city to place a lien against the subject property for the amount overdue, any
accrued penalties and any accrued statutory interest which will attach to the subject property until fully paid. (Ord. 167, 5-20-1996)
C. Billing For New Accounts; Automatic Opening Of Accounts: New accounts, including accounts opened by or on behalf of users previously not of record,
opened in the middle of a calendar quarter, will be billed on a prorated rate of service from the date the account is opened through the end of that
calendar quarter. Accounts are automatically opened for billing purposes within fifteen (15) days after:
1. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the subject property;
2. The residence or location becomes occupied; or
3. Water service has been established to the location by the Virgin Valley water district.
D. Effective Date Of Increase In Rates: The city council may increase solid waste collection rates, fees or penalties at any time by resolution. All such
increases in rates, fees or penalties become effective at the beginning of the calendar quarter following adoption of the rate increase resolution by the
city council. Prepayment for service does not exempt a party from payment for any increase in rates.
E. Payment By Homeowners' Association, Property Manager Or Agent:
1. Two (2) or more residential users may elect to be billed and to pay through a homeowners' association, property manager or agent. If this election is
made, the homeowners' association representative, property manager or agent must submit the following items to the sanitation department:
a. A list of the residential users represented by the homeowners' association property manager or agent;
b. A copy of any covenants, conditions and restrictions as recorded which apply to the subject property or properties; and
c. A surety bond or cash deposit in the amount of one-fourth (1/4) of the estimated total charges for all represented users for a calendar year.
2. If a cash deposit is submitted, it may not be used by the account holder to pay any past due amounts or penalties on the account. The city will not
pay interest on any cash deposit. A cash deposit may be refunded after one year of timely payments, upon the written request of the account holder.
3. If a surety bond is submitted, it shall be executed by a surety insurance company licensed to do business in the state. The bond shall run to the
department as obligee and provide that the association, property manager or agent will comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of this
chapter and will make payments in a timely manner on behalf of all represented users. The bond shall further provide that in the event the penal sum
is not paid within sixty (60) days after demand by the department, the department will file suit to collect the penal sum. If judgment is entered in favor
of the department, the surety will pay all attorney fees, costs and expenses incurred by the department in securing the judgment.
4. No cash deposit or surety bond is required if the association, property manager or agent demonstrates that the past service charges for all of the
represented users have consistently been paid in a prompt and timely manner for the preceding fiscal year.
5. Upon compliance with the above requirements, the association, property manager or other agent will be billed in advance quarterly. Failure of the
association property manager or other agent to pay the amount billed within thirty (30) days after presentation of the bill (5 days after it is mailed)
shall constitute an election by the represented users to be billed and to pay their charges (including the account service charge) on an individual
basis. The sanitation department will apply the cash deposit or the proceeds of the surety bond toward payment of charges due.
F. Bills Due; Delinquency:
1. Payment Required: Bills are due and payable upon presentation and shall be conclusively deemed to have been presented five (5) days after
mailing. The department cannot guarantee receipt of any bill, and failure to receive a bill does not relieve a user of the obligation to pay. All account
holders are required to keep the sanitation department advised of their current mailing address for billing purposes.
2. Delinquent Bills; Penalty: Bills shall be delinquent on the thirtieth day after presentation and shall be assessed a five dollar ($5.00) penalty.
Delinquent bills not paid within sixty (60) days of presentation are subject to lien and will be assessed a ten percent (10%) monthly penalty until paid
in full in addition to other application fees and charges.
3. Notice Of Lien: The department may cause a notice of lien to be recorded at any time against the subject property after a bill has not been paid
within thirty (30) days of presentation. The department shall cause a release of lien to be recorded after it has received payment of the amount for
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 196/565
which the lien was claimed, which shall include the cost of the recording the notice of lien and release of lien plus any service charge or penalty
authorized by the city council by resolution, including, but not limited to, incurred and documented reasonable attorney fees and costs. This provision
also applies to commercial accounts for which the city receives a franchise fee from the city's contractor.
4. Request For Disconnection Of Water Service For Nonpayment Of Sanitary/Solid Waste Bill: The sanitation department will request the Virgin Valley
water district to disconnect water service to a city served location when the city sanitation department has not been paid for sanitary/solid waste
service to such location for ninety (90) days or longer. Upon receipt of such a request to disconnect water service from the sanitation department, the
district will send a notice with its next billing to such address, notifying the users that the water service to the subject property will be disconnected if
sanitation department fees are not paid within twenty five (25) days and that the user will be responsible for all reconnect fees to the subject property
caused by the interruption of water services. (Ord. 86, 6-23-1992; amd. Ord. 218, 5-25-1999, eff. 6-17-1999; Ord. 255, 7-16-2001)
4-2-4: USE OF CITY LANDFILL:
A. Garbage Deposited Only At Dump: All garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals collected from the public and private places and premises in the city
shall not be deposited at any place within the city limits, except at a disposal site operated by the city or its authorized contractor. (Ord. 127, 4-8-1995)
B. Free Dumping Of Garbage At Dump: Any resident of the city participating in the ninety (90) gallon automated system, or any other person participating
in the ninety (90) gallon automated system who is not a resident of the city, may dispose of his own normal garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals
generated at his principal residence at any landfill owned or leased by the city without charge in accordance with such rules and regulations as the city
council may from time to time adopt. (Ord. 167, 5-20-1996)
C. Fee For Refuse Originating Within The City: The fees for residential or commercial solid waste collection service shall be established by the city council
by resolution and may be modified from time to time by resolution. A current schedule of charges, fees and penalties for commercial and residential
solid waste collection accounts shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk.
The city's contractor may accept residential solid waste collection accounts within Bunkerville Township and Lincoln County without prior permission of
the city council. The city's solid waste contractor will advise the city council as soon as possible of the establishment of such new Nevada out of
Mesquite residential accounts. Applicants for commercial solid waste collection accounts and all accounts outside the state must obtain the advance
consent of the city council before the city's solid waste contractor may service such accounts. The city council has the authority to permit the city's solid
waste contractor to commence residential solid waste collection service to out of Nevada residential accounts without advance approval by the city
council by resolution. Any such resolution will specify the procedures and limitations for establishment of out of Nevada residential accounts without
advance city council permission. All out of Mesquite accounts require city council approval.
D. Compacted Garbage Deposited At Dump: Any resident or business that disposes of garbage which originates from a commercial source shall pay three
(3) times the normal rate for garbage in the event that garbage is in a "compacted" state, as defined in section 4-2-1 of this chapter, at the time of
deposit in the landfill. (Ord. 86, 6-23-1992)
E. Transporting Garbage In Uncovered Vehicle: Any person hauling and disposing of garbage which is not delivered in a covered vehicle in accordance
with section 4-2-8 of this chapter, or is not properly secured to prevent its being lost in transit shall pay two (2) times the normal rate for garbage or
twice the outside rate for garbage depending on its origin. (Ord. 157, 12-22-1995; amd. Ord. 218, 5-25-1999, eff. 6-17-1999)
4-2-5: REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND WEEDS AND OTHER SPECIFIED ITEMS FROM LOTS; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Duty Of Responsible Person: Every person owning, having charge or control of, or occupying any real property, lot, part of a lot or land abutting on any
street of the city within the developed or inhabited areas of the city, or vacant land adjacent to or in the middle of the developed or inhabited areas of
the city, and anywhere in the city where the fire chief or his designee determines a fire hazard exists, is responsible for keeping such property free of
rubbish, garbage, inoperable vehicles, junk, dirt, weeds more than four inches (4") in height for residential or commercial property and more than
twelve inches (12") for agricultural or unimproved property, and brush. Any person in violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject
to criminal citation at any time and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. A criminal citation for violation
of this section may be issued by the police department, the fire chief or his designee, or the code enforcement officer. The word "weeds", as used
herein, does not include crops or other vegetation which has a legitimate business purpose or use.
B. Notice To Responsible Person: In addition to criminal citation, the fire chief or his designee, or the code enforcement officer may give a responsible
person found to be in violation of the requirements of subsection A of this section a verbal or written notice and directive to clean real property and/or
remove and properly dispose of specified items from real property and, when given, the person or persons given such notice must comply with the
directive and clean the real property and/or remove and properly dispose of specified items from real property as directed within ten (10) days after
receipt of notice, unless a longer period is given to comply within the notice. A written notice and directive will be delivered to a responsible person
personally or mailed to a responsible person by certified mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail at the mailing address for the subject
property or the mailing address or addresses of a responsible person. The written notice must specify the conditions which must be corrected and the
date by which the specified conditions must be corrected.
C. Removal Of Weeds, Garbage Or Other Specified Items:
1. In case of failure, refusal or neglect to comply with a directive to clean real property and/or remove and properly dispose of specified items from real
property as specified in subsection B of this section within the time allotted in the notice and directive given by the fire chief or his designee, the code
enforcement officer, the public works director or his designee, or the planning and redevelopment director or his designee, may cause the cleaning
and/or removal and proper disposal of the specified items and charge the cost to the responsible person or persons and against the subject property.
Upon request of the responsible person or persons after the notice and directions are given, but before the cleanup and/or removal and proper
disposal of specified items from the subject property has occurred, the public works director will provide an approximate estimate of the cost of the
cleanup of the subject property and/or removal and proper disposal of specified items from the subject property.
2. If, after notice has been given as provided in subsection B of this section, a responsible person has not complied with the directive to clean property
and/or remove and properly dispose of specified items from real property, and if the city then elects to clean real property and/or remove and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 197/565
properly dispose of specified items from real property, or if the city contracts with an independent contractor to do so, the cost of cleaning the subject
real property and/or removal and proper disposal of specified items from the subject real property will be charged to the responsible person or
persons and against the subject property until paid. The charge for cleaning real property and/or removing and properly disposing of specified items
from real property, whether accomplished by city staff or by an independent contractor retained by the city, will be one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
the cost of cleaning the subject real property and/or removing and properly disposing of specified items from the subject real property, plus
administrative fee, whichever is greater. If the cleanup and/or removal and proper disposal of specified items is completed by city staff, the charge to
the responsible person or persons and against the subject property will include the salary of city personnel involved for the time involved at each
employee's hourly rate of pay, equipment, materials and administrative fee. If the cleanup and/or removal and proper disposal of specified items is
performed by an independent contractor, the charge to the responsible person or persons and against the subject property will include the amount
charged by the independent contractor for services rendered plus administrative fee. Whether the work is performed by city staff or an independent
contractor, an additional twenty percent (20%) of the costs incurred for personnel, materials and equipment will be added as an administrative fee
payable to the city. All charges billed to a responsible person or persons must be paid within thirty (30) days of the date notice of charge was
personally given or mailed to the responsible person or persons.
3. Any expense incurred by the city for cleaning real property and/or removing and properly disposing of specified items from real property, whether
accomplished by city staff or contracted for by the city, will accrue interest at the statutory rate from the date the cleaning of real property and/or
removal and proper disposal of specified items from real property occurs until fully paid. Additionally, the city may lien the subject property for
payment of the costs incurred by the city in the event the responsible person or persons do not reimburse the city within thirty (30) days of billing.
D. Exceptions: Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit any property owner from using earth combined with broken concrete, stones, caliche or
broken building blocks and/or bricks as fill material for the purpose of bringing to ground level any gully, excavation or depression. Property owners
desiring to fill property in the manner stated above must first secure any required or necessary permits including, but not limited to, building permits or
flood control permits.
E. Hearing: As specified in Nevada Revised Statutes section 268.4122(2), any person receiving a notice and direction to clean real property and/or remove
and properly dispose of specified items from real property, may request and be afforded a hearing before the planning and redevelopment director or
his designee upon written request within the time allotted in the notice to clean real property and/or remove and properly dispose of specified items
from real property. any such timely request for a hearing by the planning and redevelopment director suspends the time given to clean and/or remove
specified items from real property until the hearing is held and the final written decision is issued by the planning and redevelopment director or his
designee. The planning and redevelopment director will render his final written decision as soon as possible after the hearing. Within ten (10) business
days of issuance of the final written decision of the planning and redevelopment director or his designee, any person wishing to appeal the planning
and redevelopment director's final written decision may do so in writing to the city council. Any timely appeal will be calendared at the next public
hearing after it is received, subject to the posting and notice requirements of the Nevada open meeting law. If the decision of the planning and
redevelopment director or his designee is not appealed, then the remaining period given to clean real property and/or remove and properly dispose of
specified items from real property commences at the conclusion of the appeal period. If the decision of the planning and redevelopment director or his
designee is appealed to the city council and the city council does not sustain the appeal, the remaining period given to clean real property and/or
remove and properly dispose of specified items from real property commences unless the city council gives a longer time for the responsible person or
persons to comply. (Ord. 209, 6-23-1998; amd. Ord. 287, 10-22-2003)
4-2-6: ABATEMENT BY CITY; OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR COSTS:
In the event any owner or occupant of any land shall fail, within the time provided in the notice hereinabove mentioned, to remedy the conditions specified
above, the city shall be empowered to enter upon such land and take remedial and corrective action. Any costs incurred in connection with such remedial
and corrective action by the city, or any contractor specifically hired therefor, shall be charged to the responsible person or persons and against the subject
real property until fully paid. (Ord. 209, 6-23-1998)
4-2-7: NONRESIDENT OWNERS; NOTICE:
All of the foregoing provisions for removal of garbage, rubbish, junk vehicles, dirt and weeds more than four inches (4") in height, and brush from land, are
hereby declared to be applicable to land owned by nonresidents of the city, as well as residents; provided, that in the case of nonresidents, the notice
required hereinabove shall be served by posting it upon the land where such rubbish, garbage, junk vehicles, dirt, weeds more than four inches (4") in
height or brush is present or exists, and the same day, mailing a copy thereof, by registered mail, addressed to the current or last known business or
residence address of such nonresident owner; provided, further, that if neither the place of business nor residence address of such nonresident owner is
known, then no mailing shall be necessary. Should the property be occupied, the requirement of notice to nonresident owners may be satisfied by serving
notice on an occupant or controller of the subject property, either verbally or in writing. (Ord. 209, 6-23-1998)
4-2-8: GARBAGE HAULING VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to use any cart or vehicle for the conveyance or removal of garbage or dead animals unless such cart or vehicle is staunch, tight and closely
covered with a wooden, metal or tarp cover so as wholly to prevent leakage, spilling, drifting or blowing; or to use any cart or vehicle for the conveyance or
removal or rubbish unless such cart or vehicle be provided with a wire net or canvas cover fastened over the top thereof, and be so constructed as to
prevent sifting, spilling, drifting or blowing of such rubbish, or any portion thereof, in or upon the streets through which such cart or vehicle may be driven.
(Ord. 47, 1-26-1989)
4-2-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Throwing Garbage:
1. Streets And Alleys: It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, in any street, alley, gutter or highway within
the limits of the city, any dirt, rubbish, garbage or dead animal. No person shall throw, or cause to be thrown, or deposited, any rubbish, garbage, dirt
or dead animal upon the property or premises of another within the immediate limits of developed or inhabited areas of the city, nor shall any person
place, deposit, accumulate, or cause to be placed, deposited or accumulated, any rubbish, garbage, dirt or dead animal in such a manner, or permit
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 198/565
the same to remain on his premises in such condition so that the same may be blown or carried over to public or other private property by any means
whatsoever. (Ord. 47, 1-26-1989)
2. Upon Premises Or In Receptacles Of Another: It is unlawful for any person to throw, or cause to be thrown or deposited, upon the premises, or in the
garbage receptacle of another, any garbage, rubbish, dirt or dead animal.
B. Burning Of Garbage And Rubbish: It is unlawful for any person for the purpose of burning garbage, rubbish, dead animals, or dirt, to kindle or maintain
any bonfire, or knowingly to furnish the materials for any such fire, or to authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained in any garbage or rubbish
receptacle, or on any street, alley, road, land or public grounds or upon any private property within the immediate limits of developed and/or inhabited
areas of the city unless a written permit to do so shall first have been secured from the fire department; provided, however, that rubbish may be burned
in an incinerator duly approved by both the fire chief and the building inspector. (Ord. 13, 9-20-1984)
4-2-10: REGULATIONS OF CITY COUNCIL; VIOLATIONS:
A. The city council is authorized to make any and all necessary or proper regulations to carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter, including all
matters relating to notices, procedure, regulation of hours, segregation of districts, classifications of services, routes of travel, regulation of dump
grounds or disposal sites and similar matters.
B. Licensees, contractors and owners hauling their own refuse shall be bound by:
1. All such regulations of which notice is given as required by the city council.
2. The method of disposal of refuse at the disposal site by notices posted at such disposal site or on the roads leading thereto.
C. A violation of the requirements of notices promulgated or posted pursuant to this section is a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in section
4-2-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 13, 9-20-1984)
4-2-11: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
Any and all remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative. The city and the officers thereof shall, in addition thereto, have the right to exercise and
enforce all rights and remedies otherwise created or existing, including:
A. The right of injunction.
B. The right of abatement of nuisances.
C. The right of action for damages.
D. The right of prosecution for violation of any statute of the state or other provision of this code. (Ord. 13, 9-20-1984)
4-2-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of a first offense, sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months
in the city jail. Any person found guilty of a second offense shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in the city jail. Every day that the violation occurs, exists or is
allowed to exist or continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 47, 1-26-1989)
4-2-13: MANDATORY GARBAGE PICK UP:
Collecting, hauling and disposing of garbage, rubbish, dirt and dead animals from single-family residences and multiple dwellings participating in the ninety
(90) gallon automated system is mandatory by no other than the contractor with whom the city has contracted to haul the same, except as provided in this
code. (Ord. 167, 5-20-1996)
ARTICLE A. REFUSE COLLECTIONS, REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL
4-2A-1: REFUSE HAULING BY CITY; COLLECTION OF FEES:
A. Hauling By City: The city council may:
1. By resolution, cause to be hauled all or part of the refuse in the city.
2. Purchase such equipment as may be required to carry out the provisions of subsection A1 of this section.
3. Charge and collect fees for service required by subsection A1 of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 199/565
B. Collection Of Fees: Any uncollected fees for service shall be collected with taxes levied on the property served. The collection of fees for service is
reserved to the city and shall not be extended to others. All necessary or proper provisions for the assessment of such fees, the collection thereof and
the certification thereof to the county assessor of Clark County to be included in his assessment of taxes against the real estate involved may be
established by resolution of the city council.
C. Powers Discretionary: It is discretionary with the city council whether or not the city council shall exercise the powers vested in it by this section. (Ord.
10, 8-16-1984)
4-2A-2: LETTING CONTRACTS FOR COLLECTION OF REFUSE:
A. Letting Contracts: The city council may, if it is considered to be for the best interests of the city, enter into a contract or contracts with one or more
persons authorizing the collecting, removing and disposing of all refuse within the city and for the assessing and collecting of charges for such services.
In letting any such contract, the city council shall include therein:
1. Such provisions as may be deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the city and its citizens and inhabitants; and
2. Particularly, provisions relieving the city from any responsibility for any acts of such contractor and from any damages that may result from collecting,
hauling or disposing of refuse.
B. Submission Of Bids: Before awarding any such contract, sealed proposals or bids shall be called for pursuant to such notice deemed reasonable and as
provided by the city council. Persons submitting bids or proposals shall include therein all statements or requirements required by the city council,
including descriptions, plans and specifications of all equipment used or to be used, and fees to be charged for regular services and for additional or
special hauling of refuse. The city council, in awarding one or more contracts shall take into consideration the type of equipment used or to be used,
the responsibility of the bidder, the rates and charges named in the bid and all other pertinent matters as well as the amount of money offered by the
bidder to the city for the awarding of such contracts.
C. Deposit Required: Each proposal or bid submitted must be signed by the bidder submitting it or his agent, and shall be accompanied by a certified
check for two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) payable to the city as a guarantee that the bidder will execute the contract in accordance with his bid. Bids
may be required to be on forms provided by the city. Upon the awarding of the contract, the execution thereof, the posting of a satisfactory bond for the
faithful performance of the contract in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and the submission of evidence that the bidder carries satisfactory
insurance as required in subsection F of this section, the deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be returned.
D. Award Of Contracts: The city council has the right to waive formalities in awarding contracts under this section. The city council may award one or more
contracts with such designations, differences and restrictions as to districts and nature of hauling as deemed proper, and may make such contracts
exclusive with the contractor or exclusive as to districts, nature of hauling or otherwise. Successful bidders shall have such rights, privileges and duties
whether exclusive within limitations or otherwise, as determined by such awards and by the terms of such contracts. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984)
E. Term Of Contract: The term of contracts to be let under this section shall be for not more than twenty (20) years from the date of the contract but may be
extended for an additional term not exceeding twenty (20) years, on petition of the contractor and resolution of the city council, without additional calls
for bids. (Ord. 127, 4-8-1995)
F. Insurance Required: All contractors must qualify by procuring for the period covered by the contract:
1. Full compensation insurance required by the state;
2. Public liability insurance of not less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for the death of or injury to one person and not less than thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for the death of or injury to more than one person; and
3. Property damage insurance of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon each truck or vehicle to be used by the contractor under the
contract.
The insurance shall cover and protect both the city and the contractor. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
G. Persons Collecting Own Refuse: Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any person from collecting and removing his own refuse, but
in so doing he shall be subject to all the requirements of the Southern Nevada health district and the city, inclusive, relating to hauling, nature of
containers, place and manner of disposition and all similar requirements. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 252, 5-18-2001; Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-
20-2006)
4-2A-3: REFUSE HAULING LICENSING PROVISIONS:
A. Business License Option: In addition to the right of the city to haul refuse under the provisions of section 4-2A-1 of this article, or to let contracts for such
purpose under section 4-2A-2 of this article, the city council may grant one or more quarterly licenses to person desiring to haul refuse in like manner
as licenses are issued for conducting other businesses. Such license may be exclusive, or exclusive with certain limitations and conditions or
otherwise. If the licensee is already the holder of a hauling license the assessment of further license fees for refuse hauling shall be waived. Any and all
of the conditions and qualifications required on contractors under section 4-2A-2 of this article may be required of such licensees.
B. Revocation Of License; Hearing: If the city council is advised that a licensee is not fully complying with all of the requirements of his license or that any
of the statements or representations made in his application therefor are false, the city council may issue an order to such licensee to show cause
before the city council, at a time and place to be fixed, why the license should not be revoked. Upon such hearing, the city council may revoke or
suspend such license or take such action as is deemed proper. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 200/565
4-2A-4: COLLECTION OF REFUSE WITHOUT CONTRACTS OR LICENSE:
A. It is unlawful for any person, other than a person to whom a contract has been awarded or to whom a license has been granted as provided in this
article to collect or remove refuse in or from the city.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section do not apply to a person hauling his own refuse. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984)
ARTICLE B. RECYCLING
4-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this article, the following shall apply, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
DEPARTMENT: The state department of conservation and natural resources.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS: Apartments and any other collection of two (2) or more residences, which are grouped together under the management of one
person, and which do not require separate individual collection from each residence.
MUNICIPALITY: A county, city, town, general improvement district or health district created pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 439.370, or other
political subdivision of this state which has jurisdiction over the management of solid waste.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place of business in the city, other than multiple dwellings, to conduct or carry on principally or exclusively any pursuit or
occupation for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
PROCESSING: Preparing a material for recycling, use as a fuel or disposal in a landfill by baling, chipping, crushing, grinding, splitting or otherwise
altering the material.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Office buildings, clubs, churches, schools, hospitals or other places of similar character.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Solid waste that can be processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products, as
determined by the state environmental commission. As used in Nevada Revised Statutes sections 444A.100 through 444A.140, this includes, but is not
limited to:
A. Newspaper;
B. Corrugated cardboard;
C. Aluminum;
D. Yard debris, as defined in this section;
E. Office paper;
F. Glass;
G. Tin and steel cans;
H. Metal;
I. Motor oil;
J. Plastic; and
K. Antifreeze.
RECYCLING CENTER: A facility designed and operated to receive, store, process or transfer recyclable material, which has been separated at the source
from other solid waste.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building or dwelling wherein not more than one family resides or dwells, and where no business of any kind is
conducted, and includes a mobile home, apartment and other unit in a multiple dwelling, which receives individual and heavy and bulky collection.
YARD DEBRIS: As defined by Nevada Revised Statutes section 444A.100, material generated from plants, including trees, bushes and grass clippings on
residential or business properties. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-2: GOAL OF ARTICLE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 201/565
The goal of this article is to adopt minimum standards to provide for the recycling of at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total solid waste generated by
the city. These standards shall address: 1) the separation at the source of recyclable material from other solid waste originating from the residential
premises where services for the collection of solid waste are provided; 2) the establishment of recycling centers for the collection and disposal of
recyclable material where existing recycling centers do not carry out the purposes of the program; and 3) the disposal of hazardous household products,
which are capable of causing harmful physical effects if inhaled, ingested or absorbed. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-3: RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION:
A. The city will establish or cause to be established a program to collect recyclable materials separated at the source of single-family residential premises
where services for the collection of solid waste are provided. The collection of recyclable materials at the residential place of generation will commence
eighteen (18) months from the date of approval of the ordinance codified herein.
B. The city will provide the necessary containers to be used in connection with the recyclable material collection system for city residents and others living
in the city participating in the system. The city will collect, or cause to be collected an annual rental fee for the use of the containers. Such fee will be
determined by the city council. Applicable fees will be billed and collected quarterly. If containers are lost or destroyed, it will be the responsibility of the
resident to replace the containers. The purchase price of replacement containers will be prorated after the first year of service. The containers provided
for rental by the city are the property of the city. Containers for accounts located outside the city shall be supplied by the city's contractor and are the
property of the city's solid waste contractor. Account holders will be responsible for any damage to the containers not caused by the city or the city's
designated contractor.
C. The city will provide up to three (3) curbside collection containers for those participating in the recyclable material collection program at the point of
generation for residential premises. The containers shall be constructed of a sturdy plastic material and be of three (3) different colors. Each container
shall be clearly imprinted with the type of acceptable recyclable material to be placed in each container. One container shall be clearly imprinted with
the words "GLASS ONLY". The second container shall be clearly imprinted with the words "ALUMINUM, PLASTIC, TIN". The third container will be
clearly imprinted with the word "PAPER". The city or the designated contractor will produce or cause to be produced a mailer describing the use of the
bins for each customer participating in the program. The mailer shall describe the type of material to be placed in each container, the schedule for
placement of the containers at the curb for collection and the requirement to bind or containerize old newspapers in plastic or paper bags for placement
in the appropriate container for collection with other recyclable materials.
D. No person shall remove any recyclable material from containers after it has been deposited therein, except the city, or its authorized agents or
contractors, or their employees.
E. Identified recyclable materials should be placed in a container. However, residents may bundle newspapers or place them in plastic or paper bags and
place the bundled or contained newspaper at the curb with the recyclable containers. These items will be picked up by the designated city contractor,
not less than each month nor more than every two (2) weeks. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-4: RECYCLING CENTERS:
A. The city will establish or cause to be established recycling centers for the collection and transport and processing of recyclable material within the city.
These recycling centers shall consist of appropriately sized collection bins located at central locations in the city for the self-depositing of recyclable
materials by residents and businesses. No more than four (4) recycling centers shall be established to provide collection of recyclable materials within
the city.
B. The recyclable material bins will be placed at the designated collection locations with the approval of the city and the owner of the selected locations.
The bins shall be placed in nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, being located a minimum of thirty feet (30') away from any single-family
residential zoning district, unless the adjacent property is undeveloped and the city council determines that the setback will not fulfill its intended
purpose. Each bin will be serviced on a regular basis by the city or its designated contractor to ensure collection and removal of material before any
excess material is deposited causing unsightliness, health hazard or violation of existing city ordinance prohibiting the creation of nuisance. Residents
and businesses located within the municipality may make use of the recycling center collection bins. Nonresidents of the municipality are responsible
for arranging recycling services with the city or its designated contractor.
C. All collected material from the recycling centers shall be hauled to the designated city landfill and processed by the city or its designated contractor.
Business generators may haul their own recyclable material as permitted by applicable city ordinance. Business must separate or segregate recycled
material from solid waste at the business location before hauling recycled material.
D. Recyclable materials not collected at the recycling centers or through the residential collection program to be enacted eighteen (18) months after the
approval of the ordinance codified herein, may be self-hauled to the landfill for depositing or arrangements can be made with the city or its designated
contractor for collection. These materials may include corrugated cardboard, yard debris, office paper and metals. Motor oil and antifreeze collection
centers in the city will be designated and posted through regular communications as issued by the city and/or its designated contractor. Businesses
must separate or segregate recycled material from solid waste at the business location before hauling recycled material.
E. The establishment of recycling centers will commence thirty (30) to sixty (60) days following the approval of the ordinance codified herein.
F. The depositing of nonrecyclable materials, such as waste generated at the point of multiple dwelling, place of business or single-family residence waste
generation shall be deemed to be an illegal dumping act and punishable as defined under section 4-2B-10 of this article. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-5: HAZARDOUS HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 202/565
The city will establish or cause to be established a hazardous household product program for materials, which are capable of causing harmful effects if
inhaled, absorbed or ingested. Enacted through the city solid waste collection agreement is a standard of performance by and between the city and its
designated contractor for collection of solid waste and operation of the city landfill. The agreement by and between the city and its designated contractor
explicitly states that contractor shall abide by all rules, regulations, city ordinances, contracts and state and federal regulations related to the use and
maintenance of the landfill facility. As part of this contract, the city designated contractor currently operates a hazardous household product collection
program at the city owned landfill. In compliance with Nevada Revised Statutes section 444A.040(1)(c) and as made a part of this article, the city
designated contractor will continue to operate a hazardous household product program. The hazardous household products currently collected and
ultimately transported to a certified site for disposal by the city contractor, which will continue to be collected as part of this recycling article, includes, but is
not limited to:
A. Paints (oils and water base, aerosols and sealers);
B. Thinners;
C. Stains;
D. Pesticides (diazinon crystals, rid-o-bug, warbex famphure);
E. Agricultural containers (Sevin garden dust, Roundup);
F. Solvents;
G. Muriatic acid;
H. Antifreeze;
I. Clordane 8E;
J. Charcoal starter;
K. Chlorine;
L. Propane; and
M. Lead acid and household batteries.
The city will continue to make available through its designated contractor a program for the collection and ultimate disposal of hazardous household
products as listed within this article. The city and its designated contractor recognize that the future enactment of city, state or federal laws may effect
the types of materials, which can be handled through this hazardous household product program and agree to make adjustments and allowances for
such material modifications. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-6: PAYMENT OF CHARGES AND FEES:
A. Charges for the establishment of a recycling center program will be absorbed by the city designated contractor for the first twenty four (24) months of
the program. As the recyclable collection program reaches the anniversary date of its establishment and a residential collection program at the point of
generation is implemented, the contractor will request the establishment of a fee to support operational overhead of the program. The fee will be based
on a per unit level of service to each residential unit in the city and agreed upon by the city council by resolution and may be changed from time to time
by resolution. Revenue generated from the sale of collected materials will be used to offset the overhead expenses of continuing the recycling center
program when the residential recyclable material collection program is implemented.
B. Rental fee charges for containers for establishing the residential recyclable material collection program shall be established by the city council by
resolution and may be changed from time to time by resolution. Charges for rental fees of collection of recyclable materials from locations outside the
city shall be established by the city council by resolution and may be modified from time to time by resolution. Charges for single-family residences
participating in the recycling program shall be billed in advance on a quarterly basis to all existing users of record. New accounts, including accounts
opened by or on behalf of users previously not of record, opened in the middle of a calendar quarter will be billed on a prorated basis from the date the
account is opened through the end of that calendar quarter.
C. Bills are due and payable upon presentation and are deemed to have been delivered five (5) days after mailing. Bills shall be delinquent on the thirty
first day after presentation and subject to lien. Delinquent bills may also be assessed interest and penalties in the total amount of one and five-tenths
percent (1.5%) per month, if payment is not received within sixty (60) days after presentation.
D. The city council may increase recycling program rates, fees or penalties at any time by resolution. Such increases in rates, fees or penalties become
effective at the beginning of the calendar quarter following adoption of the rate increase resolution by the city council. Prepayment for service does not
exempt a party for any increase in rates. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 203/565
4-2B-7: RECYCLABLE MATERIAL HAULING VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to use any vehicle for the conveyance of removal of recyclable materials unless such vehicle is staunch, tight and closely covered with a
metal or tarp cover to prevent leakage, spilling, drifting or blowing, or to use any vehicle for the conveyance of recyclable materials unless such vehicle is
provided with a wire net or canvass cover fastened over the top. The cover shall be constructed to prevent sifting, drifting or blowing of transported
materials in or upon the streets through which such vehicle may be driven. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-8: REGULATIONS OF CITY COUNCIL:
A. The city council is authorized to make any and all necessary or proper regulations to carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter, including all
matters relating to notices, procedure, regulation of hours, segregation of districts, classifications of services, routes of travel, regulation of recycling
centers and similar matters.
B. Licensees, contractors and owners collecting or hauling their own recyclables shall be bound by:
1. All such regulations of, which notice is given as required by the city council.
2. The method of handling the recovered material by notices posted at the processing site or on the roads leading to the site. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-9: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
Any and all remedies provided in this article are cumulative. The city and the officers thereof shall, in addition, have the right to exercise and enforce all
rights and remedies otherwise created or existing, including:
A. The right of injunction.
B. The right of abatement of nuisances.
C. The right of action for damages.
D. The right of prosecution for violation of any statute of the state or other provision of this code. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of a first offense, sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months in
the city jail. Any person found guilty of a second offense shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in the city jail. Every day that the violation occurs, exists or is
allowed to exist or continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 252, 5-18-2001)
4-2B-11: MANDATORY RECYCLING SERVICE:
Collecting, hauling and processing recyclable materials from single-family homes and multiple dwellings participating in the recyclable collection program
is mandatory by no other than the contractor with whom the city has contracted to perform such service, except as provided in this code. (Ord. 252, 5-18-
2001)
Chapter 3
DANGEROUS, UNHEALTHFUL PREMISES
4-3-1: NOTICE OF UNHEALTHFUL CONDITION TO PROPERTY OWNER:
A. When it appears to the satisfaction of the city council that there exists on any premises within the city any insecure or unsafe building, walk, chimney,
stack or other structure, or any filth, garbage, offal, ashes, shavings, weeds, grass, leaves, manure, paper, boards, partially burned structures or any
nauseous, inflammable or unhealthful matters, or any unenclosed or dangerous excavation or any undrained cesspool or standing water that may
constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city, the city council shall order the city clerk to issue a citation or notice to
the person creating, maintaining, causing or committing such condition, and to the person owning, or in possession, charge or control of the real
property upon which such condition is maintained or exists to appear before the city council at a specified time and place and show cause why such
condition should not be abated or removed.
B. The city clerk shall cause:
1. Such notice to be mailed to any of the persons specified in subsection A of this section at his place of residence or business; but if either such place
of business or residence is unknown, then no mailing is necessary.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 204/565
2. A copy of the notice to be posted upon the premises where such condition is deemed to exist. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
4-3-2: HEARING BEFORE CITY COUNCIL:
A. Presentation Of Evidence: The city council may proceed to take evidence at the hearing, after notice as provided in section 4-3-1 of this chapter, and all
persons cited to appear or having any interest in the real property involved shall be entitled to be heard and to present evidence for the consideration of
the city council.
B. Property Owner Failure To Appear: Failure of any property owner to appear before the city council at the time provided for the hearing gives the city
council jurisdiction to proceedwith the hearing and the power to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
4-3-3: ORDER TO REPAIR, ABATE OR REMOVE:
If, after the hearing, in the judgment of a majority of the city council members, a condition constituting a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the city is maintained or exists upon the described parcel or parcels of real property, the city council shall order the same to be repaired,
abated or removed within such reasonable time as the city council shall designate. The city council shall also designate a reasonable time within which the
work of such repair, abatement or removal shall commence and be completed. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
4-3-4: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS A LIEN:
A. Failure Of Owner To Abate: If the work to repair, abate or remove the conditions constituting a menace to health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
city is not commenced or completed within the time fixed and designated by the city council at the hearing and no extension is granted by the city
council, the city council shall cause the work of repair, abatement or removal to be done.
B. Statement Of Work And Costs:
1. The person doing such work shall file with the city clerk a verified statement of the work done and of all expenses and costs incurred in connection
therewith, together with a description of the parcel or parcels of real property upon which the work was done.
2. The city council shall thereupon determine if such costs and expenses were proper and shall, by resolution, adopt or revise the statement and
require the city clerk to deliver a certified copy of the resolution and a certified copy of the verified statement of the work done and all expenses and
costs incurred, as determined proper or as corrected by the city council, to the county assessor of Clark County.
C. Cost A Lien Against The Property: The county assessor of Clark County shall levy the sum or sums in the statement upon the respective lot or lots as a
tax and shall enter the same in the general assessment roll next thereafter to be made, in a column for special assessments. The amount so levied
shall be collected and enforced with the other taxes in the assessment roll and in the same manner as other city taxes, and shall continue to be a lien
upon the premises assessed from the date of assessment until paid. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
4-3-5: CIVIL, CRIMINAL ACTION BY CITY:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the maintenance of an action by the city against any person to collect the expenses or repair, abatement or
removal or the criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter by any person creating, maintaining, causing or committing a nuisance or owning or in
possession, charge or control of the real property upon which a nuisance is created, maintained, caused or committed. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 4
HEALTH SERVICES
4-4-1: HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDED BY SOUTHERN NEVADA HEALTH DISTRICT:
A. The Southern Nevada health district shall continue to provide health services and enforcement of health laws of county, state and federal governments
and its regulations shall be in full force and effect within the city. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
B. The city shall honor health permits for individuals and businesses issued by the district and shall cooperate with health district officials in providing its
services to city residents1. (Ord. 10, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 5
ABANDONED, WRECKED OR DISMANTLED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the abandonment of vehicles and to facilitate the expeditious removal of inoperative, wrecked or dismantled
motor vehicles which have been discarded or abandoned in the city on public or private property, which vehicles constitute a nuisance, a safety hazard,
impede traffic in the streets or alleys, interfere with the enjoyment of property, reduce the value of private property, extend and aggravate scenic blight,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 205/565
degrade the environment, or adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993; amd. Ord. 291, 10-2-
2003)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terms used in this chapter are intended to have standard definitions, meanings, and connotations, and are intended to be consonant with the meanings
ascribed to them in other chapters of this code, but the following terms also have the specific meanings stated as follows:
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD: Any establishment or place of business which maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, processing, buying or
selling wrecked, abandoned, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts as described in Nevada Revised Statutes section
410.040.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, Nevada.
EDGE OF RIGHT OF WAY: The property line between the area acquired for roadway rights of way and abutting property.
JUNK: Old or scrapped copper, brass copper, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste or junked, dismantled, wrecked or abandoned motor
vehicles, or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrapped ferrous or nonferrous material, and all other secondhand, used or castoff articles or
materials of any kind as described in Nevada Revised Statutes section 410.070. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "junk" does not include any
article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new, therefore,
shall not be considered junk.
JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined in this section, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative,
abandoned or discarded.
JUNKYARD: An establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, processing, buying, or selling, or for the
maintenance or operation of an automotive graveyard or scrap metal processing facility, and the terms shall include garbage dumps and sanitary fills.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every "vehicle", as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes, which is required to carry a license plate or plates, and shall include, but not
be limited to, automobiles, buses, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, campers and motor homes. The term also includes trailers and any other
devices which are designed or intended to be towed by motor vehicles.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation, company or other legal entity or organization.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is not owned by the city, the state of nevada or the United States, or any division or
department thereof. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
4-5-3: UNLAWFUL ABANDONMENT OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Time Limits; Removal:
1. A person shall not leave a junk motor vehicle upon public property within the city for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. Nor shall
any person leave a junk motor vehicle upon private property within the city for a period in excess of thirty (30) days.
2. Any vehicle stored on private property which is determinedto be an immediate safety hazard and in an unsafe condition, may be subject to removal
within seventy two (72) hours.
B. Public Nuisance Declared: The presence of a junk motor vehicle on private property within the city is declared a public nuisance.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of subsections A and B of this section do not apply to:
1. Business premises used as a licensed dealer, manufacturer, distributor, auto wrecking shop and dismantled or rebuilder of motor vehicles.
2. Business premises used as a licensed repair shop for motor vehicles.
3. Junk motor vehicles placed in a completely enclosed building or not visible from any public roadway or adjoining property. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
4-5-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Every person who abandons a junk motor vehicle is responsible for the cost of removal and disposition of such motor vehicle.
B. A junk motor vehicle remaining on public property for a period of time of more than seventy two (72) hours and on private property for more than thirty
(30) days is presumed to have been abandoned or discarded on such private property by the owner of such vehicle with the permission of the occupant
and/or owner of such private property. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
4-5-5: REQUIRED NOTICES FOR JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Notice: Whenever it comes to the attention of code enforcement officer/chief of police, or their designee, that any nuisance, as defined above, exists in
the city, a violation notice in writing may be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then
upon the owner of record of such property, directing the removal of such nuisance within ten (10) days except that any vehicle stored on private
property which is determined to be an immediate safety hazard and in an unsafe condition may be removed within seventy two (72) hours as permitted
by subsection 4-5-3A of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 206/565
B. Failure To Comply: If the occupant or property owner fails to comply with the violation notice, the city shall furnish written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of the existence of a junk motor vehicle on private property tothe registered owner of the vehicle thereof, or to the owner of record of
the private property where such junk motor vehicle is located, and the written notice shall contain the following:
1. A description of the junk motor vehicle;
2. The location of the junk motor vehicle;
3. A statement that, within seventy two (72) hours for public property and thirty (30) days for private property, except as provided by subsection 4-5-3A
of this chapter, from receipt of such notice, the junk motor vehicle must be removed from the city or placed in an enclosed building or not visible from
any public roadway or from any adjoining property;
4. A statement that the failure of the recipient of the notice to comply with subsection B3 of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor subject to the
penalty provisions of section 4-5-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
C. Hearing Before Planning And Redevelopment Director: Any person issued a directive to remove a junk motor vehicle from private property may request
a hearing before the planning and redevelopment director ("director") within the time given by the code enforcement officer or chief of police, or their
designees, to remove a junk vehicle from private or public property. Any such request for hearing suspends the time given to remove a junk vehicle
from private or public property until the final decision of the director, except as provided in subsection 4-5-3A of this chapter. The director will issue his
final written decision as soon as possible after the conclusion of the hearing. If the director affirms the decision to direct the removal of a junk motor
vehicle from private property, the person who requested the hearing before the director must remove the junk vehicle within ten (10) days of the
director's final written decision requiring the junk vehicle to be removed.
D. Appeal To District Court: Any person who timely requested a hearing by the director as set forth in subsection C of this section may appeal the final
written decision of the director by filing a complaint for declaratory or injunctive relief within ten (10) days of the final decision of the director. Service of
the complaint shall be effectuated in accordance with the Nevada rules of civil procedure. In the event a timely appeal is made to the district court of
the director's final written decision by the person referred to in subsection C of this section, the date specified for removal of the junk vehicle is
suspended until the decision of the district court is rendered on the appeal. (Ord. 291, 10-2-2003)
4-5-6: REQUIRED NOTICES FOR JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Junk motor vehicles on public property shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with the Nevada Revised Statutes and this code. (Ord. 96, 9-14-
1993)
4-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
4-5-8: LOCATION AND SCREENING OF JUNKYARDS/AUTOMOTIVE GRAVEYARDS:
A person shall not, after September 14, 1993, establish a junkyard/automotive graveyard, any portion of which is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
nearest edge of any roadway maintained by the city and visible from the main travelway of any roadway, or continue to operate and maintain a
junkyard/automotive graveyard in existence on September 14, 1993, in such a location without obtaining from the city a license required to do so. (Ord. 96,
9-14-1993)
4-5-9: LICENSE; CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE:
No license may be granted for the establishment, maintenance or operation of a junkyard/automotive graveyard any portion of which is within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the nearest edge of any roadway maintained by the city, except the following:
A. Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate aesthetic means so as not to be visible from main traveled way or
otherwise hidden from sight.
B. Those located in areas which are zoned for industrial use under authority of city ordinance. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
4-5-10: SCREENING OF CERTAIN JUNKYARD/AUTOMOTIVE GRAVEYARD REQUIREMENTS:
Any junkyard/automotive graveyard lawfully in existence on July 1, 1994, any portion of which is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the nearest edge of
the right of way of any city maintained roadway and visible from the main travelway shall be screened so as not to be visible from the main travelway of
such roads. Screening may consist of any of the following methods: a six foot (6') chainlink fence with plastic strips through the links full length and
nontransparent; a six foot (6') redwood or cedar fence; a six foot (6') high block wall;or a six foot (6') concrete masonry unit wall. All fencing shall be built to
city standards from new materials only. Any junkyard/automotive graveyard lawfully in existence on July 1, 1994, must comply with such screening within
one hundred twenty (120) days of passage of this section. (Ord. 108, 7-1-1994)
4-5-11: VIOLATION CONSTITUTES PUBLIC NUISANCE; ABATEMENT; RECOVERY OF COST:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 207/565
Any junkyard or automobile graveyard established after September 14, 1993, or in operation which violates the provisions of this chapter, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the zoning official, police chief or their designees shall abate any such junkyard or automobile graveyard which is not
removed or screened prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after personal service of notice of such violation and demand of removal or screening upon
the landowner and the owner or his agents of such junkyard or automobile graveyard.
Abatement by the city of such junkyard or automobile graveyard on the failure of such owners to comply with such notice and demand gives the city a right
of action to recover expenses of such abatement costs and expenses of suit. (Ord. 96, 9-14-1993)
Chapter 6
FIREWORKS
4-6-1: PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION, AND APPLICATION:
The purpose of this chapter shall be held to regulate permitted consumer fireworks and to prohibit dangerous fireworks within the city of Mesquite, except
as provided otherwise herein. If there is a conflict in interpreting this chapter based upon state law or the international fire code, the following applies:
A. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with state law applicable to the city, state law shall control.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of the international fire code, as amended, the most stringent or
restrictive regulation shall prevail. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks items prepared for consumer sale that are not prohibited by local, state, or federal law and that meet the
requirements of this code.
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Firecrackers, M-80s, M-100s, salutes and other articles which explode;
B. Fireworks that provide an aerial display;
C. Skyrockets and rockets, including all devices which employ any combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
D. Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire into the air;
E. Cannons, canes, pistols or other devices designed for use otherwise than with paper caps;
F. Fireworks compositions that may ignite spontaneously or undergo marked decomposition when subjected for forty eight (48) consecutive hours to a
temperature of one hundred sixty seven degrees Fahrenheit (167°F);
G. Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter;
H. Torpedoes of all kinds including those which explode on impact;
I. Any firework that incorporates or utilizes a detonator or blasting cap;
J. Fireworks which explode through means of friction;
K. Fireworks kits which are any assembly of materials or explosive substances, designed and intended by the seller to be assembled by the consumer
and when so assembled would come within this definition;
L. Devices that travel a distance on the ground exceeding a ten foot (10') radius.
FIREWORKS: Includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person upon whom some or all of the powers of a peace officer are conferred pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 289.150 to
289.360, inclusive, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-3: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 208/565
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, to offer for sale, display for sale, sell at wholesale or retail, otherwise provide to another person, or
use, ignite, discharge, or explode any dangerous fireworks in the city of Mesquite.
B. Exceptions:
1. Consumer fireworks as defined above.
2. Outside fireworks displays if:
a. A special event permit has been issued by the city of Mesquite;
b. All required licenses and/or permits have been obtained from the state fire marshal; and
c. All pyrotechnic operators are registered with the state fire marshal to conduct the display or discharge of the fireworks.
3. Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the sole purpose of propelling recoverable aero models. The construction, use,
launching, and recovery of model rockets shall comply with the model rocket safety code, as may be amended from time to time by the National
Association Of Rocketry and the code for model rocketry, as may be amended from time to time by the National Fire Protection Association.
4. Toy caps for use in toy pistols, toy canes, or toy guns, and novelties and trick noisemakers manufactured in accordance with U.S. department of
transportation regulations, as may be amended from time to time, and packed and shipped according to said regulations.
5. Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to the manufacture, storage, sale or use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads
or other classes of public or private transportation nor applying to the military of the United States or of this state or to peace officers, nor as
prohibiting the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial or theatrical or athletic events.
C. Upon finding dangerous fireworks, a peace officer shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed such dangerous fireworks. The dangerous
fireworks seized pursuant to this section shall be retained during any judicial proceeding involving the fireworks and will, upon conclusion of the
proceedings, be destroyed or returned to the person from whom they were seized as directed in such proceedings. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
fireworks that are found to be unstable will be destroyed. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; DETERMINATION; APPEAL:
A. Permit Required: No person shall sell fireworks at retail in the city of Mesquite unless that person has applied for and obtained a permit(s) from the
Mesquite fire and rescue chief or his or her designee. No permit shall be issued to an applicant prior to the Mesquite fire and rescue chief or his or her
designee inspects all proposed consumer retail sales locations and all proposed firework storage areas. Permits issued pursuant to this section are site
specific and shall specify the approved retail sales location and approved storage location(s). This permit requirement is in addition to any other
applicable licensing, zoning, or other code requirement.
B. Permit Fee: Each applicant for a permit must pay, at the time of application, a permit fee of zero dollars ($0.00) for each location.
C. Orientation Meetings: One or more designated staff member(s) with the city of Mesquite fire and rescue department shall hold at least two (2)
orientation meetings per year for retailers of consumer fireworks. The purpose of these meetings shall be to review applicable code requirements and
the Southern Nevada Fire Chiefs Association "Approved Guidelines For Fireworks". Each permit applicant shall designate at least one representative
per consumer fireworks sales location to attend at least one meeting per year. The representative selected to attend the orientation meeting must be
available for the inspection of the consumer fireworks sales location on the day of the permit inspection.
D. Denial, Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The Mesquite fire and rescue chief or his or her designee may deny, revoke, or suspend a permit for good
cause, which includes, but is not limited to, the following grounds:
1. The application is incomplete or contains false, misleading or fraudulent statements with respect to any information required;
2. The proposed sale would pose a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;
3. The applicant in the past has failed to satisfy any qualification or requirement imposed by this code or by other local, state or federal law or
regulation pertaining to such sales, or to comply with the conditions of a previous permit;
4. The sale as proposed will be conducted in a manner contrary to a qualification or requirement imposed by this code or by other local, state or federal
law or regulation pertaining to such sales;
5. The structure or location of the proposed sale is determined, upon inspection, not to conform with applicable standards set forth in this chapter or
other local, state or federal law or regulations;
6. The applicant or permit holder fails to comply with any conditions of a current permit.
E. Validity: Unless a provision of this code specifies a shorter time period for sales of consumer fireworks, a permit issued pursuant to this section is valid
for three (3) months. A permit issued for a retail location shall be kept at the applicable retail sales location.
F. Appeal Of Administrative Decision:
1. Review By City Manager: Where it is alleged that there is error in any decision or determination made by an administrative official pursuant to
administrative authority granted pursuant to this chapter, an appeal of such determination shall first be made to the city manager by delivering a
written document entitled "request for review of administrative decision" to the office of the city manager. Appeals to the city manager must be made
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the administrative decision or determination.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 209/565
The city manager shall conduct a recorded hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the "request for review of administrative decision" and shall
consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the city of Mesquite. The city manager must base his/her decision on the preponderance
of the evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within fifteen (15) days after the date of the hearing. The decision or
determination shall affirm, reverse, or modify the administrative decision or determination.
2. Appeal To City Council: Any person aggrieved by the decision or determination of the city manager may appeal that decision or determination to the
city council by delivering a written document entitled "notice of appeal" to the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after receiving the
decision of the city manager. The city council may consider the record of the prior appeal to the city manager and may take additional testimony. The
city council must render a decision or determination on the preponderance of the evidence and shall render a decision within sixty (60) days after
receiving the appeal. The decision or determination shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision or determination of the city manager.
3. Stay Of Action: Filing of an appeal stays any action by the city related to the administrative decision or determination until the city manager and/or
city council have rendered a decision. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-5: LABELS; PACKAGING:
A. All fireworks for consumer sales must bear the California state fire marshal's "safe and sane" seal. Each item or case of small items or item box shall
bear the seal.
B. Retailers shall display and sell consumer fireworks in their original packages only. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-6: STORAGE:
A. Approval Of Wholesale And Retail Firework Storage Locations: All wholesale and retail firework storage locations shall be approved by the Mesquite fire
and rescue chief or his or her designee.
B. Storage For Wholesale Consumer Fireworks: Storage for wholesale consumer fireworks shall comply with all local, state, and federal laws. Wholesale
consumer firework storage areas shall be inaccessible to the public.
C. Storage For Retail Consumer Fireworks:
1. Retail consumer fireworks shall be stored in an approved wholesale storage location that is inaccessible to the public, an approved permanent retail
sales location when supervised by an adult, or an approved temporary firework sales stand when supervised by an adult.
2. In the event that a retail consumer fireworks sales location is not in continuous operation, fireworks shall be returned to an approved wholesale
consumer firework storage location at the end of each sales day. There shall be no storage in unapproved areas including, but not limited to,
residential neighborhoods, dwellings, garages, public ways, driveways, or vehicles.
D. No Smoking Signs: No smoking signs shall be posted at all fireworks storage locations. No smoking signs with at least three inch (3") tall letters or the
international no smoking symbol with a minimum diameter of eight inches (8") shall be posted on all four (4) sides of fireworks storage containers. (Ord.
456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-7: SALES OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS IN PERMANENT STRUCTURES:
A. Fire Safety Requirements:
1. Display of consumer fireworks inside of permanent structures shall be so located to ensure constant visual supervision.
2. In all retail sales locations in permanent structures, the area where consumer fireworks are displayed or stored shall be at least fifty feet (50') from
any flammable liquid or gas, or other highly combustible material.
3. In permanent structures, retail sales displays of consumer fireworks shall not be placed in locations that would impede egress from the building.
4. Display of consumer fireworks inside of permanent structures protected throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the area of the retail sales floor or exceed six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is less.
5. Display of consumer fireworks inside of permanent structures not protected with an automatic fire sprinkler system shall not exceed one hundred
twenty five (125) pounds of pyrotechnic composition. Where the actual weight of the pyrotechnic composition is not known, twenty five percent (25%)
of the gross weight of the consumer fireworks, including packaging, shall be permitted to be used to determine the weight of the pyrotechnic
composition.
6. Display of consumer fireworks inside of permanent structures shall not exceed a height greater than six feet (6') above the floor surface.
B. Certificate Of Insurance: An operator selling consumer fireworks in a permanent structure shall furnish a certificate of insurance for hazard coverage of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence or greater that covers the time period that the operator will be selling fireworks. (Ord. 456, 12-11-
2012)
4-6-8: TEMPORARY FIREWORK SALES STANDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 210/565
A. Construction And Operational Features: Temporary firework sales stands shall be constructed/erected, arranged, and have the following construction
and operational features:
1. Operations: Temporary firework sales stands may be operated during the following time periods of every calendar year:
a. Beginning on June 21 and ending on July 4.
b. Beginning on December 28 and ending on January 1.
2. Personnel: Temporary fireworks sales stands shall be operated by at least one adult, eighteen (18) years or older, and not be occupied by anyone
under the age of fourteen (14).
3. Construction/Erection Of Stands: Each temporary fireworks sales stand shall be constructed or erected as follows:
a. No stand shall exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet.
b. All stands shall have no less than two (2) unobstructed exits measuring a minimum of six feet (6') tall and two feet (2') in width. The counter shall
not be considered an exit.
c. The siding and roof of the stands shall be made of a minimum of one-fourth inch (1/4") plywood or comparable material or of noncombustible
materials, or if a tent, the tent material must be treated with a fire retardant substance.
d. All wiring and appliances shall meet the requirements of the national electrical code and be protected from damage.
e. Overhead wiring powering stands shall be a minimum of thirteen feet six inches (13'6") above grade.
f. Trailers used as temporary fireworks stands may be used when approved by the city of Mesquite fire and rescue chief or his or her designee. In the
event that a trailer is used as a temporary fireworks stand, the trailer must be used exclusively for the sale of fireworks.
4. Fire Safety Requirements: Each temporary fireworks sales stand shall have the following fire safety features:
a. A fully charged fire extinguisher rated at least 2A 10BC.
b. No smoking signs with at least three inch (3") tall letters or the international no smoking symbol with a minimum diameter of eight inches (8") shall
be posted on all four (4) sides of fireworks sales stands.
c. Clear space between the stand and exposures as specified in the following table:
Minimum separation distance from sales stand in all directions:
10 feet Combustibles
Curb of edge of roadway, street or driveway
Vehicle parking
20 feet Buildings
Dry grass
Fireworks storage
Other fireworks stands
50 feet Aboveground storage tanks for flammable or combustible liquids, flammable compressed gases including propane
Compressed natural gas dispensing
Motor vehicle fuel dispensing
Propane dispensers
B. Certificate Of Insurance: The operator of a temporary fireworks sales stand shall furnish a certificate of insurance for hazard coverage of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence or greater that covers the permitted time period that the operator will be selling fireworks. (Ord. 456, 12-11-
2012)
4-6-9: IGNITION OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS:
A. Hazardous Locations: Ignition of consumer fireworks shall not take place within one hundred feet (100') of a fireworks booth, gasoline service station
buildings, gasoline dispensers, flammable or combustible liquid tank fill or vent lines, aboveground flammable or combustible liquid tanks, or any
building, structure, or vehicle containing unsealed flammable or combustible liquids, hazardous materials or explosives.
B. General Prohibition: General prohibition ignition of consumer fireworks shall take place so as to not endanger persons, buildings, structures, property,
brush, automotive vehicles and/or equipment, etc.
C. Prohibited Dates: Ignition of consumer fireworks is permitted only between the following dates of each year:
1. June 21 through July 4.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 211/565
2. December 28 through January 1. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
4-6-10: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in jail for not more than six (6) months, or any combination of such fine and
imprisonment. Every day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 456, 12-11-2012)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
MISDEMEANORS
5-1-1: ADOPTION OF STATE MISDEMEANORS:
The commission of any act within the corporate limits of the City, or the failure to perform any act within such corporate limits, which is a misdemeanor by
the laws of the State, is hereby declared to be and shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 193, 10-28-1997)
5-1-2: MISDEMEANOR DEFINED; PENALTY:
A violation of any criminal provision of this Code or any other ordinance which defines or prescribes what constitutes a crime or offense is termed a
misdemeanor, and shall, unless otherwise provided, be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-
2006)
5-1-3: NOISE CONTROL:
5-1-3-1: TITLE:
This section 5-1-3 shall be known and may be referred to as the MESQUITE NOISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section 5-1-3, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
A-WEIGHTING: The electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity.
C-WEIGHTING: The electronic filtering in sound level meters that models a flat response (output equals input) over the range of maximum human hearing
frequency sensitivity.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Any premises, property, or facility involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit.
COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING DEVICE (Commonly Referred To As JACOBS BRAKES): A device used primarily on trucks for the
conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures.
dBA: An A-weighted unit of sound level.
dBC: A C-weighted unit of sound level.
DAYTIME HOURS: The hours between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sunday through Saturday.
DECIBEL (dB): The unit of measurement for a sound pressure level and is equal to ten (10) times the common logarithm of the ratio of two (2) like
quantities (see "sound pressure level").
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone,
sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights of way, or abating life threatening conditions.
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY OR PROPERTY: Any activity and its related premises, property, facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, or
production of durable or nondurable goods. A property's zoning does not have to be industrial as defined under city zoning ordinances for a facility or
property to be considered an industrial facility or property for purposes of this section 5-1-3.
LASeq: An A-weighted unit of sound level averaged over a set time.
LCSeq: A C-weighted unit of sound level averaged over a set time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 212/565
MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL (Lmax): The maximum root mean square sound level measured or not to be exceeded by time varying sounds.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor.
MUFFLER: A sound dissipative device or system for lessening the sound of the exhaust of an internal combustion engine.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING: Any building wherein there are two (2) or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Mesquite, Nevada.
NIGHTTIME HOURS: The hours between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day on Sunday through Saturday.
NOISE: Any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the
enjoyment of life or property throughout the city or in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning
health and safety hazard within the confines of a place of employment.
NOISE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR (NCA): The individual designated by the chief of police as the official liaison with all municipal departments, who is
charged with the administration of this section 5-1-3, maintaining records showing that noise control officers are properly trained and maintaining records
of the SLMs, and who shall be empowered to grant permits for temporary variances. The NCA shall not be permitted to issue citations under this section 5-
1-3.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO): Any police officer or officially designated employee of the municipality who has received training required by this
section 5-1-3 for the measurement of sound and is authorized to issue a citation for violations of this section 5-1-3 based on readings taken with an SLM.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound, that due to the sound exceeding the limits set forth in this section 5-1-3, endangers the health, safety or welfare of
any person, and therefore is detrimental to the peaceful enjoyment of private property and the use and enjoyment of public spaces including public rights
of way.
NOISE SOURCE: The point of origin of any noise.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership, joint stock company, or the municipality.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound produced by a noise source, which can be heard by any person at prescribed distances. Measurement standards shall be
the auditory senses. Words or phrases need not be discernible and low frequency sound reverberations are included.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property or structures thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, or alley that is leased, owned, or controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE TONE: A sound dominated by energy in a single frequency.
REAL PROPERTY LINE: The imaginary line, including vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Property used for human habitation, including, but not limited to: a) private property used for human habitation; b) commercial
living accommodations and commercial property used for human habitation including mixed use properties; and c) recreational and entertainment property
used for human habitation.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any radio, tape player, compact disk player, loudspeaker or other electronic or digital device used for the amplification
of the human voice, music or other sounds.
SOUND LEVEL (Per American Society For Testing And Materials [ASTM] C 634): A sound pressure level obtained using a signal to which standard
weighting has been applied.
SOUND LEVEL METER (SLM): An instrument used to measure sound pressure levels. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-3: SCOPE:
Except as otherwise provided in federal law, state law, or local ordinance, the provisions of this section 5-1-3 shall apply to the control of all noise
originating within the geographical limits of the city of Mesquite, Nevada. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-4: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The provisions hereinafter contained are enacted for the purpose of preventing noise disturbances. Above certain levels, noise or noise disturbance is
detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and the individual's right to peaceful and quiet enjoyment. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the
policy of the city to prohibit noise disturbances from all sources, subject to its police power in order to secure and promote the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the citizens of Mesquite. Nothing in this section 5-1-3 is intended to deter individuals from lawfully
exercising the individual right to freedom of speech or any other freedom guaranteed under the constitutions of the United States Of America or of the
state of Nevada. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-5: ENFORCEMENT; POWERS, DUTIES, AND QUALIFICATIONS OF NOISE CONTROL OFFICERS AND
ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Noise Control Administrator (NCA):
1. Qualifications: A person shall be qualified to be an NCA if the person has satisfactorily completed:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 213/565
a. A training program prepared and supervised by the manufacturer of noise meters used in the enforcement of this section 5-1-3.
b. A peace officer standards and training course in instructional development.
2. Responsibilities: The noise control administrator (NCA) is authorized to:
a. Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the extent
practicable;
b. Review the actions of other municipal departments and advise such departments of the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
c. Delegate the duties of the NCO to any duly qualified individual according to the provisions of this section 5-1-3 upon a showing that such person
received the training required by this section 5-1-3, provided, however, that no police officer shall be required any additional type of delegation
from the NCA in order to enforce the provisions of subsection 5-1-3-7B of this chapter;
d. Grant permits for temporary variances according to the provisions of section 5-1-3-10 of this chapter;
e. Maintain the records of the training received by NCOs under which such NCOs have become eligible to receive their delegation of authority to
enforce this section 5-1-3. The delegation of such authority to an NCO shall arise upon successful completion of the training required by this
section 5-1-3 and shall not require a separate act by the NCA beyond the transmission to the NCA of the record of completion of the required
training; and
f. Maintain the records of the specification, purchase, warranty and calibration requirements of SLM used by NCOs.
B. Enforcement:
1. All NCOs, including police officers trained as NCOs, are authorized to issue a citation for violations of this section 5-1-3.
2. Police officers shall not be required to have the specific training required by this section 5-1-3 in order to issue citations pursuant to subsection 5-1-3-
7B of this chapter.
C. Noise Control Officer (NCO): A person shall be qualified to be an NCO if the person has satisfactorily completed any of the following:
1. Training given or approved by the manufacturer of noise meters used in the enforcement of this section 5-1-3; or
2. An instructional program in community noise analysis and migration from the NCA; or
3. Education or experience or a combination thereof certified by the NCA as equivalent to the provisions of any of the requirements of this subsection.
D. Noise Measurements: Noise measurements taken by an NCO shall be taken in accordance with the procedures specified in this section 5-1-3, but no
procedures shall be required to enforce subsection 5-1-3-7B of this chapter, including its enforcement by police officers that are not NCOs.
E. Nonapplicability: The provisions of this section 5-1-3 shall not apply to any department or agency of the city or state of Nevada engaged in any
emergency activities, city activities or as otherwise excluded under section 5-1-3-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-6: SOUND MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions. All noise measurements
shall be made as directed in this section 5-1-3. When a measurement is required at a property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto
as is reasonable. For the purposes of this section 5-1-3, noise measurements are measured on the A-weighting scale slow meter response speed
and/or C-weighting scale slow meter response speed of a sound level meter (SLM) of standard design and quality having characteristics established by
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
B. All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:
1. The NCO shall, to the extent practicable, identify all sources contributing sound to the point of measurement, but shall not be required to document
the absence of such sources or document that such sources would not have caused the test to be valid.
2. When a measurement is being taken to determine whether the noise source is in violation of the absolute caps set forth in subsection 5-1-3-7A of
this chapter, the measurement shall be taken at the receiving property line of the affected person or as close thereto as is reasonable.
3. Measurements shall be taken at two hundred feet (200') from the noise source during daytime hours or at one hundred feet (100') from the noise
source during nighttime hours when the affected person and noise source are both located on public property, public right of way or jointly shared
private property where both the affected party and noise source are located.
4. The SLM must be calibrated using a calibrator recommended by the SLM manufacturer and in the manner recommended.
5. The SLM must be recertified and the calibrator must be recalibrated at least once each year by the manufacturer or by a person that has been
approved by the NCA. A copy of written documentation of such recertification and recalibration, in a form approved by the NCA, shall be kept by the
NCA with sufficient documentation to identify the equipment to which it refers.
6. Unless the manufacturers' specifications allow adjustments to be made to compensate for the following factors, no outdoor measurements shall be
taken:
a. During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour;
b. Without a windscreen, recommended by the SLM manufacturer, properly attached to the SLM;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 214/565
c. Under any condition that allows the SLM to become wet; or
d. When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance of the SLM.
Provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to document the absence of the conditions set forth in this subsection for a reading to be valid.
If one of these conditions exist, measurement shall be taken pursuant to subsection 5-1-3-7B of this chapter.
C. The formal approved report for each measurement session shall include:
1. The starting and ending date, day of the week, and times at which measurements are taken;
2. The times of calibration;
3. The weather conditions, including notable wind speeds;
4. The identification of all monitoring equipment by manufacturer, model number, and serial number;
5. The normal operating cycle of the sources in question with a description of the sources, provided however, that where the sources in question do not
have a normal operating cycle, such notation shall not be required;
6. The sound level in LASeq or LCSeq with the source(s) in question operating;
7. The total accumulative time duration of the monitoring session; and
8. A description of the measurement site, including measurement locations and relevant distance and other information sufficient for another
investigator to repeat the measurements under similar conditions. Photographs which contain sufficient information for another investigator to repeat
the measurements under similar conditions may be substituted at the discretion of the NCO.
9. Information required in the report to support the issuance of a citation shall be considered sufficient if the data captured by the SLM provides such
information, and/or such information can be provided by the citation and/or testimony of the NCO taking such readings and/or such other reports
generated by the NCO or any police officer.
D. Prior to taking noise measurements, the investigator shall reasonably explore the vicinity of the source in question to identify any other sound sources
that could affect measurements, to establish the approximate location and character of the principal sound source, and to select suitable locations from
which to measure the sound from the source in question. Unless the reasonable exploration of the site uncovers a condition that would affect the
measurements, the NCO shall not be required to make a notation that this subsection has been satisfied.
E. The SLM shall be placed at a minimum height of three feet (3') above the ground or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall
be held at arm's length and pointed at the source as recommended by the SLM manufacturer.
F. If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or barking dogs, that are unrelated to the measurements increase the monitored sound levels, the
measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of such a level as not to increase the monitored sound levels of
interest.
G. The monitoring session should last for a period of time sufficient to ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question, but in
no event shall the duration of testing be less than five (5) minutes. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-7: SOUND LEVEL LIMITATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section 5-1-3 to exceed the following sound level limitations:
1. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any noise source on a particular category of property or any public property or right of
way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the levels in table 1 or 2 of this section.
TABLE 1
Maximum permissible sound levels A-weight averaged (LASeq) over a minimum of 5 minutes to minimize the possibility of interfering noise.
Receiving Property Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours
Commercial property 75 65
Industrial property 75 65
Residential property 75 65
TABLE 2
Maximum permissible sound levels C-weight averaged (LCSeq) over a minimum of 5 minutes to minimize the possibility of interfering noise.
Receiving Property Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours
Commercial property 85 75
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 215/565
Industrial property 85 75
Residential property 85 75
2. If the noise source, measured at a receiving property line, is a pure tone, then the sound level limitations set forth in tables 1 and 2 of this section
shall be reduced by five (5) dBA.
B. At the discretion of a police officer and as an alternative to making a determination based upon subsection A of this section, the following standards
shall be used for sounds emanating from any noise source:
1. During daytime hours, sound emanating from any noise source shall be limited in volume, tone and intensity so that the sound shall not be plainly
audible to any person at a distance of two hundred (200) or more feet from the real property line of any private property on which the noise source is
located, or from any noise source located on any public property or public right of way.
2. During nighttime hours, sound emanating from any noise source shall be limited in volume, tone and intensity so that the sound shall not be plainly
audible to any person at a distance of one hundred (100) or more feet from the real property line of any private property on which the noise source is
located, or from any noise source located on any public property or public right of way. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-8: SPECIFIC PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful and a violation of this section 5-1-3 for any person to cause, suffer, allow, or permit any of the following acts:
A. Construction Work: Construction work shall be prohibited between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. from May 1 through
September 30, and between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. from October 1 through April 30, except for emergency work
or by permit for temporary variance pursuant to section 5-1-3-10 of this chapter;
B. Loud Sound Amplification Devices:
1. Upon or within any public property or public right of way, no person shall play, use or operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any sound
amplification device, so that the sound is plainly audible to any person, at a distance proscribed by the provisions of subsection 5-1-3-7B of this
chapter. The proscribed distance shall be measured from the noise source.
2. It is an affirmative defense to charge under this section 5-1-3 that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification device, and that any of the following apply:
a. The sound amplification device was being operated to request medical or emergency assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
b. The sound amplification device was being operated to provide emergency information or to warn of an emergency condition;
c. The sound amplification device was authorized or permitted by the city to be used for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks,
addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons;
d. The loud sound amplification device was used in authorized or permitted public activities, such as parades, fireworks, sports events, musical
productions and other activities which have the approval of the city.
C. Compression Release Engine Braking Prohibited:
1. Prohibited: Operating any motor vehicle with a compression release engine braking device engaged except for the aversion of imminent danger shall
be prohibited.
2. Public Emergency Response Vehicles Exception: Any public emergency response vehicle equipped with a compression release engine braking
device will be allowed to use such device during a response to an emergency situation. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-9: EXEMPTIONS:
A. The provisions of this section 5-1-3 shall not apply to the generation of noise by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized
public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of any emergency.
B. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3, provided such burglar alarm shall
terminate its operation within fifteen (15) minutes of its activation.
C. Noises from any automobile alarm shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation
within ten (10) minutes of its activation.
D. Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and equipment when operated between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3, provided they are equipped with all original equipment from the manufacturer meant to lessen the
sounds produced, and all noises from tools and lawn mowers operated in association with the upkeep and maintenance of any public or private golf
course shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3, provided that all such tools and lawn mowers are equipped with mufflers or are
operated in conjunction with a device or system for lessening the sounds produced;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 216/565
E. Noise from church bells and chimes when a part of a religious observance or service shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3 during
daytime hours;
F. Noise from permitted construction, authorized public or private utility activity shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3, provided all
motorized equipment used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except as provided in subsection 5-1-3-8A of this chapter.
G. The generation of noise in the performance of emergency work by the city or persons designated by the city of Mesquite for state of Nevada shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3.
H. The generation of noise in situations within the jurisdiction of the federal occupational safety and health administration shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section 5-1-3.
I. Noise generated from celebrations, outdoor festivals or events municipally sponsored or approved, whether by contract, permit or otherwise, shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3.
J. Noises resulting from the operation of the Mesquite Municipal Airport shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3.
K. Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a permit for temporary variance has been granted pursuant to this section 5-1-3,
and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3.
L. Noises resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of
learning, including, but not limited to, band, choir, and orchestral performances shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3.
M. Noises that result from or arise out of or stem from the occurrence of a professional sporting event, public school sporting event, an organized sports
tournament, or organized sports league shall be exempt from the provisions of this section 5-1-3.
N. Noise resulting from animals shall be addressed under the provisions of subsection 10-3-16C of this code.
O. Noise resulting from disturbances where both the affected party and the alleged noise source are located in a structure with shared walls, shall be
addressed under the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 203.010 (breach of peace) or other applicable statutes or ordinances. (Ord. 469, 2-12-
2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-10: TEMPORARY VARIANCE PERMITS:
A. Application: Any person who owns or operates any noise source may apply to the NCA for a temporary variance from one or more of the provisions of
this section 5-1-3, unless such noise source is specifically exempted according to the provisions of section 5-1-3-9 of this chapter. Applications for a
permit of temporary variance shall supply information including, but not limited to:
1. The nature and location of the noise source for which such application is made;
2. The reason for which the permit of temporary variance is requested, including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the public
if the permit of temporary variance is not granted;
3. The level of noise that will occur during the period of the temporary variance;
4. The section or sections of this section 5-1-3 for which the permit of temporary variance shall apply;
5. A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom; and
6. A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be taken to bring the source into compliance with this section 5-1-3 within a reasonable
time.
Failure to supply the information required by the NCA shall be cause for rejection of the application. A copy of the permit of temporary variance must
be kept on file by the municipal clerk for public inspection.
B. Application Fee: The NCA shall charge the applicant a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the
application for a permit of temporary variance.
C. Limit On Duration: The NCA shall limit the duration of the permit of temporary variance, which, in any event, shall be effective no longer than seven (7)
days. Any person holding a permit of temporary variance and requesting an extension of time shall apply for a new permit of temporary variance
according to the provisions of this section.
D. Adequate Proof: No temporary variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate proof that:
1. Noise levels occurring during the period of the temporary variance will not constitute a danger to public health; and
2. Compliance with this section 5-1-3 would impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 217/565
E. Factors For Determination: In making the determination of granting a temporary variance after having made a finding that adequate proof was provided
by the applicant as required in this section 5-1-3, the NCA shall consider the following factors:
1. The character and degree of interference with the health and welfare or the reasonable use of property that is caused or threatened to be caused;
2. The level of interference to the peaceful enjoyment of adjoining property or the public right of way above that which is allowed under this section 5-1-
3 if the temporary variance is denied; and
3. The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control measures.
F. Notification Of Approval Or Denial: The NCA shall notify the applicant in writing of his or her determination on the application within fourteen (14) days
after receipt of the application. This notification shall inform the applicant of whether a permit for temporary variance has been approved or denied; and,
if approved, shall set forth the location, dates and times of temporary variance.
G. Appeal Of Administrative Decisions:
1. Review By City Manager: Where it is alleged that there is error in any decision or determination made by an administrative official pursuant to
administrative authority granted pursuant to this section 5-1-3, an appeal of such determination shall first be made to the city manager by delivering a
written document entitled "request for review of administrative decision" to the office of the city manager. Appeals to the city manager must be made
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the administrative decision or determination.
The city manager shall conduct a recorded hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the "request for review of administrative decision" and shall
consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the city. The hearing under this section shall be de novo and shall be informal. Such
hearing shall evaluate the application in accordance with the criteria of this section 5-1-3. The city manager must base his/her decision on the
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within fifteen (15) days after the date of the hearing. The
decision or determination shall affirm, reverse, or modify the administrative decision or determination.
2. Appeal To City Council: Any person aggrieved by the decision or determination of the city manager may appeal that decision or determination to the
city council by delivering a written document entitled "notice of appeal" to the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after receiving the
decision of the city manager. The city council shall consider the record of the prior appeal to the city manager and may take additional testimony. The
city council must render a decision or determination on the preponderance of the evidence and shall render a decision within sixty (60) days after
receiving the appeal. The decision or determination shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision or determination of the city manager.
H. Revocation: The permit of temporary variance may be revoked by the NCA if the terms of the permit of temporary variance are violated. (Ord. 469, 2-
12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-11: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Citations: Violation of any provision of this section 5-1-3 shall be cause for a citation to be issued by a police officer or NCO according to procedures set
forth in this code and the Nevada Revised Statutes. The NCA shall not be permitted to issue citations under this section 5-1-3.
B. Warning Notices: In lieu of issuing a citation, a police officer or NCO may issue a warning notice requiring abatement of any sound source alleged to be
in violation of this section 5-1-3 within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines that the police officer or NCO may prescribe and document
in writing. Failure to follow such guidelines shall not be a separate offense, but any police officer or NCO may consider the failure to follow such
warning when making subsequent enforcement decisions.
C. Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section 5-1-3 shall be subject to the following penalties:
1. A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or a period of confinement in the city
jail not to exceed six (6) months, or both.
2. In addition to any other penalties provided in this section, the court may issue an order requiring abatement of any noise source found to be in
violation of this section 5-1-3 within a reasonable time period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, and according to any guidelines that the court may
prescribe.
a. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section 5-1-3 and ordered to abate any noise source shall demonstrate compliance with
the abatement order as required by the court.
3. Each day during which any violation occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
D. Impairment Of Other Provisions Prohibited: No provision of this section 5-1-3 shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action,
or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section 5-1-3 or from other law. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013,
eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-12: REQUEST FOR SLM READING FOR BUSINESS OPERATIONS:
A. The city recognizes the need to balance the level of noise associated with the reasonable and legal operation of businesses with the level of noise in
the community and to provide for a method to assist businesses with understanding the noise levels that generate complaints. In furtherance of this
policy, any business that is the subject of a complaint that is subject to a citation under subsection 5-1-3-7B of this chapter may request an SLM
measurement by an NCO upon their reasonable belief that the noise level of their business operation would not be in violation of subsection 5-1-3-7A
of this chapter if an SLM reading was taken.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 218/565
B. A request from a business for an SLM reading shall be deemed to be sufficient under this section 5-1-3 if it is made at the time that an NCO or police
officer appears at the premises to investigate a noise complaint.
1. In the event that a police officer requests that an NCO take a reading, the business in question may continue operations until such reading is taken
but it shall not remove the officer's discretion to issue a citation under subsection 5-1-3-7B of this chapter if the business alters or ceases that part of
the operation producing the noise to avoid the confirmation of a violation through the SLM reading and recommences operations within the next
twelve (12) hours.
2. A police officer who chooses not to issue a citation upon a good faith belief that the noise level of the business operation would not be in violation of
this section 5-1-3 if an SLM reading is taken by an NCO is not required to seek such reading unless requested by the business to determine whether
they are in compliance.
3. A business must possess a valid business license to conduct the type of business being carried on at the location where the complaint arises before
the option to permit SLM reading shall be considered. If a business license cannot be produced or the business operation does not have a valid
business license, a police officer may issue a citation pursuant to subsection 5-1-3-7B of this chapter in addition to a citation for any other violations
of this code.
C. In the event that an SLM reading confirms a violation of this section 5-1-3, a citation may be issued under subsection 5-1-3-7A of this chapter.
D. No police officer shall be required to honor a request for an SLM reading if such request is made within thirty (30) days after a citation for a violation of
subsection 5-1-3-7A of this chapter was issued unless the citation has been dismissed or the business represents that noise remediation efforts have
been undertaken.
E. Where an SLM measurement is not reasonably available, no police officer or NCO shall be prevented from issuing a citation for a violation of subsection
5-1-3-7B of this chapter. However, if the failure to conduct such SLM measurement is offered in defense of the citation, proof of the reasonableness of
the decision not to conduct such SLM measurement shall be in the discretion of the municipal court. It is the intention of this section to allow SLM
readings to be made available to a business, pursuant to the provisions of this section 5-1-3, whenever reasonably possible. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff.
3-8-2013)
5-1-3-13: INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS:
Insofar as the provisions of this code are inconsistent with any provision of any other title of this code, or any rule or regulation of any government agency
of the city, then the provisions of this section 5-1-3 shall be controlling. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-3-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this section 5-1-3, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this section 5-1-3 which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
application and, to this end, the provisions of this section 5-1-3 are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 469, 2-12-2013, eff. 3-8-2013)
5-1-4: OFFENSES INVOLVING LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
5-1-4-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
A. Person Placed In Civil Protective Custody: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a person who is found in any public place within the city
under the influence of alcohol, in such a condition that he is unable to exercise care for his own health or safety, or the safety or the health of others,
shall be placed under civil protective custody by a police officer, who shall then comply with the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes section
458.270.
B. Exception: The provisions of this section do not apply to any driver apprehended or arrested for the offense of operating a vehicle under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or controlled substances, pursuant to section 6-1-6 of this code. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-1-4-2: NARCOTIC DRUGS:
A. Possession Restricted: It is unlawful for any person to sell, keep or give away, or offer to sell, keep or give away, or to have in his possession in the city
any cannabis indica, cocaine, opium, yen shee, morphine, codeine, heroin, anhalonius, or any of the salts, derivatives or compounds of the foregoing
substances containing more than fifty percent (50%) by volume of any of the foregoing substances, except upon a written and signed order or
prescription of a physician, surgeon, dentist or veterinary surgeon licensed to practice in the state, which order or prescription shall be dated and
contain the name of the person or kind of animal for whom the prescription is written.
B. Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section do not apply to sales:
1. At wholesale by jobbers, wholesalers and manufacturers, to pharmacies licensed and doing business within the state, or to licensed physicians or
surgeons.
2. At retail by pharmacies to physicians, surgeons, dentists and veterinary surgeons licensed to practice in the state.
3. By pharmacists to persons having prescriptions calling for the same signed by any person authorized under the laws of the state to write such
prescription.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 219/565
C. Smoking Opium: It is unlawful for any person to smoke any opium within the city or to have in his possession any opium pipe for the purpose of
smoking opium within the city. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984; amd. 1991 Code)
5-1-4-3: OPEN CONTAINERS UNLAWFUL IN MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Definitions:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Beer, wine, spirits and alcohol, and every liquid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume
which is used for beverage purposes.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way dedicated to a public authority when any part of the way is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic, whether or not the public authority is maintaining the way.
B. Prohibitions:
1. It is unlawful for a person to have in his or her possession, or on his or her person, while in a motor vehicle upon a highway, any bottle, can or other
receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.
2. It is unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle, or the driver if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle, to keep in a motor
vehicle when the motor vehicle is upon any highway, any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been partially
removed, unless the container is kept in the truck of the vehicle or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passengers if the vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by
the driver and passengers.
C. Exceptions: Subsection B of this section does not apply to a motor vehicle operated by a common carrier, taxicab, limousine, bus or other motor vehicle
used to carry passengers for furtherance of commercial enterprise, or the living quarters of a motorhome, housecar or camper. (Ord. 58, 8-14-1990)
5-1-4-4: LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY: Any conduct involving the sale, offer for sale, purchase, offer to purchase, transfer, offer to transfer, gifting, possession,
ingestion or other use of any controlled substance, drug or immediate precursor enumerated in Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 453, or of any device,
implement or tool which is primarily adapted or designed for the transportation, processing or use of any such controlled substance.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and
entranceways to any building that fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or a motor vehicle in or on any such place.
B. Misdemeanor: Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place, or on private property not owned by or in the lawful control of such person,
and repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or
repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons, or congregates with others, for the
purpose of engaging in drug related activity is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 496, 10-13-2015, eff. 11-21-2015)
5-1-5: OBSCENE, INDECENT MATERIALS AND CONDUCT:
5-1-5-1: OBSCENE MATERIALS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the words set out in this subsection mean as follows:
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the
character and content of any material described in this section.
MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing, photograph, film,
negative, motion picture or material or other pictorial representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical,
chemical or electrical reproduction, or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.
OBSCENE: Any material which:
1. The average person, applying contemporary community standards would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in
sex.
2. The work depicts or described patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
or patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area.
3. The work taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
PROMOTE: To produce, direct, perform in, manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, publish, distribute, circulate,
disseminate, present, exhibit or advertise or offer to agree to do any of these things.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 220/565
B. Promotion Of Obscene Material:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to promote any obscene material.
2. Upon notification that any person has violated this subsection or any federal law or statute of the state which relates to the exhibition, sale,
distribution or transportation of obscene materials, the city council may suspend the license of such person to operate the business in connection
with which such conviction was obtained for a period of not less than five (5) days nor more than sixty (60) days or may institute other appropriate
disciplinary action against such person as is deemed appropriate.
C. Exhibition Of Motion Pictures, Slides Or Exhibits:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a business in the city, and for any employee, including, but not limited to, a ticket seller, ticket taker,
usher, motion picture machine operator, or any other person, or any independent contractor or agent, connected with or employed by such person, to
exhibit or show, or to aid or assist in the exhibition of, any obscene motion picture, slide or exhibit in the city.
2. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or fails to comply with the provisions hereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum fine allowed by law for the commission of a misdemeanor, or by imprisonment in the city
jail for not more than six (6) months, or any combination of such fine and imprisonment. Every day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
3. Upon notification that any person has violated this section or any federal law or statute of the state which relates to the exhibition, sale, distribution or
transportation of obscene materials, the city council may suspend the license of such person to operate a movie theater within the city for a period of
not less than five (5) days nor more than sixty (60) days or may institute other appropriate disciplinary action against such person as is deemed
appropriate.
D. Placing In Public View: Every person who shall place, mark, post, draw or cause to be placed, posted, marked or drawn upon any fence, billboard,
building, door, wall, pavement or other surface exposed to public view, any obscene, indecent, offensive or profane word, writing, picture,
representation or drawing is guilty of a misdemeanor.
E. Nuisance Designated: Any person who knowingly prints, copies, manufactures, prepares, produces, reproduces, publishes, sells, rents, leases, loans or
in any other manner distributes, for a monetary consideration, or exhibits or has in his possession with intent to sell, rent, lease, loan or in any other
manner distribute, for a monetary consideration, any book, magazine, pamphlet, comic book, story paper, writing, paper, picture, drawing, photograph,
figure image, or any written or printed matter of an obscene character, or which is or contains an article or instrument of obscene use or purpose, or
purports to be for an obscene use or purpose, or in any other respect defined in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
F. Action Upon Nuisance Finding: Upon a specific finding by the city council that any person is conducting his business in violation of this section, the
council shall refer the matter to the city attorney who shall, without further directions from the council, take whatever action against such person as he
shall see fit, including, but not limited to, the filing of appropriate proceedings for the abatement of such nuisances in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
G. Destruction By Court Order: Upon the conviction of the accused, the court may, when the conviction becomes final, order any matter or advertisement,
in respect whereof the accused stands convicted, and which remains in the possession or under the control of the city attorney, or any law enforcement
agency, to be destroyed, and the court may cause to be destroyed any such material in its possession or under its control.
H. Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum fine allowed by law for the commission of a misdemeanor, or by
imprisonment in the city jail for not to exceed six (6) months, or any combination of such fine and imprisonment. Every day of such violation shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 48, 1-26-1989)
5-1-5-2: LIVE SEX ACTS:
It shall be unlawful to engage in any live sex act, including, but not limited to, sexual intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy, or any said sex act by
implication or simulation before an audience, whether it be between a male and female, male and male, female and female, human being and an animal,
or through the means of using an artificial device to simulate any sexual act of any kind whatsoever. (Ord. 48, 1-26-1989)
5-1-5-3: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
Any person who in the presence of another person makes any indecent or obscene exposure of his person or the person of another is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-1-5-4: OBSCENE CONDUCT, LANGUAGE:
A. Obscene Conduct: Any person who disturbs the peace and quiet of any person, family or lawful assemblage of persons within the city by loud, indecent,
profane, abusive or obscene conduct is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Obscene Language In Public Places: It is unlawful for any person to use any profane or obscene language upon any street or alley or in any public
place, in the hearing of any person within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 221/565
5-1-5-5: PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION:
Any person who shall defecate or urinate in any public place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. For purposes of this section, a "public place" means any street, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare, school, Municipal premises, vacant lot, parks, or private
property that is plainly visible from any such public place, except by proper use of a toilet or other suitable facility provided for this purpose.
B. In addition to other penalties for this offense, the court shall at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge order the person to pay an administrative fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City of Mesquite for any clean-up costs incurred by the City. (Ord. 527, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
5-1-6: HOUSE OF ILL FAME; PROSTITUTION:
A. Keeping House Of Ill Fame:
1. It is unlawful for any owner, or agent of any owner, or any other person to keep any house of ill fame, or to let or rent to any person whomsoever, for
any length of time whatsoever, to be kept or used as a house of ill fame or resort for the purposes of prostitution, any house, room or structure.
2. Any person violating the provisions of subsection A1 of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Prostitution And Pandering: Every person who does any of the following acts is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, is punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code:
1. Aids, offers or agrees to commit or commits any lewd or indecent act or any act of prostitution; or
2. Offers to secure to secures another for the purpose of committing any act of prostitution, fornication, assignation or for any other lewd or indecent act
with any other person; or
3. Is in or near any thoroughfare or public place for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit an act of lewdness fornication or
unlawful sexual intercourse; or
4. Knowingly transports any person to any place where he may commit, or for the purpose of committing any lewd or indecent act or any act of
prostitution; or
5. Knowingly receives, offers or agrees to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of assignation or of performing any act of
lewdness or fornication, or knowingly permits any person to remain there for any such purposes; or
6. Directs any person to any place for the purpose of committing any lewd or indecent act, or any act of prostitution or fornication; or
7. In any way aids or abets or participates in the doing of any of the acts prohibited by this subsection B. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-1-7: VAGRANCY:
Every person is a vagrant and guilty of a misdemeanor who:
A. Solicits anyone to engage in or who engages in lewd or dissolute conduct in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public
view.
B. Solicits any act of prostitution.
C. Is a pimp, panderer or procurer or lives in or about houses of prostitution.
D. Accosts other persons in any public place or in any place open to the public for the purpose of begging or soliciting alms.
E. Goes from house to house begging food, money or other articles, or seeks admission to such houses upon frivolous pretexts for no other apparent
motive than to see who may be therein, or gain an insight of the premises. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-1-8: OFFENSES INVOLVING PEACE OFFICERS:
A. Refusing To Aid Peace Officer In Arrest: Any person refusing, when called upon by any peace officer within the City, to aid in arresting any offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Resisting, Obstructing Police Officers, Other City Officers: It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Hinder, obstruct, resist, molest or threaten to molest any City officer or member of the Police Department in the discharge of his official duties.
2. Attempt to prevent any member of the Police Department from arresting any person or to attempt to rescue from such member of the Police
Department, or from any called to his aid, any person in his custody. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 222/565
5-1-9: PUBLIC NOTICES; POSTING AND DESTRUCTION:
A. Posting Of Notices Or Other Devices: Any person who, within the city, prints, paints, writes, marks, or in any other manner posts up any notice, card,
advertisement or other device upon any wall, fence, tree, post, building, bridge, land or premises, or causes the same to be done, without permission of
the owner, agent or tenant thereof, or the mayor if the same is public property, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Destruction Of Public And Other Notices: Any person who, without authority, tears down or defaces any ordinance, bill, notice, advertisement or other
public paper of a business or legitimate character lawfully posted within the city at any time before the object of such notice has been accomplished is
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-1-10: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS:
A. Concealed And Dangerous Weapons:
1. Carrying Concealed Weapons Restricted: It is unlawful for any person within the city to wear, carry or have concealed upon his person any dirk, dirk
knife, pistol, sword in case, slingshot, brass knuckles or other dangerous weapon without proper authorization of the county and state as required by
the current Nevada Revised Statutes.
2. Proof Of Permit: It is unlawful for any person to carry a concealed weapon without also carrying proper proof of current required permits upon his
person.
3. Exceptions: The provisions of subsections A1 and A2 of this section do not apply to peace officers in the regular discharge of their duties, or to
persons acting or engaged in the business of common carriers.
4. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of subsections A1 and A2 of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 398, 3-25-2008, eff. 4-17-2008)
B. Discharging Firearms:
1. Discharge Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, any person discharging any gun or pistol within the city is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
2. Exceptions: The provisions of subsection B1 of this section do not apply to:
a. Necessary self-defense or the defense of one's family or property.
b. A civil officer in the discharge of his duty.
c. A licensed shooting gallery or a lawful breastwork for target shooting. A lawful breastwork must be a wall sixteen inches (16") thick, six feet (6')
high in the back, six feet (6') wide, with side wings one foot (1') thick, six feet (6') high in the back, six feet (6') flaringly to the front, and six feet (6')
high of adobes, brick or other equivalent material.
d. Legal hunting of animals. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
C. Unlawful Use Of Electronic Stun Device:
1. It is unlawful, within the city limits, for any person, other than a law enforcement officer, to use an electronic stun device (device which is designed to
deliver an electric shock to the body or person of another) for any purpose other than self-defense.
2. It is further unlawful for any person to possess such electronic stun device, who:
a. Has been convicted of a felony in the United States or the state, or in any state or territory of the United States of any public subdivision thereof.
b. Is a fugitive from justice.
c. Is an unlawful user or seller of narcotics.
d. Is a minor. (Ord. 32, 4-24-1986)
5-1-11: INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLES:
A. No person shall, either individually or in association with one or more other persons, wilfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or the contents thereof, or
break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner.
B. No person shall, with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury or other crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest, nor
shall any person attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism unattended, nor shall any person set in
motion any vehicle while it is at rest and unattended. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-1-12: FEE SCHEDULE FOR FALSE INTRUSION ALARMS RECEIVED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The following schedule of fees is hereby fixed for the described items:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 223/565
A. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per false intrusion alarm received by the police department that is indicated by malfunction or employee error, which is in
excess of six (6) such alarms in a twelve (12) month period by each user of this service. This fee will apply to all users which would include those
systems which terminate in the police department and those relayed through a central station or answering service.
B. The fee mentioned in subsection A of this section does not apply to any newly installed system until a grace period of forty five (45) days from the
installation of said system has passed. (Ord. 91, 12-22-1992)
5-1-13: GRAFFITI:
A. Purpose And Intent: The council is enacting this section to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the reduction of
graffiti and the removal of graffiti from public and private property, as authorized under Nevada Revised Statutes 268.4075 through 268.4085. (Ord.
395, 1-22-2008, eff. 2-14-2008)
B. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and terms defined in this subsection have the meanings ascribed
to them as follows:
BROAD TIPPED INDELIBLE MARKER OR MARKER: Any felt tipped marker or similar implement which contains a fluid which is not soluble in water,
with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth inch (1/4").
GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, insignia, symbol, word, figure, character or design that is written, etched, sketched, marked, drawn, sprayed
or painted on a building, fence, wall, rock, bridge, gate, tree, landscaping, other structure, or any other public or private property.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS: Any broad tipped indelible marker, aerosol paint container, gum label, paint stick, etching equipment, brush, adhesive label,
engraving device or any other device capable of leaving a visible mark on a natural or manmade surface.
GUM LABEL: Any material such as, but not limited to, decals, stickers, posters or labels which contain a substance commonly known as adhesive or
glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts.
MINOR: A person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PAINT STICK: A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar nonwater soluble substance, which is capable of being
applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, can leave a mark of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") in width.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A parent or legal guardian or person having custody and control of a minor.
C. Unlawful To Place Graffiti On Public Or Private Property: It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any wall, sign, rock, street, sidewalk, tree,
bridge, building, fence, gate, other structure, other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, without the permission of the owner or
operator of such property.
D. Unlawful For Minor To Possess Graffiti Implements; Exception: It is unlawful for any minor to possess graffiti implements, unless:
1. A responsible adult has first consented; or
2. Possession is necessary for school related purposes on property used by a school, school district, community college or university.
E. Unlawful For Adults Or Minor To Possess Graffiti Implements With Intent To Place Graffiti On Public Or Private Property: It is unlawful for any adult or
minor to possess graffiti implements with the intent to place graffiti on public or private property while in, upon or in close proximity to such property,
unless authorized by the owner or operator of such property.
F. Rebuttable Presumption Of No Responsible Adult Permission: There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person under the age of eighteen (18)
years old who is in possession of an aerosol container of spray paint, broad tipped indelible marker or paint stick does not have the permission of any
responsible adult.
G. Unlawful To Sell Or Otherwise Furnish Graffiti Materials To Minor; Exception: It is unlawful for any person, other than the minor's responsible adult or
school teacher to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti
implement without the consent of the minor's responsible adult.
H. Retail Display And Storage Of Graffiti Implements:
1. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad
tipped indelible markers shall store the containers, sticks or markers in an area continuously observable, through direct visual observation or
surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of business.
2. In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks or broad tipped indelible markers in an
area as provided in subsection H1 of this section, the establishment shall store the containers, sticks, and markers in an area not accessible to the
public without employee assistance.
I. Criminal Penalties; Administrative Assessment; Parental Liability For Fine, Administrative Assessment And Restitution:
1. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 224/565
2. If a defendant pleads or is found guilty of violating subsection C of this section (unlawfully applying graffiti), the court shall include an administrative
assessment of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation in addition to any other fine or penalty. The money collected must be paid by the
clerk of the court to the finance department on or before the fifth day of each month for credit to the graffiti reward and abatement fund.
3. In case of a minor violating subsection C of this section (unlawfully applying graffiti), or subsection E of this section (unlawful possession of graffiti
implements), each responsible adult shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines and administrative assessments.
4. In accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes section 206.330, the court may also suspend the driver's license of an adult violating subsection C or E
of this section.
5. In addition to any punishment specified in this subsection, the court shall order any violator of subsection C of this section to make restitution to the
victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a
minor, each responsible adult is jointly and severally liable with the minor to make the restitution.
6. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this subsection, a minor or responsible adult may be required to perform community service as
determined by the court consistent with Nevada Revised Statutes section 206.330.
J. Civil Liability; Liability Of Responsible Adult:
1. Any person who violates subsection C of this section by unlawfully applying graffiti is liable civilly to the property owner or other person whose
property is damaged thereby.
2. Any act of a minor which results in the unlawful placement of graffiti is hereby imputed to that minor's responsible adult for purposes of civil liability,
including, but not limited to, civil damages, costs and attorney fees incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any such claim. The
responsible adult shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for all civil damages, costs and attorney fees. Such obligations shall be
enforceable as a civil debt.
3. If restitution is being paid to the victim of graffiti pursuant to an order of a court, no civil action may be commenced pursuant to this subsection. If
restitution ceases to be paid in compliance with the order, a civil action may be commenced and prosecuted.
4. Any civil damages awardable pursuant to this subsection shall be reduced by the amount of any restitution paid to the victim.
5. This subsection in no way limits or narrows the liability of a responsible adult for acts of a minor pursuant to any other provision of law.
K. City As Victim Of Graffiti: If graffiti is applied to any city property, or property facing or bordering any city street, road or alleyway, and such graffiti is
removed, covered or cleaned at city expense, the city is deemed to be the victim of graffiti and suffers damage for the purpose of a civil action brought
under this section.
L. Reward For Information Leading To Arrest Of Perpetrator:
1. If sufficient money is available in the graffiti reward and abatement fund, the police department may offer a reward not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) to any person who provides information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person who unlawfully applies graffiti to
any public or private property.
2. Application for a reward pursuant to this subsection must be made to the chief of police. At the direction of the city council, the reward shall be paid
by the finance department to a qualifying person from the graffiti reward and abatement fund. (Ord. 333, 1-10-2006; amd. Ord. 395, 1-22-2008, eff. 2-
14-2008)
M. Declaration Of Nuisance:
1. Graffiti A Nuisance: The city council hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the procedures herein
contained.
2. Graffiti Attracting Surface A Nuisance: The existence of any surface of a structure on any privately owned parcel of land which has been defaced
with graffiti after removal more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months is hereby deemed to be a nuisance, and may be abated by city requiring
modifications thereto. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to: retrofitting of such surfaces at the expense of the property owner(s) of
said lot, not to exceed a total cost of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or at the cost of the city at the city's option, with such features or qualities as
may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient,
expedient or efficient removal of graffiti therefrom.
N. Removal Provisions:
1. Removal Of Graffiti By Perpetrator: Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty
four (24) hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or
for the payment of such removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this section.
Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for
the removal.
2. Removal Of Graffiti By Property Owner Or City: If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to this subsection, graffiti shall be removed
pursuant to the following provisions:
a. Property Owner Responsibility: It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or
maintenance of property in the city to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of seventy two (72) hours after
service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. That notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for identification of the property;
(2) A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 225/565
(3) A statement that the graffiti must be removed within seventy two (72) hours after the date of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within
that time, the city will declare the property to be a public nuisance; and
(4) An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance programs and funds available through the city and private graffiti removal
contractors.
b. Right Of City To Remove:
(1) Use Of Public Funds: Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned
property viewable from a public or private place open to the public, the City shall be authorized to use graffiti or other public funds for the
removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any
more extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the City Manager or designee determines, in writing, that a more extensive
area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the
property owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repairing the more extensive area.
(2) Right Of Entry On Private Property: Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the City for the
purpose of graffiti removal, the City shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the City from
liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time
specified by this subsection, or if the City has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or
responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the City and consistent with the terms of this subsection, the City shall
issue a citation for violation of this subsection.
3. Enforcement:
a. The Police Department shall investigate and pursue potential graffiti vandals as a crime against property.
b. The Code Enforcement Officer shall pursue the abatement of graffiti from private property as provided within this subsection.
4. Recovery Of Unpaid Costs Of Abatement: Any unpaid sum of money against the property or owner accrued in abating or removing "nuisances", as
provided in this subsection, is a claim against the property and may be recovered in an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The amount
recovered shall be disbursed to pay the expenses of abating or removing the nuisance and court costs. (Ord. 395, 1-22-2008, eff. 2-14-2008)
5-1-14: MISUSE OR ABUSE OF CITY PROPERTY OR EMERGENCY SERVICES:
A. Any person who shall misuse or abuse any emergency service, emergency communication service, or emergency resources provided by the City shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. For purposes of subsection A of this section, "misuse or abuse" shall be afforded the ordinary and proper meaning generally attributed to those words
and shall include, but shall not be limited to, repeatedly calling or communicating with the Police Department, the Fire Department, Emergency
Dispatch, Animal Control or other such similar service, with no intent of reporting a bona fide on-going emergency, a safety hazard, or other similar
dangerous situation. (Ord. 513, 3-14-2017, eff. 4-5-2017)
5-1-15: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON:
5-1-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. It is the intent of this section 5-1-15 to provide safety and awareness to our community. Battery/domestic violence offenses that are committed "in the
presence of a child" are treated severely and carry large potential punishments. (Ord. 543, 9-11-2018)
5-1-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. "Child" means a person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
B. "Domestic violence" occurs when a person commits one of the following acts against or upon the person's spouse or former spouse, any other person
to whom the person is related by blood or marriage, any other person with whom the person has had or is having a dating relationship, any other
person with whom the person has a child in common, the minor child of any of those persons, the person's minor child or any other person who has
been appointed the custodian or legal guardian for the person's minor child:
1. A battery.
2. An assault.
3. Compelling the other person by force or threat of force to perform an act from which the other person has the right to refrain or to refrain from an act
which the other person has the right to perform.
4. A sexual assault.
5. A knowing, purposeful or reckless course of conduct intended to harass the other person. Such conduct may include, but is not limited to:
a. Stalking.
b. Arson.
c. Trespassing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 226/565
d. Larceny.
e. Destruction of private property.
f. Carrying a concealed weapon without a permit.
g. Injuring or killing an animal.
h. Bullying including but not limited to verbal, emotional, physical or cyber bullying.
6. A false imprisonment.
7. Unlawful entry of the other person's residence, or forcible entry against the other person's will if there is a reasonably foreseeable risk of harm to the
other person from the entry.
C. "Dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affection or sexual involvement. The term does
not include a casual relationship or an ordinary association between persons in a business or social context.
D. "In the presence of a child" means in the physical presence of a child; or having knowledge that a child is present and may see or hear an act of
domestic violence. "Child" may be any child whether or not related to the victim or the defendant. (Ord. 543, 9-11-2018)
5-1-15-3: COMMISSION OF BATTERY DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN THE PRESENCE OF A CHILD:
A. A person commits battery domestic violence in the presence of a child if the person:
1. Commits a battery against a current or former spouse, a present spouse of a former spouse, a former spouse of a present spouse, parents, a foster
parent, a child, a person otherwise related by blood or marriage, a person with whom the defendant is or was in a dating relationship as defined in
Nevada Revised Statutes 33.018, which is consistent with Nevada Revised Statutes 200.485 while in the presence of a child is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than thirty (30) days but not more than six (6) months and by a fine not exceeding
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 543, 9-11-2018)
5-1-15-4: DOMESTIC VIOLENCE:
A. A person commits the crime of domestic violence when that person engages in conduct that would violate subsection 5-1-15-2B of this section 5-1-15 or
Nevada Revised Statutes 33.018 or battery.
B. A person who commits domestic violence pursuant to subsection A of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment of
at least two (2) days in jail but not more than six (6) months. (Ord. 543, 9-11-2018)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL1
(Rep. by Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
Chapter 3
MINORS
5-3-1: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase any alcoholic beverage or to consume any alcoholic beverage in any
saloon, restaurant or premises where spirituous, malt or fermented liquors or wines are sold, or to be found upon any street, alley, parking lot or other
public place in possession of, or after having consumed alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-3-2: CURFEW:
A. Curfew Hours: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or
play about any public street, highway, lot, alley, park, playground, other public ground, public place, public building or any place open to the public or
vacant lot in the City:
1. During the months of September through May, both inclusive, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday, both
inclusive, and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the succeeding day, and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturday and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the succeeding day, official County time.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 227/565
2. During the months of June, July and August between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday, both inclusive, and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the succeeding day, and between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturday and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M. of the succeeding day, official County time.
B. Extend Curfew: The Chief of Police may extend the curfew imposed by subsection A of this section on special occasions if forty eight (48) hours in
advance he receives a written request therefor from:
1. The principal or superintendent of any high school.
2. The lawful representative of a church in Clark County.
3. A recognized youth organization.
4. An official government agency.
C. Notification Of Extension: Upon granting any extension of the curfew imposed by subsection A of this section, the Chief of Police shall notify:
1. The Sheriff of Clark County.
2. The Juvenile Probation Officer of Clark County.
3. Nevada Highway Patrol Officers stationed in the Mesquite area.
4. All Police Officers having a tour of duty during the time of such extension of curfew.
D. Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section do not apply when a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years:
1. Is a high school graduate.
2. Is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
3. Has in his possession a work permit issued by the Chief of Police and signed by a parent, guardian or adult person having the care and custody of
the minor. Such work permit shall be issued to allow the minor to work other than during school hours and shall allow such minor a reasonable time
required to go to and return from his employment. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-3-3: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS, GUARDIANS AND OTHER ADULT PERSONS:
A. It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit such
minor to loiter, idle, wander or stroll or play about any public street, highway, lot, alley, park, playground, other public ground, public place, public
building, any place open to the public or vacant lot in the City in violation of the provisions of section 5-3-2 of this chapter.
B. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years who violates the provisions of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-3-4: RESTITUTION FOR UNLAWFUL ACTS COMMITTED BY A DELINQUENT CHILD:
In accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 62E.550 through 560, as may be amended from time to time, a delinquent child, or the parent or guardian of
the child, or both may be required by a Juvenile Court to provide restitution to the victim of any unlawful act committed by the child or to participate in a
program designed to provide restitution to a victim of any unlawful act committed by the child.
In accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 62E.610, as may be amended from time to time, an order by a Juvenile Court that a delinquent child, parent
or guardian, or both pay restitution to a victim of any unlawful act, does not prohibit a victim from bringing a civil action to recover damages incurred as a
result of the unlawful act. (Ord. 462, 9-11-2012, eff. 10-1-2012)
5-3-5: CITATIONS ISSUED TO MINORS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS:
Any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years who violates any provision of sections 5-3-2 through 5-3-4 of this chapter, inclusive, shall be issued a
citation. Such minor will answer the citation within the prescribed time by appearing before the Juvenile Probation Officer of Clark County accompanied by
his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor. (Ord. 11, 8-16-1984)
5-3-6: ARCADES; SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Definitions:
ARCADE: Any separate room or enclosed area used for the primary purpose of providing access to a minimum of twenty five (25) coin operated
amusement machines or devices not intended or played for gambling purposes.
SMALL GAME ROOM: Any separate room or enclosed area used for the primary purpose of providing access to less than twenty five (25) coin
operated amusement machines or devices not intended or played for gambling purposes.
B. Security Attendants Required In Arcades:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 228/565
1. Every operator of an arcade shall staff such arcade with attendants trained in security measures for the protection of children.
a. The training shall include an on the job training of a minimum of eight (8) hours; and
b. Attendance in a hotel approved arcade staff training program designed to identify child predators.
2. Every operator of a small game room shall:
a. Staff the small game room with an attendant trained in security measures for the protection of children as listed in subsections B1a and B1b of this
section; or
b. Periodically monitor the small game room by having an attendant trained in security measures for the protection of children as in subsections B1a
and B1b of this section, inspect the small game room a minimum of four (4) times randomly within each hour.
3. Every arcade or small game room must be under surveillance cameras and recorded at all times during all hours that the arcade or small game room
is open to the public.
4. Every operator of an arcade or small game room shall operate a security or surveillance camera in the arcade or small game room and shall display
a sign in a prominent place that provides notice that the arcade or small game room is monitored by security or surveillance cameras.
C. Curfew:
1. It is unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) to be in an arcade or small game room between the hours specified in section 5-3-2 of this
chapter unless such child is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
2. Every operator of an arcade or small game room shall display, in a prominent place at or near the entrance to the arcade or small game room, a sign
of at least two feet by three feet (2' x 3') at a sufficient height so as to be clearly visible in a conspicuous area, which provides the following:
Minors are prohibited in these premises after the following hours:
Mesquite municipal code prohibits the presence of children under the age of 18, who are unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian in this
arcade during the following hours:
For the months September through May:
Sunday - Thursday: 10:00 P.M. - 5:00 A.M.
Friday/Saturday: 12:00 midnight - 5:00 A.M.
For the months June, July, August:
Sunday - Thursday: 11:00 P.M. - 5:00 A.M.
Friday/Saturday: 12:00 midnight - 5:00 A.M.
3. Any child who violates this section is subject to being issued a citation to appear at Juvenile Court.
4. Any parent or legal guardian who violates this section is subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00).
D. Children Under Eighteen Not Under Care Of Establishment: The owner or operator of an arcade or small game room or the establishment in which it is
located shall not be deemed to have legal care, custody or control of any child under the age of eighteen (18) present in such establishment.
E. Enforcement Authority: Any Peace Officer finding or observing any child under the age of eighteen (18) being on or upon any place in violation of this
chapter may cite the child for such violation and release the child to the custody of his or her parent or legal guardian, release the child, or take the
child to the Clark County Juvenile Court Services. (Ord. 194, 10-28-1997)
5-3-7: ANNOYANCE, MOLESTATION OF OR INDECENCY TOWARD A MINOR UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
A. Any person who annoys or molests a minor is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the word "annoy" refers to conduct which would cause a reasonable person in the position of the minor or the parent or
guardian of the minor to reasonably apprehend a significant threat to the minor's safety.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, the word "molest" refers to conduct which would cause a reasonable person in the position of the minor or the parent or
guardian of the minor to reasonably apprehend the commission against the minor of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation, as defined in Nevada Revised
Statutes 432B.100 or Nevada Revised Statutes 432B.110. (Ord. 515, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 229/565
This title shall be commonly known and referred to as the MESQUITE MUNICIPAL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and terms defined in this section have the meanings ascribed to them in section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A vehicle of the fire department, police department, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the state of Nevada.
BICYCLE: A device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is over fourteen inches (14")
in diameter, or every such device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2)front or two (2) rear wheels.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: Any block within which fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage is used for retail or wholesale business purposes and, when so
established by the chief of police, with the approval of the city council, any block immediately adjacent to any such block.
CITY: The city of Mesquite.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle of a type used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A "controlled substance", as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 453.
CROSSWALK: A. That portion of a street ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where
the intersecting roadways meet at approximately right angles, except the prolongation of any such lines from an alley across a street; or
B. Any portion of a street distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other marking on the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials,
so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be visible at all times.
DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of Mesquite, or any agency with which it has contracted for enforcement of its laws and ordinances.
DRIVER: A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
ESSENTIAL PARTS: All integral and body parts of a vehicle of a type required to be registered under law, the removal, alteration or substitution of which
would tend to conceal the identity of the vehicle or substantially alter its appearance.
GARAGE: A building or other place wherein the business of storing or safekeeping vehicles (of a type required to be registered under state law and which
belong to drivers, members of the public) is conducted for compensation.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2)
highways or streets which join one another at approximately right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling from different highways orstreets
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
LEGAL OWNER: A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: A. A motorcycle, including a motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) horsepower.
B. A bicycle with motor attached.
MOTOR TRUCK: A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle which is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3)
wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle; or if a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with or
without the right of purchase upon performance of the condition stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or if a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purpose of this title.
PERSON: A natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
POLICE OFFICERS: Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of
traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD, PRIVATE DRIVEWAY: A way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other members of the public.
REGISTERED OWNER: An individual, firm, corporation or association whose name appears in the files of the motor vehicle registration division of the
department of motor vehicles as the person to whom the vehicle is registered.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a
distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with dwellings, or dwellings and buildings in use for business.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 230/565
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the highway or street.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway or street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
SCHOOL BUS: A motor vehicle while being used for the transportation of any school pupil to and from school or to and from school activities, except:
A. A motor vehicle of the pleasure type designed for and when actually carrying not more than eight (8) persons, including the driver.
B. A motor vehicle operated by a common carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the public service commission of Nevada, except any such vehicle when
in use exclusively for the transportation of school pupils.
C. A motor vehicle of any type carrying only members of the household of the owner thereof.
SEMITRAILER: A vehicle designed for carrying persons or property and having one or more axles and one or more wheels, used in conjunction with a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by, another vehicle.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
SIDEWALK OR SIDEWALK AREA: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.
STOP: When required, means complete cessation of movement.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: A way or place, of whatever nature, including alleys, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY OR THROUGH STREET: A highway, street or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways
or streets is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same, and when stop signs are erected as provided in this title.
TOW CAR: A motor vehicle which has been altered or designed and equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing or is otherwise
exclusively used to render assistance to other vehicles.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or highway for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulation, warning or guiding traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
TRAFFIC DIVISION: The traffic division of the police department of the city or, if a traffic division is not established, then such term, whenever used in this
title, is deemed to refer to the police department of the city.
TRAILER: A vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
VEHICLE: A device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-3: CONSTRUCTION OF TITLE:
A. Generally: Unless the context otherwise requires, the general provisions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this title.
B. Tenses, Gender: The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present; the masculine gender includes the feminine and
neuter; and the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
C. Effect Of Headings: Subsection and section headings contained in this title shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any subsection or section of this title.
D. Delegation Of Powers And Duties: Whenever by provisions of this title a power is granted to a public officer or a duty imposed upon such an officer, the
power may be exercised pursuant to law by the officer.
E. Required Writings: Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required by this title, it shall be made in writing in the English language.
F. Reference: Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this title or of any other law, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions
thereto hereafter made. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-4: DRIVERS' LICENSES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 231/565
A. Employing Unlicensed Driver: No person shall employ or hire as a driver of a motor vehicle any person not licensed to drive.
B. Employing Unlicensed Parking Facility Attendant To Move Motor Vehicles: No operator of an off street parking facility shall hire or retain in his employ
an attendant whose duties involve the moving of motor vehicles unless such attendant at all times during such employment is licensed to drive.
C. Permitting Unlicensed Person To Drive: No person shall knowingly permit or authorize the driving of a motor vehicle, owned by him or under his control,
upon the streets or highways by any person unless such person is then licensed to drive. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-5: ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORTS:
A. Accidents Involving Injuries, Death Or Property Damage:
1. The driver of any vehicle in an accident resulting in injury to any person, other than himself, or death of any person or damage to property shall:
a. Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident.
b. Give his name, address and registration number of the vehicle he is driving and the name of the owner.
c. Upon request and if available, exhibit his driver's license to the person struck or the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with or give
information and exhibit such license to any traffic or police officer at the scene of the accident.
d. Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of or the making arrangements for the carrying of
such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such
carrying is requested by the injured.
2. Every driver shall, as soon as possible, make a full report of such collision, with all details and circumstances thereof, to the police department.
B. Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle, Animal Or Other Object: The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle or animal or other object of
any nature whatsoever which is unattended shall immediately:
1. Stop and shall then and there either locate and notify theoperator or owner of such vehicle, animal or other object of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, animal or other object, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a
written notice giving the name and address of the driver and the owner of the vehicle doing the striking.
2. Make a full report of such collision with all details and circumstances thereof, to the police department.
C. When Driver Unable To Report: Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another
occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident, such occupant shall make, or cause to be made, such report. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-6: RECKLESS DRIVING; PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
A. Reckless Driving:
1. It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive or propel a vehicle of any kind or character or, being in charge thereof, to control the same in a careless,
reckless and imprudent manner on any street, highway or alley within the city or in such a manner as to endanger the life, limb or property of any
person. Such riding, driving or propelling constitutes reckless driving.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section
6-1-6-1 of this chapter, and his driver's license may be canceled, suspended or revoked as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 483.
B. Driving While Under Influence Of Intoxicating Liquors Or Controlled Substance:
1. It is unlawful for any person, while either intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquors, or of controlled substances, to drive, ride or
conduct any vehicle, or have charge or control of any vehicle, or ride any animal, on any public street, highway or alley within the city.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section 6-1-6-1 of this chapter, and such person's license to operate a vehicle in the state of Nevada may, by decision of the municipal court, be
suspended by the department of motor vehicles for a period of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one year. Subsequent convictions for an
offense under the provisions of this subsection shall be punished as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes section 484.379.
C. Presumptions In Criminal Prosecution That Defendant Was Under Influence Of Intoxicating Liquors; Chemical Analysis:
1. In any criminal prosecution for a violation or relating to driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, the amount of alcohol in the
defendant's blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the defendant's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall give rise
to the following presumptions:
a. If there was at the time five one-hundredths percent (0.05%) or less by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that the
defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
b. If there was at that time in excess of five one-hundredths percent (0.05%) but less than eight one-hundredths percent (0.08%) by weight of alcohol
in the defendant's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the defendant was or was not under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 232/565
c. If there was at the time eight one-hundredths percent (0.08%) or more by weight of alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that the
defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 320, 3-28-2006)
2. The provisions of subsection C1 of this section shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the
question whether or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
D. Duty Of Police Judge: The police judge in imposing sentences provided for in subsection B of this section shall not suspend the same or any part
thereof.
E. Intoxication In Or About Motor Vehicle: It is unlawful for any person, while either intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquor, to be in or about
any motor vehicle on any street, highway or alley within the city. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-6-1: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE; PENALTY1:
A. First Offense In Five Years: Any person who violates any city ordinance corresponding to Nevada Revised Statutes sections 484.379(1) or 484.379(2),
and who has not been convicted of a violation of such ordinance or any law which prohibits the same conduct as that prohibited by Nevada Revised
Statutes sections 484.379(1), 484.379(2) or 484.3795in any jurisdiction within five (5) years before the violation took place, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the court shall order him to pay tuition for and attend courses on the use and abuse of alcohol and
controlled substances approved by the Nevada department of motor vehicles, shall fine him not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may sentence him to imprisonment in the city jail for not more than six (6) months. The court may order the
Nevada department of motor vehicles to suspend his driver's license for a definite period of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one year and
not to allow him any limited driving privileges unless his inability to drive to and from work or in the course of his work would cause extreme hardship or
prevent his earning a living.
B. Second Or Successive Offenses In Five Years: Any person who violates any city ordinance corresponding to Nevada Revised Statutes sections
484.379(1) or 484.379(2) within five (5) years after having once been convicted in any jurisdiction of a violation of Nevada Revised Statutes sections
484.379(1), 484.379(2), 484.3795 or any other law which prohibits the same, conduct is guilty of a misdemeanor, except as provided in subsection C of
this section. The court shall sentence him to imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months in the city jail, fine him not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and direct the Nevada department of motor vehicles to suspend
his driver's license for a period specified in the order, which must be not less than six (6) months, and not allow him any limited driving privileges unless
his inability to drive to and from work or in the course of his work would cause extreme hardship or prevent his earning a living.
C. Treatment, Permitted When:
1. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any city ordinance corresponding to Nevada Revised Statutes sections 484.379(1) or 484.379(2)
may elect to undergo treatment approved by the court for at least one year if:
a. He is classified an alcoholic or abuser of drugs by a:
(1) Counsel certified to make that classification by the Nevada bureau of alcohol and drug abuse of the rehabilitation division of the department of
human resources; or
(2) Physician certified to make that classification by the state board of medical examiners.
b. He agrees to pay the costs of the treatment.
c. He has served a term of imprisonment in the county jail of five (5) days if it is his second conviction of violatingNevada Revised Statutes sections
484.379(1), 484.379(2), 484.3795, or a law which prohibits the same conduct, within five (5) years, in any jurisdiction.
d. The court orders the Nevada department of motor vehicles to suspend his driver's license for a period specified in the order which must not be
less than ninety (90) days and not more than the time required to complete the treatment. The court may not allow him any limited driving
privileges unless his inability to drive to and from work or in the course of his work would cause extreme hardship or prevent his earning a living.
2. A person may elect treatment pursuant to this section or pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 484.379(6) only once in any period of five (5)
years.
D. Treatment; Completion, Failure: If a person who has elected and qualified for treatment pursuant to subsection C of this section:
1. Fails to complete the treatment satisfactorily, he must be sentenced to the fine and imprisonment to which he would have been sentenced had he
not elected treatment. The sentence of imprisonment must be reduced by a time equal to that which he served before beginning treatment.
2. Completes the treatment satisfactorily, he may not be sentenced further, but the conviction shall remain on his record of criminal history.
E. Suspended Sentence, Program Before Conviction, Dismissal: No sentence imposed for violating the provisions of any city ordinance corresponding to
Nevada Revised Statutes sections 484.379(1) or 484.379(2) may be suspended, nor may any program of education, counseling or treatment be
ordered or permitted before conviction. No prosecuting attorney may dismiss a charge of violating the provisions of any city ordinance corresponding to
Nevada Revised Statutes section 484.379(1) or 484.379(2) in exchange for a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a lesser charge or for any other
reason unless he knows or it is obvious that the charge is not supported by probable cause or cannot be proved at the time of trial.
F. Serving Time: Any term of confinement imposed under the provisions of this section may be served intermittently at the discretion of the judge. This
discretion must be exercised after considering all the circumstances surrounding the offense, and the family and employment of the person convicted,
but any sentence of thirty (30) days or less must be served within six (6) months from the date of conviction or within six (6) months after the date of
sentencing if the person elected to undergo treatment pursuant to subsection C of this section. Any segment of time the person is confined must not
consist of less than twenty four (24) hours. (Ord.30, 12-31-1985)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 233/565
6-1-7: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. No person driving, or in control of, or in charge of, a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any street or highway unattended without first effectively
setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor thereof.
B. No person shall leave standing a locked vehicle in which there is any person who cannot readily escape therefrom. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-8: OBSTRUCTING OR INTERFERING WITH DRIVER OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
A. Obstruction: No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons as to obstruct the view of
the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. Interference: No person shall wilfully interfere with the driver of a vehicle or with the mechanism thereof in such manner as to affect the driver's control
of the vehicle. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-9: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
No person shall ride, and no person driving a motor vehicle shall knowingly permit any person to ride, on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his duty or to
persons riding within or upon vehicle bodies in space intended for any load on such vehicle. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-10: OPENING VEHICLE DOORS:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a
door open upon the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. (Ord. 12, 8-16-
1984)
6-1-11: COASTING PROHIBITED:
The driver of a motor vehicle when traveling upon any street or highway shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle inneutral. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-12: RUNNING OVER FIRE OR CHEMICAL HOSE2 :
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no person shall drive or propel any vehicle or conveyance upon, over or across, or in any manner
damage, any fire hose or chemical hose used by or under the supervision and control of the fire department.
B. A vehicle may cross such hose, provided suitable jumpers or other appliances are installed to protect such hose. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-13: VEHICLES CARRYING EXPLOSIVES OR GASES:
A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer transporting any explosive substance or poisonous gases as a cargo or part of a cargo,
or any motor tank truck, tank trailer or tank semitrailer, used for the transportation of inflammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases with the tanks
thereon, unless at the time of such transportation there is displayed upon each side and the rear of the exterior of such vehicle a sign upon which
appears the word "explosives", or "poisonous" or "inflammables", whichever may correctly designate such cargo, in letters not less than three inches
(3") in height upon a background of sharply contrasting color.
B. The provisions of this section have no application when any such explosive substances, poisonous gases, inflammable liquids or liquefied petroleum
gases are transported in a truck or in any trailer or semitrailer attached thereto when such truck and such trailer and semitrailer so attached thereto
have prominently displayed on each side and the rear of the exterior thereof a trademark, trade name, other designating mark, or a legend,
substantially descriptive of the type of cargo of such truck, trailer or semitrailer and generally known to the public as being applied to such explosive
substance, poisonous gases, inflammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-14: SIGNS DESIGNATING FIRE VEHICLES:
It is unlawful to display on any vehicle any sign with the words "fire" or "fire department" except on vehicles owned and operated by the fire department
and on privately owned vehicles of any member of the fire department. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-15: GLASS, INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES ON THOROUGHFARES PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, hoops, wire, cans or any other substance likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or highway.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 234/565
B. Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove
the same or cause the same to be removed. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-16: THROWING SUBSTANCE AT OR FROM A VEHICLE:
No person shall throw any substance at a vehicle or any occupant thereof on any street, and no occupant of any vehicle shall throw any substance at any
pedestrian walking or standing upon any street or sidewalk. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-17: PASSENGERS ON MOTORCYCLES:
It is unlawful for an operator of a motorcycle to carry any other person thereon, except on a seat securely fastened to the machine in the rear of the
operator and provided with footrests and handgrips, or in a side car attached to a motorcycle and designed for the purpose of carrying a passenger. (Ord.
12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-18: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE IN MOTION:
A. No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
B. Any person riding upon any motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, skis or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle
upon any street. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-19: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
A. Authority To Impound Vehicles: City police officers are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of
safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the city:
1. When the vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic.
2. When the vehicle upon any street is so disabled as toconstitute an obstruction to traffic.
3. When the vehicle is left unattended upon a street or is parked illegally.
B. Notification: Whenever any vehicle is impounded, the owner of the vehicle shall be notified; but if the owner is unable to be notified or if the vehicle is
not claimed by the owner within three (3) days, written notice of such impoundment shall be given to the department of motor vehicles.
C. Expenses: All expenses incurred by the impounding of any vehicle shall be borne by the owner. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-20: PROCEDURE UPON ARREST FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION:
A. The chief of police shall provide a suitable form for notifying violators of this title to appear and answer to charges of violating this title.
B. Any police officer may take a person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title before a magistrate for the fixing of bail or may, in lieu thereof
upon making an arrest for a violation of this title, take the name, address and driver's license number of the alleged violator and the registration number
of the vehicle involved and issue to him in writing on a form provided by the chief of police a notice to answer to the charge or charges against him at a
place and time to be specified in such notice. In such event, the police officer, upon receiving the written representation of the alleged violator to
answer as specified in such notice, shall release such person from custody; or, at the pleasure of the arresting officer, should the violator wish to post
bail in the amount specified by the police judge, he may do so by appearing before the desk sergeant at the police department.
C. If the offender is not present at the time such police officer views such violation, such notice to the offender may be given by attaching to the vehicle
used in connection with the offense, in a conspicuous place thereof or therein, a ticket or tag in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police.
D. It is unlawful for any person other than the person to whom it is addressed to remove such ticket or tag from such vehicle or for any person to destroy
the same prior to the appearance of the person designated therein before the police judge in obedience to the requirement of such ticket or tag. (Ord.
12, 8-16-1984)
6-1-21: PENALTY:
A. General Penalty; Continuing Violations:
1. Wherever in any section of this title the doing of any act is required or is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, and no specific fine or penalty is
provided for violation thereof, any person who, is convicted of a violation of any provision of this title shall, for each offense, be punished as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 235/565
2. The provisions of subsection A1 of this section do not apply to any section of this title in which a specific fine or penalty is expressly provided for its
violation.
B. Amendment Of Section Subject To Penalty: In case of the amendment of any section of this title containing provisions for which a penalty is provided in
another section thereof, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate and apply to the section so amended, whether reenacted in
the amendatory ordinance or not, unless specifically provided therein. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 2
RULES OF THE ROAD
6-2-1: OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS:
6-2-1-1: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS:
It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this title with respect to particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in this chapter. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-1-2: PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS:
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animalupon a street, highway or alley shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-1-3: COMPLIANCE BY PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
A. The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets, highways or alleys shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles while
engaged in the course of employment by the United States government, the state of Nevada or any political subdivision thereof, or any municipal
corporation or district therein, including authorized emergency vehicles subject to those exemptions granted such emergency vehicles in this title.
B. The provisions of this title shall not apply to public employees, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
any street, or work of installation, removal, repairing or maintaining traffic signs, signals or other traffic control devices, but shall apply to such persons
and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-1-4: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Exemptions:
1. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall be exempt from the provisions of this title as set forth in this subsection under the following
conditions:
a. Such exemptions shall apply whenever any such vehicle is being driven in response to an emergency call or when used in the immediate pursuit
of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to, but not returning from, a fire alarm.
b. Such exemptions shall apply when the driver of such vehicle sounds a siren as may be reasonably necessary and the vehicle displays a lighted
red lamp visible from the front as a warning to others.
2. Under the circumstances stated in subsection A1 of this section, the driver shall not be required to observe those regulations contained in sections 6-
2-4-3, 6-2-4-7 and 6-2-9 of this chapter, but such exemptions shall not relieve the driver of any such vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the street or highway, nor shall the provisions of this subsection protect any such driver from the consequences of an
arbitrary exercise of the privileges declared in this subsection.
B. Operation Of Fire Department Vehicles: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply to the operation of fire department vehicles whether
directly responding to an emergency call or operated from one place to another as rendered desirable or necessary by reason of an emergency call
and operated to the scene of such emergency, or operated from one fire station to another or to some location by reason of such emergency call.
C. Vehicles Owned By Physicians:
1. A physician traveling in response to an emergency shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection 6-2-9A of this chapter if the vehicle so used by
him displays an insignia indicating that such vehicle is owned by a licensed physician.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of any such vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street, highway or alley, nor shall the provisions of this subsection protect any such driver from the consequences of any arbitrary exercise
of the privileges declared in this subsection. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-1-5: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
A. Police Officers:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 236/565
1. Enforcement Of Traffic Laws: The officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police shall enforce all street
traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
2. Direction Of Traffic Laws: Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, but in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
B. Members Of Fire Department:
1. Directing Traffic At Scene Of Fire: When at the scene of a fire, members of the fire department may direct or assist the police department in directing
traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
2. Obedience Of Firefighters: It is unlawful wilfully to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any member of the fire
department, paid or volunteer, when in the absence of or assisting a police officer, and when inthe course of his duties, he is protecting the fire
department personnel and equipment. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-2: SCHOOL ZONES:
School zones are hereby designated as those portions of streets that bound or may hereafter bound school sites acquired for school purposes. (Ord. 12,
8-16-1984)
6-2-3: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS; SIGNS:
Whenever this title designates any one-way street or alley, the chief of police and the city engineer shall place and maintain or cause to be placed and
maintained signs giving notice thereof. No such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4: TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS:
6-2-4-1: AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF AND CITY ENGINEER:
The chief of police and the city engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, are authorized to:
A. Provide a uniform system of marking and signing streets and highways, and such system of marking and signing shall correlate to and so far as
possible conform to the system adopted in other parts of the state.
B. Determine the character or type and to place or erect upon the streets and highways traffic control signals at places where they deem necessary for
expeditious control of traffic. So far as practicable, all such traffic control signals shall be uniform as to type and location. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-2: SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS ERECTED:
The chief of police and the city engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall cause to be erected and maintained:
A. Appropriate signs designating railway grade crossings.
B. Such other signs, markings and traffic control signals as may be deemed necessary to direct and regulate traffic and to carry out the provisions of this
title.
C. Such additional signs as may be appropriate to give notice of parking and other regulations. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, or the person in charge of any animal, or any pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or
signal placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-4: STREET NAME SIGNS REQUIRED:
At each signal controlled intersection on streets and highways within the city limits, there shall be a street name sign clearly visible to the principal flow of
traffic. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-5: MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 237/565
A. All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the department of highways, and the
specifications approved in this title for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title shall be official traffic control devices.
B. The stop sign shall be octagonal in shape, shall have red background, and shall carry the word "Stop" in white letters at least one-third (1/3) the height
of the sign. The minimum size of stop signs shall be twenty four inches by twenty four inches (24" x 24").
C. Every stop sign shall be located at or near the entrance to the street or intersection where a stop is required, and every stop sign shall, from sunset to
sunrise, be illuminated by light beams, flasher lights or by reflecting elements set into the face of the sign.
D. This section shall apply to all stop signs erected after September 1958. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-6: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
A. Whenever traffic is controlled by official traffic control signs exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution" or "Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights
successively, one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used,and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of
vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
1. Green Alone Or Go:
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall proceed, except that vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until green or "Go" is shown alone.
2. Yellow Or Caution When Shown Following Green Or Go Signal:
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall proceed, except that vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
b. No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or cross any part of the roadway or from or to a safety zone against a yellow or "Caution" signal.
3. Red Alone Or Stop: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone, except that traffic may turn right after coming to a
complete stop and providing to do so does not endanger pedestrians in the crosswalk.
4. Red With Green Arrow: Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow
but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully using the intersection.
B. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn right or left at an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control signs or by a police officer shall proceed
to make either turn with proper care to avoid accident and only upon the "Go" signal, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or by official traffic
signs, or unless authorized by this title.
C. No person shall disobey the directions of this section except when it is necessary for the purpose of avoiding a collision or in case of other emergency
or when otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer, or as permitted under section 6-2-1-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-7: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehiculartraffic as follows:
A. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and may proceed through the intersection on such signal only after coming to a complete
stop.
B. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or pass such signal only with added caution. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-8: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND LIGHTS:
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unofficial sign, signal or device or any sign, signal or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of, or resembles, any official traffic sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal.
B. No person shall place or maintain any tree, shrubbery or other obstacle which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic
sign or signal.
C. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device or light is declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is empowered, without notice, to remove
the same, or cause the same to be removed, or bring an action as provided by law to abate such nuisance. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 238/565
6-2-4-9: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
A. No person shall, without lawful authority, deface, injure, knock down or remove, nor shall any person shoot at, any official traffic sign or signal or any
device, guidepost or historical marker placed or erected as authorized or required by law.
B. No person shall, without authority, deface, injure or remove, nor shall any person shoot at, any inscription, shield or insignia on any such sign, signal,
device, guide or marker. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-4-10: CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. By the use of paint upon curbs, the following colors only shall be used and such colors indicate as follows:
1. Red indicates no stopping, standing or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended.
2. Yellow indicates stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight for such time as may be specified.
3. Green indicates time limit parking as specified.
B. The regulations contained in subsection A of this section shall be effective upon such days and during such hours or time as may be prescribed by city
council resolution. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-5: DRIVING ON RIGHT; OVERTAKING AND PASSING:
6-2-5-1: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
A. Exceptions: Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement.
2. When placing a vehicle in a lawful position for, and when such vehicle is lawfully making, a left turn.
3. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair.
4. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
B. Divided Roadways: It is unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any street or highway which has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by means of
intermittent barriers or by means of a dividing section of not less than two feet (2') in width, either unpaved or delineated by curbs, lines or other
markings on the roadway except to the right of such barrier or dividing section, or to drive any vehicle over, upon or across any such dividing section, or
to make any left turn or semicircular or U-turn on any such divided street or highway, except through an opening in such barrier designed and intended
for the use of vehicles or through a plainly marked opening in such dividing section.
C. Driving In Right Hand Lane:
1. Notwithstanding the restricted speed limits upon all streets or highways, vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic thereon shall be
driven in the right hand lane for traffic or as close as practicable to the right hand edge or curb, except when overtaking and passing anothervehicle
proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
2. This subsection also applies to one-way streets and alleys. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-5-2: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all other rules consistent
with this section, shall apply:
A. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained
that such movement can be made with safety.
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway ahead is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe
distance; or
2. In preparation for a left turn; or
3. Where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to
give note of such allocation.
C. Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specific lanes to traffic moving in the same direction,
and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 239/565
6-2-5-3: OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES:
A. Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, except
when a roadway has been divided into traffic lanes, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway
whenever possible.
B. Overtaking Vehicle On Left: The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the
limitations and exceptions stated in this title:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicleproceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
C. When Overtaking On Right Permitted:
1. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
a. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
b. Upon a street with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of vehicles in each direction.
c. Upon a one-way street.
d. Upon a street or highway divided into two (2) roadways where traffic is restricted to one direction upon each of such roadways.
2. The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no
event shall such movement be made by driving off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway.
3. The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of a slow moving vehicle from the duty to drive as closely as practicable to the right hand
edge of the roadway. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-5-4: NO PASSING ZONES:
Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone, no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within such no passing
zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-5-5: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
A. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle and the traffic upon, and the condition of, the roadway.
B. No motor vehicle except an authorized emergency vehicle or a vehicle of an authorized member of the fire department shall follow within three hundred
feet (300') of any vehicle of a fire department which is responding to an emergency or fire call. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-6: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Vehicle Approaching And Entering Intersection:
1. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different street
or highway.
2. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets or highways at the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the
right of way to the driver of the vehicle on the right.
B. Vehicle Turning Left At Intersection:
1. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
2. Such driver turning left, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this title, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right of way to the driver making the left turn.
C. Vehicles Entering Through Street Or Highway:
1. The driver of any vehicle shall stop as required by subsection 6-2-8C of this chapter at the entrance to a through street or highway and shall yield the
right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through street or highway or which are approaching so closely on the
through street or highway as to constitute an immediate hazard.
2. Such driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the through street or highway shall
yield the right of way to the vehicle so about to enter or cross the through street or highway.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 240/565
D. Vehicles Entering Street Or Highway From Private Road Or Driveway: The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway or street from any
private road or driveway or from an alley not exceeding a width of twenty two feet (22') or from any "alley", as defined by this municipal code, shall
yieldthe right of way to all vehicles approaching on such street or highway.
E. Conduct Of Drivers And Pedestrians On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles: Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency
vehicle sounding a siren and having at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the right of such vehicle, except when otherwise directed by a police officer:
1. The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand
edge or curb of the street or highway clear of any intersection and thereupon stop and remain in such position until such authorized emergency
vehicle has passed.
2. All pedestrians upon the street or highway shall remain in a place of safety or proceed to the nearest curb or place of safety until such authorized
emergency vehicle has passed. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
6-2-7: TURNING, STARTING AND STOPPING SIGNALS:
A. Turning At Intersections:
1. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
a. Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
b. Left Turns On Two-Way Streets: At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each street entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the street nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of
such centerline where it enters the intersection; and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the
right of the centerline of the street being entered.
c. Left Turn On Other Than Two-Way Streets: At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the streets, the driver of
a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the
direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection as nearly as
practicable in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the street being entered.
2. The chief of police and the city engineer, with the approval of the city council, may, by placing markers, buttons or signs within intersections, require
and direct that a different course than that specified in this subsection be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection or may allocate and indicate
more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left turns. When markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a
vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required or permitted by such markers, buttons or signs.
B. Turning In Streets Prohibited:
1. No vehicle in a business district shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except at an intersection.
2. No vehicle in a residence district shall be turned left across the roadway or so as to proceed in the opposite direction when any other vehicle is
approaching from either direction within two hundred feet (200'), except at an intersection.
C. Starting Parked Vehicles Or Backing: No person shall start a vehicle stopped, standing or parked, nor shall any person back a vehicle on a street or
highway, in the city, unless movement can be made with reasonable safety.
D. Turning Movements And Required Signals:
1. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety
and then only after giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this title, if any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
2. Any signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during the last fifty feet (50') traveled by a vehicle before turning.
3. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle on a street or highway without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner
provided in this title to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal.
E. Signals By Hand And Arm Or Signal Device: The signals required by this title shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamp or
mechanical signal device.
F. Method Of Giving Signals: All signals required by this title given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of a vehicle in the following manner,
and such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left Turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally beyond the side of the vehicle.
2. Right Turn: Hand and arm extended upward beyond the side of the vehicle.
3. Stop Or Sudden Decrease Of Speed Signal: Hand and arm extended downward beyond the side of the vehicle. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-8: SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 241/565
A. Meeting Or Passing School Bus: The driver of any vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus equipped with signs
designating it as a school bus, which has stopped on a highway, street or road for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children when
such school bus displays a flashing red light signal visible from front and rear, shall bring such vehicle to a stop immediately before passing such
school bus. After bringing such vehicle to a full stop, such driver may then proceed past such school bus at a speed not greater than is reasonable or
proper, but in no event greater than ten (10) miles per hour and with due caution for the safety of pedestrians.
B. Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach Of Train:
1. Whenever any person driving a vehicle upon a highway approaches a railway grade crossing and a clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train, it is unlawful for the driver of the vehicle to fail to stop the vehicle before
traversing such grade crossing.
2. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any motor truck carrying explosive
or inflammable substances, whether empty or loaded, before crossing at any railway grade crossing shall stop such vehicle not less than ten feet
(10') nor more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest rail of such track and while so stopped shall listen, and look in both directions along such track, for
any approaching railroad train, before traversing such crossing.
C. Through Street Or Highway: The driver of any vehicle approaching any entrance of a street, highway or intersection, or railroad grade crossing,
signposted with a stop sign as provided in this title, except as otherwise permitted or directed in this title, shall stop:
1. Before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at a limit line when marked, otherwise before entering such street,
highway or intersection; or
2. Before entering a railroad grade crossing. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-2-9: SPEED DISPLAY OF POWER/REPEATED REVVING OF ENGINE OF IDLING MOTOR VEHICLE; RESTRICTIONS:
A. Special Restrictions:
1. The speed of any vehicle upon a highway, street or alley not in excess of the limits specified in this title or established by the city council is lawful
unless clearly proven to be in violation of subsection 6-1-1A of this chapter.
2. The speed of any vehicle upon a highway, street or alley in excess of any of the limits specified in this section or established by the city council is
prima facie unlawful. The prima facie limits referred to in this subsection are as follows and the same shall be applicable unless changed as
authorized by the city council; and, if so changed, then only when signs have been erected giving notice thereof, in which event the speed
designated on the signs shall be the prima facie limits:
a. Fifteen Miles Per Hour:
(1) When passing a school building or the grounds thereof contiguous to the street or highway during school hours or while children are going to or
leaving such school during opening or closing hours or while the playgrounds of any such school are in use by school children.
(2) When traversing any intersection of streets or highways if during the last one hundred feet (100') of his approach to such intersection the driver
does not have a clear and unobstructed view of such intersection and of any traffic upon all the streets or highways, entering such intersection
for a distance of one hundred feet (100') along all such streets or highways, except on a through street or highway or at a traffic controlled
intersection.
(3) Upon a street or highway bordering upon the grounds of any state, county or city hospital when the signs giving notice of the speed limit have
been erected.
b. Twenty Miles Per Hour: Upon all streets or highways which have not been designated as through streets.
c. Twenty Five Miles Per Hour: Upon all designated through streets.
d. Over Twenty Five Miles Per Hour: Upon any street or highway marked and signed by the chief of police, with the approval of the city council, when
the marking and signing indicate theallowance of such speed.
B. Minimum Speed Law: No person shall drive upon a street or highway at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement
of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation.
C. When Speed Limit Not Applicable:
1. The speed limits set forth in subsection A of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when driven in response to an emergency
call or in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, and when the drivers thereof sound an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle.
2. The provisions of subsection C1 of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
D. Speed Contests; Display Of Power; Repeated Revving Of Idling Motor Vehicle Engine: No person shall:
1. Engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street, aid or abet in such motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition on any
street.
2. Drive or permit to be driven any vehicle by the side of another vehicle on any street for a time longer than is necessary to pass such other vehicle,
except on designated one-way or multiple lane streets. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 242/565
3. Cause the intentional spinning of the wheels of a motor vehicle in such a manner that the tires of the motor vehicle lose traction with the road
surface.
4. Increase the revolutions per minute of the engine of an idling motor vehicle repeatedly so as to disturb others and for no other lawful purpose. (Ord.
303, 3-11-2005)
6-2-10: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
A. Driving On Sidewalks: It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive, or cause to be ridden or driven, any horse or other animal, or to ride, drive or propel,
or cause to be driven or propelled, any motor vehicle or bicycle upon or along any sidewalk.
B. Backing Across Street Intersection: No person shall back any vehicle across a street intersection.
C. Play Streets:
1. The city council has authority to declare any street or part thereof as a play street. No person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having businesses or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
2. Appropriate signs or devices must designate the street or portion thereof as a play street.
D. Scattering Load: It is unlawful to operate any vehicle so loaded or constructed that any part of its load is dropped upon the roadway.
E. Zone Of Quiet: It is unlawful for any person to ring any bell or gong or blow any whistle or cause unnecessary noises in a zone of quiet.
F. Sports In Streets: No person shall engage in any sport, amusement or play in any street which is not designated as a play street.
G. Funeral Procession: No vehicle shall be driven or propelled through or across any funeral procession passing along or though any street.
H. Driving On New Pavement:
1. No person shall ride, drive or propel, or cause to be ridden, driven or propelled, any horse or vehicle over or across any pavement newly laid or
repaired, or which is in the course of construction, around which there has been placed as a barrier, or at or near which there is a person or sign
warning persons riding or driving over such pavement, or sign or markings stating that the street is closed.
2. No vehicle shall be driven upon any newly painted roadway or lane markings upon which have been placed any barriers.
3. It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive or propel, or cause or permit to be ridden, driven or propelled, along or upon any paved, macadamized or
top dressed street in the city any vehicle or traction engine any tire of which is worn or is not smooth, or that has a sharp or uneven surface, or any
vehicle or traction engine to any tire or wheel of which is attached cleats or spikes or uneven surfaces, or any device that will cause damage to the
paving, macadamizing or top dressing such street, unless he secures permission from the city council or its designee as to the street or streets such
vehicle can be driven on or across. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 3
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
6-3-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of a public or private driveway.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
E. On a crosswalk or safety zone.
F. Within ten feet (10') of a crosswalk or safety zone at an intersection.
G. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control device located at the side of a roadway.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 243/565
H. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
I. Within twenty feet (20') of a driveway entrance to any fire station.
J. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
K. On the street side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street or highway.
L. Within a highway underpass or tunnel.
M. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
N. At any place within thirty five feet (35'), measured from the apex of the corner of an intersection in any business district, except at designated bus stops;
and the operator of no vehicle shall stop in the area designated as a bus stop longer than three (3) minutes. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984; amd. Ord. 153, 12-8-
1995)
O. At any curb which is marked by signs or red paint upon the curb. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
P. At any place within thirty five feet (35') of any intersection measured from the apex of the corner or at any place within ten feet (10') of the beginning of
the curve for the corner, whichever is greater. (Ord. 153, 12-8-1995)
6-3-2: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Parallel Parking: No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the street headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided
in this title.
B. Angle Parking:
1. The chief of police and the city engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be
permitted and shall mark or sign or cause to be marked or signed such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or
state highway within the city unless the department of highway approves such angle parking in writing.
2. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of
the street.
3. Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
C. Alleys: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for
the free movement of vehicular traffic, or to stop, stand or park a vehicle in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property.
2. Park on the left side of any designated one-way traffic movement alley.
D. Vehicle Or Trailer Projecting Into Street: In no case shall any part of any vehicle, part of the load of such vehicle, or trailer attached to such vehicle
project into the street on a line at right angles to the curb.
E. Twenty Four Hour Parking: No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than twenty four (24) hours.
F. Certain Purposes:
1. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
a. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
b. Greasing or repairing such vehicle, except as necessitated by an emergency.
2. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon any street in any business district, from which such vehicle merchandise is being sold, or on
which merchandise is placed and advertised for sale, or on which any article is being repaired, modeled or remodeled or manufactured.
G. Narrow Streets:
1. The chief of police and the city engineer, with the approval of the city council, are authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street
when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the street
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 244/565
does not exceed thirty feet (30').
2. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this subsection, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any such sign.
H. Schools: When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle
in any such designated place.
I. Left Side Of Street: No person riding, driving, propelling or in charge of any vehicle shall stop the same upon any street of the city with the left side of
such vehicle toward or along the curb, except on duly designated one-way streets.
J. Rear Of Vehicle To Curb: No vehicle shall stand backed up to the curb except when actually loading or unloading, but no vehicle shall stand backed up if
it interferes with orinterrupts the passage of other vehicles. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-3-3: MUNICIPAL VEHICLE PARKING SPACES:
The city council may designate a certain space to be reserved for the parking of municipal vehicles of the city. It is unlawful to park any vehicle, other than
a municipal vehicle, in such space. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-3-4: LOADING ZONES:
A. Standing For Loading: It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials, but the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes, nor the loading or
unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes, in the following designated places:
1. In an alley.
2. In any loading zone.
3. In any marked bus stop.
4. In front of theaters.
B. Loading Zones Designated: The chief of police and the city engineer, with the approval of the city council, shall determine the location of loading zones
and shall mark or cause to be marked by appropriate signs or as specifically required in this chapter those places where standing for loading only is
permitted under this subsection, subject to the following requirements and limitations:
1. Every loading zone and that portion of every curb reserved for loading shall be designated by yellow paint, or other yellow materials, upon the entire
curb surface therein.
2. Within any business district, not more than forty feet (40') on each side of the street in any one block may be set apart as a loading zone. (Ord. 12, 8-
16-1984)
6-3-5: PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS DESIGNATED:
A. Stands Designated: The city council is authorized to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor
vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as the city council determines to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the
public. Every such bus stop, taxicab stand or other stand will be designated by appropriate signs.
B. Stop To Load Or Unload: The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business or other district at any place other than at a bus
stop, or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance
with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
C. Use Of Bus Or Taxicab Stand: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand,
when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily
stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or
taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-3-6: TIMED PARKING:
A. Whenever by this chapter any city council resolution or other provision of this code any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on
designated streets, the chief of police and the city engineer shall erect or cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof; and no such
regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
B. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than is designated by signs in a time limit area. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-3-7: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 245/565
In the prosecution of a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the
complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such
parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-3-8: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter or as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with thedirection of a police
officer or official traffic control device. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-3-9: REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 4
PEDESTRIANS
6-4-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Crosswalks:
1. Except as otherwise provided in this title, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
2. Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
B. Sidewalk: The driver of any motor vehicle, prior to driving over or upon any sidewalk, shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian approaching thereon.
(Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-4-2: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS:
A. Every pedestrian crossing a street or highway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the street or highway.
B. The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of any pedestrian upon a street or
highway.
C. It is unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any roadway at any point other than within a crosswalk. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-4-3: WALKING ALONG STREETS AND HIGHWAYS:
A. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street or highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
street or highway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
B. No person shall stand in a street or highway for thepurpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.
C. It is unlawful for any pedestrian who is intoxicated to such an extent as to create a hazard to himself or others to walk or be upon any roadway. (Ord.
12, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 5
VEHICLE CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT
6-5-1: LIGHTING EQUIPMENT AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. When Vehicles Must Be Equipped: Every vehicle upon a street at any time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and
at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person or vehicle on the street shall be equipped with lighted lamps
and lighting devices as required in this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 246/565
B. Taillights:
1. Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with at least one taillight mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible for a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear.
2. It is unlawful for a taillight to be other than absolute red in color, and no portion of a taillight shall be of another color.
3. No rear lights shall be mounted higher than sixty inches (60") from the ground, nor lower than twenty four inches (24") from the ground.
4. A separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear license plate and render it clearly legible from a
distance of fifty feet (50') to the rear.
5. No red taillight shall be larger than four inches (4") in diameter nor smaller than two and seven-eighths inches (27/8") in diameter.
C. Headlamps On Motor Vehicles:
1. Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor driven cycle, at the times specified in subsection A of this section, shall be equipped with two
(2) lighted headlamps, mounted on opposite sides of the front of such vehicle; and they must be located directly above or in advance of the front axle
of such vehicle. The headlamps shall be located at a height measuredfrom the center of the headlamps of not more than fifty four inches (54") nor
less than twenty four inches (24") above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands.
2. Every motorcycle, at the times specified in subsection A of this section, shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two (2) headlamps,
which shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
3. Every motor driven cycle, at the times specified in subsection A of this section, shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two (2) lighted
headlamps; but in either event when the vehicle is operated at the times mentioned in subsection A of this section, the headlamp or headlamps shall
be of sufficient intensity to reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') when the motor drive cycle is operated at
any speed less than twenty five (25) miles per hour.
D. Lamps On Bicycles: Every bicycle, at the times specified in subsection A of this section, shall be equipped with a lamp emitting a white light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of three hundred feet (300') in front of such bicycle and with a red reflector visible for at least
three hundred feet (300') when directly in front of a motor vehicle displaying lawful undimmed headlights or with a rear lamp exhibiting a red light visible
from a distance of three hundred feet (300') to the rear.
E. Candlepower; Dimming:
1. There shall be uppermost distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed and of such intensity as to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of
at least three hundred feet (300') ahead for all conditions of loading. The maximum intensity of this uppermost distribution of light or composite beam
one degree of arc or more above the horizontal level of the lamps when the vehicle is not loaded shall not exceed eight thousand (8,000) apparent
candlepower, and at no other point of distribution of light or composite beam shall there be intensity of more than seventy five thousand (75,000)
apparent candlepower.
2. Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within five hundred feet (500'), such driver shall use a distribution of light
composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver; and in no case shall the high intensity portion
which is projected to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle be aimed higher than the center of the lamp from which it
comes at a distance of twenty five feet (25') ahead, and in no case higher than a level of forty two inches (42") above the level upon which the
vehicle stands at a distance of seventy five feet (75') ahead.
F. Spotlights: Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed two (2) spotlights, and every spotlight shall be so aimed and used when approaching
another vehicle that no part of the high intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle,
nor more than one hundred feet (100') ahead of the vehicle.
G. Fog Lamps:
1. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed two (2) fog lamps mounted upon the front below the level of the center of the headlamps.
Such fog lamps shall be located at a height measured from the centers of such lamps of not less than sixteen inches (16") above the level surface
upon which the vehicle stands.
2. Fog lamps shall not be used in substitution of headlamps, except under the conditions of rain or fog rendering disadvantageous the use of
headlamps.
3. Every fog lamp used upon a motor vehicle shall be so adjusted and aimed that no part of the high intensity portion of the beam shall, at a distance of
twenty five feet (25'), rise above the horizontal plane passing through the center of the lamp.
H. Signal Lamps And Signal Devices:
1. Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped within not less than one stop lamp on the rear, which shall emit a red light and which shall be
actuated upon the application of the service (foot) brake and must be visible during normal sunlight and at night time from a distance of three
hundred feet (300') to the rear.
2. Any vehicle may be equipped with a lamp type turn signal system or semaphore turn signal device capable of clearly indicating any intention to turn
to the right or to the left, and any such lamp type signal device shall project a flashing white or amber light.
I. Backup Lamps:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 247/565
1. Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a backup lamp, either separately or in combination with another lamp. Such backup lamp shall be so
directed as to project a white light illuminating the street to the rear of the vehicle for a distance not to exceed seventy five feet (75').
2. No backup lamp shall exceed a diameter of six inches (6") measured across the lens or face thereof, nor shall any lamp be lighted on any vehicle
moving forward or otherwise, except when such vehicle is about to be backed or is backing.
J. Following With Headlights Illuminated: Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within two hundred feet (200') to the rear, such driver
shall use a distribution of light.
K. Flashing Lights; Prohibited Equipment:
1. Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles except as a means of indicating right or left turns or emergency vehicles.
2. No vehicle shall be equipped with any lamp or illuminating device not required in this chapter. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-5-2: BRAKES:
A. No person shall operate on any street any motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles of a type subject to registration unless such vehicles, or at
least one unit of any such combination of vehicles, is equipped with brakes adequate to bring such vehicle or combination of vehicles to a complete
stop when operated upon a dry asphalt or concrete pavement surface where the grade does not exceed one percent (1%) at speeds set forth in the
following table:
Miles Per Hours Stopping Distances
10 9.3 feet
15 20.8 feet
20 37.0 feet
25 58.0 feet
B. Every trailer coach having a weight of one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or more shall be equipped with brakes in compliance with the table
contained in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-5-3: HORNS OR WARNING DEVICES:
A. Every motor vehicle, when operated upon any street, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound.
B. The driver of a motor vehicle, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, shall give audible warning with hishorn. Such horn shall not
otherwise be used.
C. No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, except as authorized by this title. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-5-4: MUFFLERS AND EXHAUST SYSTEMS; NOISE PREVENTION:
A. Muffler Defined: A "muffler" is a device consisting of chambers or baffle plates or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from
an internal combustion engine and effective in reducing noise.
B. Muffler Required: Every motor vehicle subject to registration and operated on any street shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler in
constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a
cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by
the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle and such original muffler shall comply with all of the
requirements of this section.
C. Exhaust Pipe Position: All exhaust pipes shall be parallel to the ground and vehicle, or vertical, and if vertical, the exhaust from such pipes shall not be
directed to the side of the vehicle.
D. Exhaust Products: No motor vehicle shall be operated in a manner resulting in the escape of excessive smoke, flame, gas, oil or fuel residue. (Ord. 12,
8-16-1984)
6-5-5: MIRRORS AND WINDSHIELDS:
A. Mirrors: All motor vehicles shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street for a distance of at least two hundred
feet (200') to the rear of such vehicle.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 248/565
B. Windshields And Windows: It is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon any street when the windshield or rear window or other windows are in such
a defective condition as to impair the driver's vision. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
6-5-6: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
A. Operating Vehicle Without Required Equipment Or In Unsafe Condition: It is unlawful to operate on any street any vehicle or combination of vehicles
which is in an unsafe condition, which is not equipped as required by this title, or which isnot safely loaded.
B. Driver Submit To Inspection Or Test Of Equipment:
1. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is directed by a police officer to stop and submit the lamps and other equipment to an inspection or test under the
conditions stated in this chapter, such driver shall stop and submit to such inspection or test.
2. Any police officer having reasonable grounds to believe that any lamp or other equipment upon a vehicle fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter may require the driver of such vehicle to stop and submit to such inspection or test. (Ord. 12, 8-16-1984)
Chapter 6
ELECTRIC LOW SPEED VEHICLES
6-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council to encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation, which, from an environmental standpoint, are energy efficient
and have zero emissions. The city council finds that the use of low speed vehicles in the city will promote that intent. These low speed vehicles, known as
neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs), will provide economical and nonpolluting transportation for those persons who use them in the city. It is the further
intent of this chapter to establish permit procedures, safety guidelines, minimum design criteria and operator restrictions for such vehicles. (Ord. 217, 3-9-
1999)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the definitions set forth in this section. Whenever any words or phrases used in this
chapter are not defined herein, but are defined in the Nevada Revised Statutes or elsewhere in this code, such definitions shall apply.
LOW SPEED VEHICLE: Any four (4) wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed is twenty (20) miles per hour or greater but not greater than twenty five
(25) miles per hour. This group includes neighborhood electric vehicles and speed modified golf carts, capable of a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour but
not greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE (NEV): An emission free motor vehicle with at least four (4) wheels in contact with the ground and is designed or
modified to operate at a speed of at least twenty (20) miles per hour but not greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour and is designed to carry no more
than four (4) passengers.
STANDARD NUMBER 500: Federal motor vehicle standard no. 500 established by the national highway traffic safety administration, and which may be
found at federal motor safety standard no. 500 at 49 CFR section 571.500. (Ord. 217, 3-9-1999; amd. Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-6-3: AUTHORIZATION TO DESIGNATE CERTAIN STREETS AND ROADS FOR USE:
The city council, by this chapter, and by resolution thereafter from time to time, may establish designated streets and roads in the city as being safe for
travel by NEVs and for other low speed vehicles other than NEVs. Different and more restricted designations of streets and roads may be adopted by
resolution for the operation of low speed vehicles other than NEVs. In connection with the adoption of any resolution permitting low speed vehicles other
than NEVs, the city council may establish additional conditions and restrictions different than those set forth in this chapter for the operation of NEVs. (Ord.
217, 3-9-1999)
6-6-4: SIGNAGE FOR NEVs:
The public works director is directed to post appropriate signage on the main streets of the city indicating that NEV operation is permitted on the streets
and roads of the city as set forth herein. Should low speed vehicles other than NEVs be permitted to travel on certain streets and roads in the city in the
future by resolution, the city council may also direct the public works director to post appropriate signage for those low speed vehicles by resolution. (Ord.
217, 3-9-1999)
6-6-5: MINIMUM DESIGN CRITERIA:
The city council finds that in consideration of the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the city, only NEVs meeting minimum
design criteria set forth herein shall be eligible upon compliance with all other requirements of this chapter for operation on certain designated streets and
roads in the city. Low speed vehicles meeting the following criteria shall be considered to be NEVs. The minimum design criteria are set forth in Nevada
Revised Statutes 484B.637 and federal motor safety standard no. 500 at 49 CFR section 571.500. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-6-6: OPERATOR SAFETY CRITERIA:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 249/565
The city council requires that the following NEV operator safety requirements shall be adhered to at all times:
A. NEV operators must have a valid driver's license issued by the state of Nevada or by another state of the United States.
B. NEV operators must meet Nevada financial responsibility and insurance requirements by obtaining liability insurance for NEVs in at least the minimum
type and amount designated, and changed from time to time, by the state and must carry proof of insurance with them at all times when operating the
vehicle.
C. NEV operators must maintain NEVs in a safe operating condition at all times.
D. NEV operators may only travel on designated streets and roads in the city. (Ord. 217, 3-9-1999)
6-6-7: NEVs; PERMITS AND DECALS:
A. NEVs are subject to the same registration requirements as other vehicles and are issued standard sized license plates. Nevada Revised Statutes
sections 482.205 - 482.210.
B. The police department shall create and issue an education and enforcement flier to NEV owners describing the requirements of this chapter for the
operation of NEVs on designated streets and roads in the city. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-6-8: ENFORCEMENT:
NEVs may only operate on designated streets and roads in the city if they are in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter and if the owner
thereof meets the requirements of this chapter. Any person operating an NEV in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016,
eff. 11-16-2016)
6-6-9: DESIGNATED STREETS AND ROADS IN CITY:
NEVs which comply with all of the requirements and conditions set forth herein may operate on all streets and roads in the city subject to the following
requirements and exceptions:
A. NEVs may operate on any street or road in the city where the maximum speed limit is thirty five (35) miles per hour or less.
B. NEVs may not operate on any street or road in the city with a maximum speed of over thirty five (35) miles per hour.
C. NEVs may not operate on Interstate 15.
D. When traveling on a street or road with more than one travel lane in each direction, NEVs will travel in the far right travel lane except when passing
another vehicle or when making a left turn.
E. NEVs operators will comply with all state and city traffic laws applicable to motor vehicles.
F. Owners and operators of NEVs should maintain the posted speed limit on streets and roads where the maximum speed is twenty (20) miles per hour or
less. On streets and roads with a maximum speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour, owners and operators of NEVs will maintain a speed of at
least twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord. 217, 3-9-1999)
Chapter 7
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE USE AND OPERATION
6-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The city council declares that this off highway vehicle use and operation chapter is an exercise of the regulatory powers delegated to the council by the
state of Nevada pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 490.100, inter alia.
B. It is the intent of this chapter to provide reasonable regulations for off highway vehicles, as defined in section 6-7-2 of this chapter, to operate on
designated public streets, roads and/or highways for the express purpose of traveling to private or public areas that are open for use by off highway
vehicles. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 250/565
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way maintained by a public authority when any part of such way is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV): A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for off highway and all-terrain use.
A. The term includes, but is not limited to:
1. An all-terrain vehicle (including a four-wheeler);
2. An all-terrain motorcycle;
3. A dune buggy; and
4. Any motor vehicle used on public lands for the purpose of recreation.
B. The term does not include:
1. A motor vehicle designed primarily for use in water;
2. A motor vehicle that is registered by the department of motor vehicles;
3. A "low speed vehicle" as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 484B.637 and/or section 6-6-2 of this title;
4. A neighborhood electric vehicle as defined in section 6-6-2 of this title; or
5. A "golf cart" as defined in section 6-8-2 of this title. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009; amd. Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-7-3: OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 490.090(2), as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, no person shall operate an OHV on
a public street, road or highway in the city of Mesquite that is not designated for use by OHVs.
B. No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate an OHV on any public street, road or highway in the city of Mesquite.
C. No person sixteen (16) years of age or older may operate an OHV on any public street, road or highway designated for OHV use in the city of Mesquite
unless the person possesses:
1. A valid motor vehicle operator's license, as provided by Nevada law; and (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
2. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 490.082, as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, a certificate of registration shall be attached to
the OHV. A certificate of registration is not required for an off highway vehicle which: (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
a. Is owned and operated by:
(1) A federal agency;
(2) An agency of this state; or
(3) A county, incorporated city or unincorporated town in this state;
b. Is part of the inventory of a dealer of off highway vehicles;
c. Is registered or certified in another state and is located in this state for not more than ninety (90) days;
d. Is used solely for husbandry on private land or on public land that is leased to the owner or operator of the off highway vehicle; or
e. Is used for work conducted by or at the direction of a public or private utility. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
D. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 490.110, as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, no person permitted to operate an OHV on a
public street, road or highway designated for OHV use in the city of Mesquite shall travel more than two (2) miles on a paved highway of this state
(state highway) on an OHV to reach a private or public area that is open for use by OHVs. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
E. Except as provided below, no person operating an OHV may operate the OHV on a designated public street, road, or highway for any purpose other
than to travel to or from a private or public area that is open for use by OHVs. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 490.090, as may be amended or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 251/565
renumbered from time to time, a person may operate an off highway vehicle on a paved highway that is not otherwise designated for use by off
highway vehicles:
1. If the off highway vehicle is operated on the highway for the purpose of crossing the highway, comes to a complete stop before crossing and crosses
as close as practicable to perpendicular to the direction of travel on the highway;
2. If the off highway vehicle is operated on the highway for the purpose of loading or unloading the off highway vehicle onto or off of another vehicle or
trailer, if the loading or unloading is as close as practicable to the place of operation of the off highway vehicle;
3. During an emergency if it is impossible or impracticable to use another vehicle or if a peace officer directs the operation of the off highway vehicle.
F. Any person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
G. It is a defense to a charge under subsection C1 of this section if the person charged produces, at or before the time of trial, a driver's license that was
valid at the time of his or her alleged operation. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
6-7-4: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS REGARDING DRIVING OR OPERATING OHVs:
A. No owner or other person in the care or custody of an OHV may give another person who is under sixteen (16) years of age permission to operate an
OHV on any public street, road or highway designated for OHV use in the city of Mesquite or may suffer, allow or permit such operation by a person
who is under sixteen (16) years of age.
B. Any person convicted of a violation of the above provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Mistake of age shall not be a defense to a charge under this section. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
6-7-5: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Unattended OHVs Prohibited: No person shall leave or allow any OHV owned or operated by him/herself to remain unattended on any public highway
or public property while the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition.
B. Traffic Laws Applicable: To the fullest extent practicable, the traffic laws of the state of Nevada, as set forth in the Nevada Revised Statutes, and of the
city of Mesquite, as set forth in this code, are hereby made applicable to the operation of OHVs under this chapter on any designated public streets,
roads, and/or highways of the city.
C. Violation, Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any of the above rules and regulations is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-7-6: DESIGNATED ROUTES AND TRAILS:
A. OHVs shall be used and operated within the city of Mesquite only over such public streets, roads, or highways that are designated by resolution of the
city council as open to such OHV use and operation. All streets, roads, or highways that are not open for OHV use in the city of Mesquite shall be
posted with signs indicating that OHV use is not permitted. The city of Mesquite will have authority to post signs establishing a designated crossing
route over a street, road, or highway that is not open for OHV use and OHVs shall not be operated on sidewalks or marked trails unless posted sign(s)
indicate otherwise. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
B. Signage concerning permitted and/or nonpermitted OHV travel on streets, roads, or highways in the city of Mesquite will be provided, but neither
signage nor the designation of streets, roads, or highways for OHV travel assures the safety of any operators, passengers or users of the designated
streets, roads, or highways. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
C. The city council shall adopt by resolution an "off highway vehicle/golf cart travel map" which shows where OHV use is not permitted under this chapter.
(Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-7-7: PARENT/ADULT RESPONSIBILITY:
A. In addition to any juvenile culpability which may be imposed due to violations of this chapter, the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall rest upon the adult owner or custodian of any OHV or the head of household where any OHV is kept, whether or not ownership of the
OHV is claimed by any other person residing in said household. A husband or wife, or two (2) or more adults living together, may jointly or separately
be charged as heads of the household where an OHV is kept.
B. If the true owner of an OHV is of such minor age as to prohibit the minor from being required to answer in court, the parent or guardian of such minor
may be required to appear and assume full responsibility for the actions or omissions of the minor. The age of the minor is no defense to a violation of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 252/565
the provisions of this chapter, and the parent, guardian, owner/custodian of the OHV or the head of the household of where the OHV is kept may be
held responsible for the actions or omissions of a minor's violation of this chapter. (Ord. 415, 12-9-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
Chapter 8
GOLF CART USE AND OPERATION
6-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The city council declares that this golf cart use and operation chapter is an exercise of the regulatory powers delegated to the council by the state of
Nevada pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 482.398 inter alia.
B. It is the intent of this chapter to provide reasonable regulations for golf carts, as defined in section 6-8-2 of this chapter, to operate on designated public
streets, roads and/or highways for the express purpose of traveling the route of access between a golf course and the residence or temporary abode of
the owner or operator of the golf cart. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, and their derivation, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings, ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GOLF CART: A motor vehicle that has no fewer than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground; and is designed to carry golf equipment and no more
than four (4) persons, including the driver.
A. The term includes, but is not limited to:
1. Golf cart.
B. The term does not include:
1. A motor vehicle designed primarily for use in water;
2. A motor vehicle that is registered by the department of motor vehicles;
3. A "low speed vehicle" as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 484B.637 and/or section 6-6-2 of this title;
4. A neighborhood electric vehicle as defined in section 6-6-2 of this title.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way maintained by a public authority when any part of such way is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-8-3: OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 482.398(3), as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, no person shall operate a golf cart
on a public street, road or highway in the city of Mesquite that is not designated for use by golf carts.
B. No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall operate a golf cart on any public street, road or highway in the city of Mesquite.
C. No person sixteen (16) years of age or older may operate a golf cart on any public street, road or highway designated for golf cart use in the city of
Mesquite unless the person possesses:
1. A valid motor vehicle operator's license, as provided by Nevada law.
D. Except as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 482.398(3), as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, no person shall operate a golf cart
on a public street, road or highway in the city of Mesquite after daylight hours.
E. Any person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
F. It is a defense to a charge under subsection C1 of this section if the person charged produces, at or before the time of trial, a driver's license that was
valid at the time of his or her alleged operation. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-8-4: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS REGARDING DRIVING OR OPERATING GOLF CARTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 253/565
A. No owner or other person in the care or custody of a golf cart may give another person who is under sixteen (16) years of age permission to operate a
golf cart on any public street, road or highway designated for golf cart use in the city of Mesquite or may suffer, allow or permit such operation by a
person who is under sixteen (16) years of age.
B. Any person convicted of a violation of the above provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Mistake of age shall not be a defense to a charge under this section. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-8-5: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Required Equipment:
1. Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 482.398(3), as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, a person shall not operate a golf cart on
any designated public streets, roads, and/or highways of the city, unless the golf cart has:
a. An emblem or placard for slow moving vehicles.
B. Traffic Laws Applicable: To the fullest extent practicable, the traffic laws of the state of Nevada, as set forth in the Nevada Revised Statutes, and of the
city of Mesquite, as set forth in this code, are hereby made applicable to the operation of a golf cart under this chapter on any designated public streets,
roads, and/or highways of the city.
C. Violation, Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any of the above rules and regulations is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-8-6: DESIGNATED ROUTES AND TRAILS:
A. Golf carts shall be used and operated within the city of Mesquite only over such public streets, roads, or highways that are designated by resolution of
the city council as open to such golf cart use and operation. All streets, roads, or highways that are not open for golf cart use in the city of Mesquite
shall be posted with signs indicating that golf cart use is not permitted. The city of Mesquite will have authority to post signs establishing a designated
crossing route over a street, road, or highway that is not open for golf cart use. Further, to the full extent possible, golf carts shall not be operated on
sidewalks or marked trails unless posted sign(s) indicate otherwise.
B. Signage concerning permitted and/or nonpermitted golf cart travel on streets, roads or highways in the city of Mesquite will be provided, but neither
signage nor the designation of streets, roads, or highways for golf cart travel assures the safety of any operators, passengers or users of the
designated streets, roads, or highways.
C. The city council shall adopt by resolution an "off highway vehicle/golf cart travel map" which shows where golf cart use is not permitted under this
chapter. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
6-8-7: PARENT/ADULT RESPONSIBILITY:
A. In addition to any juvenile culpability which may be imposed due to violations of this chapter, the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall rest upon the adult owner or custodian of any golf cart or the head of household where any golf cart is kept, whether or not ownership of
the golf cart is claimed by any other person residing in said household. A husband or wife, or two (2) or more adults living together, may jointly or
separately be charged as heads of the household where a golf cart is kept.
B. If the true owner of a golf cart is of such minor age as to prohibit the minor from being required to answer in court, the parent or guardian of such minor
may be required to appear and assume full responsibility for the actions or omissions of the minor. The age of the minor is no defense to a violation of
the provisions of this chapter, and the parent, guardian, owner/custodian of the golf cart or the head of the household of where the golf cart is kept may
be held responsible for the actions or omissions of a minor's violation of this chapter. (Ord. 506, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
Title 7
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
BUILDING AND RELATED CODES
7-1-1: BUILDING CODE:
A. Adoption: That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the
International Building Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of
Mesquite, in the State of Nevada regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 254/565
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the City of Mesquite are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The Southern Nevada amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2018 edition of the International Building Code are
available for review at the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 548, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7-1-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the
International Residential Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the
City of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the Office of the Mesquite Building
Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The Southern Nevada amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2018 International Residential Code are available for
review at the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 547, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7-1-3: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the Building Department, being marked and designated as the City of
Mesquite amendments to the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code, as provided by the City, is hereby adopted as amendments to the Administrative
Code of the City for regulating and governing the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Administrative Code on file in the Office of the Building Department are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 103 - Building Code shall be amended to read:
is the international building code and international residential code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted by this jurisdiction.
Section 302.3.1 will be added to say:
All plans will have two (2) copies of the soils report submitted with the plans. All lots will have a minimum of two (2) test pits for soil testing. Test
pits must be to a depth at least 10 feet below the bottom of building footing. A pad certification from a Nevada registered civil engineer that states
that the building pad is adequate to meet the structural needs of the structure to be built. A plan showing how all slopes located on the lot or parcel
will be stabilized is required with the building permit submittal. All slopes must be built to a 3 to 1 slope or greater.
Section 306.1.1, Exception 1 shall be amended to read:
Concrete for foundations conforming to the minimum requirements of chapter 19 of the building code or for group R, division 3 or group U, division
1 occupancies, provided the building official finds that a special hazard does not exist.
Section 306.1.5.2 shall be amended to read:
In addition to section 306.5.1 requirements, nondestructive testing as required by chapter 17 of the building code.
Section 306.1.6 shall be amended to read:
As required by chapter 22 of the building code.
Section 306.1.12 shall be amended to read:
During the taking of test specimens and placing of all shotcrete and as required by chapter 19 of the building code.
Section 306.1.13 shall be amended to read:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 255/565
During earthwork excavations, grading and filling operations inspection to satisfy requirements of appendix J of the building code.
Section R401.5 Slopes and soils testing.
Section 309.1 Exception 1 delete in its entirety.
Table 3-A - Building Permit Fees shall be amended as follows:
$ 1.00 to $ 1,100.00 $ 36.00
1,101.00 to 1,200.00 38.50
1,201.00 to 1,300.00 41.25
1,301.00 to 1,400.00 44.00
1,401.00 to 1,500.00 46.75
1,501.00 to 1,600.00 49.50
1,601.00 to 1,700.00 52.50
1,701.00 to 1,800.00 55.25
1,801.00 to 1,900.00 57.75
1,901.00 to 2,000.00 60.25
2,001.00 to 3,000.00 63.50
3,001.00 to 4,000.00 77.25
4,001.00 to 5,000.00 89.00
5,001.00 to 6,000.00 101.75
6,001.00 to 7,000.00 114.50
7,001.00 to 8,000.00 127.25
8,001.00 to 9,000.00 140.00
9,001.00 to 10,000.00 152.75
10,001.00 to 11,000.00 165.50
11,001.00 to 12,000.00 178.25
12,001.00 to 13,000.00 191.00
13,001.00 to 14,000.00 203.75
14,001.00 to 15,000.00 216.50
15,001.00 to 16,000.00 229.25
16,001.00 to 17,000.00 242.00
17,001.00 to 18,000.00 254.75
18,001.00 to 19,000.00 267.50
19,001.00 to 20,000.00 280.25
20,001.00 to 21,000.00 293.00
21,001.00 to 22,000.00 305.75
22,001.00 to 23,000.00 318.50
23,001.00 to 24,000.00 331.25
24,001.00 to 25,000.00 344.00
25,001.00 to 26,000.00 356.75
26,001.00 to 27,000.00 366.00
27,001.00 to 28,000.00 375.00
28,001.00 to 29,000.00 384.25
29,001.00 to 30,000.00 393.50
Total Valuation Fee
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 256/565
30,001.00 to 31,000.00 402.75
31,001.00 to 32,000.00 411.75
32,001.00 to 33,000.00 421.00
33,001.00 to 34,000.00 430.25
34,001.00 to 35,000.00 439.50
35,001.00 to 36,000.00 448.55
36,001.00 to 37,000.00 457.75
37,001.00 to 38,000.00 467.00
38,001.00 to 39,000.00 476.00
39,001.00 to 40,000.00 485.25
40,001.00 to 41,000.00 494.50
41,001.00 to 42,000.00 503.75
42,001.00 to 43,000.00 512.75
43,001.00 to 44,000.00 522.00
44,001.00 to 45,000.00 531.25
45,001.00 to 46,000.00 540.25
46,001.00 to 47,000.00 550.00
47,001.00 to 48,000.00 558.75
48,001.00 to 49,000.00 568.00
49,001.00 to 50,000.00 577.00
50,001.00 to 51,000.00 599.00
51,001.00 to 52,000.00 605.50
52,001.00 to 53,000.00 611.75
53,001.00 to 54,000.00 618.25
54,001.00 to 55,000.00 624.50
55,001.00 to 56,000.00 631.00
56,001.00 to 57,000.00 637.25
57,001.00 to 58,000.00 643.75
58,001.00 to 59,000.00 650.00
59,001.00 to 60,000.00 656.50
60,001.00 to 61,000.00 662.75
61,001.00 to 62,000.00 669.25
62,001.00 to 63,000.00 675.50
63,001.00 to 64,000.00 682.00
64,001.00 to 65,000.00 688.25
65,001.00 to 66,000.00 694.75
66,001.00 to 67,000.00 701.00
67,001.00 to 68,000.00 707.50
68,001.00 to 69,000.00 713.75
69,001.00 to 70,000.00 720.25
70,001.00 to 71,000.00 726.50
71,001.00 to 72,000.00 733.00
72,001.00 to 73,000.00 739.25
73,001.00 to 74,000.00 745.50
Total Valuation Fee
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 257/565
74,001.00 to 75,000.00 752.00
75,001.00 to 76,000.00 758.50
76,001.00 to 77,000.00 764.75
77,001.00 to 78,000.00 771.25
78,001.00 to 79,000.00 777.50
79,001.00 to 80,000.00 784.00
80,001.00 to 81,000.00 790.25
81,001.00 to 82,000.00 796.75
82,001.00 to 83,000.00 803.00
83,001.00 to 84,000.00 809.50
84,001.00 to 85,000.00 815.75
85,001.00 to 86,000.00 822.25
86,001.00 to 87,000.00 828.50
87,001.00 to 88,000.00 835.00
88,001.00 to 89,000.00 841.25
89,001.00 to 90,000.00 847.75
90,001.00 to 91,000.00 854.00
91,001.00 to 92,000.00 860.50
92,001.00 to 93,000.00 866.75
93,001.00 to 94,000.00 873.25
94,001.00 to 95,000.00 879.50
95,001.00 to 96,000.00 886.00
96,001.00 to 97,000.00 892.25
97,001.00 to 98,000.00 896.50
98,001.00 to 99,000.00 899.00
99,001.00 to 100,000.00 905.50
100,001.00 to 500,000.00 905.50 for the first 100,000.00 plus 3.60 for each additional 1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
500,001.00 to 1,000,000.00 2,945.00 for the first 500,000.00 plus 5.25 for each additional 1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
1,000,001.00 and up 5,112.50 for the first 1,000,000.00 plus 3.25 for each additional 1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
Other Inspections And Fees:
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge - 2 hours) $75.00 per hour*
2. Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of section 305.8 35.00 per hour*
3. Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans (minimum charge - 1/2 hour) 47.00 per hour*
4. For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both Actual costs**
*Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.
**Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
Table 3-E - Elevator Permit Fees, delete in its entirety.
Table 3-F - Elevator Annual Certificates Of Inspection Fees, delete in its entirety.
Table 3-H - Grading Permit Fees shall be amended as follows:
50 cubic yards (38.2m3) or less $24.00
Total Valuation Fee
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 258/565
51 to 100 cubic yards (40 to 76.5m3) 37.75
101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 to 764.6m3) 37.75 for the first 100 cubic yards, plus 17.75 for each additional 100 cubic yards or fraction
thereof.
1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 to
7645.5m3)
198.40 for the first 1,000 cubic yards, plus 14.75 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction
thereof.
10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 to
76,455m3)
331.50 for the first 10,000 cubic yards, plus 61.35 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or
fraction thereof.
100,001 cubic yards (76,456m3) or more 937.50 for the first 10,000 cubic yards, plus 37.25 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or
fraction thereof.
(Ord. 299, 3-9-2004)
7-1-4: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the
International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy
Conservation Code of the City of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada for regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of
energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems in the City of Mesquite; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the Office of the Mesquite
Building Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: That the Southern Nevada amendments to the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code, published October 12, 2006, be adopted
as amendments to the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code. (Ord. 369, 3-16-2007, eff. 4-5-2007)
7-1-5: MECHANICAL CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the Uniform
Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, be and is hereby adopted as the
Mechanical Code of the City of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada for regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation, and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, and refrigeration systems; incinerators; and other miscellaneous heat
producing appliances within the City of Mesquite; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the Office of the Mesquite Building Department are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The Southern Nevada amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2018 Uniform Mechanical Code are available for review at
the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 550, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7-1-6: PLUMBING CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the Uniform
Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, be and is hereby adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the City of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada for regulating and governing the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of plumbing systems within the City of Mesquite; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the Office of the Mesquite
Building Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The Southern Nevada amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2018 Uniform Plumbing Code are available for review at
the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 549, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7-1-7: ELECTRICAL CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the National
Electrical Code, 2017 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City
of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada for regulating and governing the installation of electrical conductors, equipment, and raceways; signaling and
communications conductors, equipment, and raceways; and optical fiber cables and raceways within the City of Mesquite; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electrical Code on file in
the Office of the Mesquite Building Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The Southern Nevada amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2017 National Electrical Code are available for review at
the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 552, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 259/565
7-1-8: POOL CODE:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the Southern
Nevada Pool Code, 2018 edition, be and is hereby adopted as the Pool Code of the City of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada for regulating and
governing the installation of pools, spas and water features within the City of Mesquite; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Pool Code on file in the Office of the Mesquite Building
Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The Southern Nevada amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are
available for review at the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 551, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7-1-9: EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
A. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the International
Existing Building Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the
City of Mesquite, in the State of Nevada regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the City of Mesquite are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. The Southern Nevada amendments to the 2018 International Existing Building Code are available for review at the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 553, 10-23-
2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
ARTICLE A. FIRE CODE
7-1A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known as the FIRE CODE OF THE CITY OF MESQUITE and may be cited as such.
Where the designation International Fire Code or the abbreviation IFC appears in this article, it shall be construed as referring to the International Fire
Code as adopted by this article. (Ord. 316, 3-22-2005)
7-1A-2: ADOPTION:
That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the Southern Nevada Consensus Fire
Code amendments adapted to 2018 IFC including various NFPA standards with additional amendments for Mesquite, Nevada, by the International Code
Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL, 60478-5795, is adopted by reference as code, including the following appendices: B, fire flow
requirements for buildings; C, fire hydrant locations and distribution. (Ord. 555, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7-1A-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Mesquite Fire Department, which is hereby established and which
shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. (Ord. 316, 3-22-2005)
7-1A-4: STATE FIRE MARSHAL REGULATIONS:
Pursuant to Nevada Administrative Code section 477.280, the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Mesquite Fire Department, which is established under the
supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department, shall enforce the regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal. (Ord. 316, 3-22-2005)
7-1A-5: CITATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department and members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention may prepare, sign and serve written citations on persons accused of
violating any provision of this article. Any designated employee issuing a citation pursuant to this section shall comply with the provisions of Nevada
Revised Statutes section 171.1773. (Ord. 316, 3-22-2005)
7-1A-6: AMENDMENTS:
The Southern Nevada Consensus amendments with City of Mesquite amendments to the 2018 Fire Code are available for review at the City Clerk's
Office. (Ord. 555, 10-23-2018, eff. 11-13-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 260/565
Chapter 2
DESERT TORTOISE HABITAT CONSERVATION
7-2-1: TITLE AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The title of this chapter shall be DESERT TORTOISE HABITAT CONSERVATION. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development in
Mesquite city, including, but not limited to, building permits, grading permits, encroachment permits, off site permits, subdivisions, resubdivisions, minor
subdivisions or other divisions of land for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-2: FINDINGS:
The city council finds and determines that:
A. Pursuant to the authority granted to it in the federal endangered species act of 1973, 16 USC section 1531 et seq., the U.S. fish and wildlife service has
listed the desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) as a threatened species, effective April 2, 1990.
B. The secretary of the interior may permit the incidental taking of a threatened species in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to section 10(a) of the
endangered species act (16 USC section 1539). All applications for a section 10(a) permit must be accompanied by a habitat conservation plan
approved by the U.S. fish and wildlife service. Said section 10(a) permit may allow the incidental taking of the threatened species as a consequence of
otherwise lawful activities on the basis that the habitat conservation plan will provide a program for the protection of the species.
C. The U.S. fish and wildlife service has decreed that:
1. Development within the historic range (habitat) of the desert tortoise has resulted in loss and degradation of occupied desert tortoise habitat,
increased the isolation of desert tortoise populations, reduced the potential habitat areas for future colonization, and eliminated the corridors which
allow the species to relocate as environmental conditions warrant;
2. The desert tortoise's survival cannot be ensured on small isolated acreage surrounded by, or in close proximity to, development or human
populations; and
3. Impacts to the desert tortoise are not limited to loss or degradation of actually occupied habitat only.
D. To decrease the impact upon land development in Clark County caused by the listing of the desert tortoise as a threatened species and to assist in the
preservation of the desert tortoise, the county has developed and proposes to implement a habitat conservation plan, which it has entitled "The Clark
County Desert Conservation Plan", and which was approved by the board of county commissioners on June 21, 1994. A copy of the desert
conservation plan is on file with the county clerk, commission division. The costs of developing and implementing the desert conservation plan have
been and shall continue to be borne by those who disturb land within the historic range of habitat of the desert tortoise. The desert conservation plan
has also been approved by the cities of Las Vegas, North Las Vegas, Henderson, Boulder City and Mesquite and the Nevada department of
transportation and was submitted to the U.S. fish and wildlife service, together with a request for a section 10(a) permit to take desert tortoises. On or
about August 1, 1995, the U.S. fish and wildlife service issued its section 10(a) permit to Clark County, the Nevada department of transportation and
the cities of Las Vegas, North Las Vegas, Henderson, Boulder City and Mesquite. Among the conditions of the section 10(a) permit is a provision that
Clark County and each of the cities adopt and enforce ordinances containing the provisions herein contained.
E. All mitigation fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used to facilitate the implementation of the desert conservation plan and
the terms of the section 10(a) permit.
F. Adoption and implementation of this chapter demonstrates the county's and city's intent to cooperate with federal and state agencies and conservation
groups to provide for the survival of the desert tortoise and other species of concern, while at the same time to provide for the further development of
property in Clark County.
G. The terms of this chapter are intended to be consistent with the requirements of the desert conservation plan and the section 10(a) permit. (Ord. 479, 3-
11-2014)
7-2-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to finance the preparation and development of a habitat conservation plan and the application for a section 10(a) permit
under the federal endangered species act for the Clark County desert tortoise habitat conservation plan study area. It is the further purpose of this chapter
to provide a method for mitigation of impacts to the desert tortoise caused by the loss of its habitat due to development during the preparation of a habitat
conservation plan and provide for habitat mitigation to be identified in the habitat conservation plan. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS: The board of county commissioners of the county of Clark.
CITY: The city of Mesquite.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 261/565
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Mesquite city.
COUNTY: The county of Clark.
DESERT TORTOISE: An animal species known as Gopherus agassizii.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: An on site or off site permit issued by the city, which authorizes the development of a parcel of land which has not previously
been improved in accordance with all applicable city ordinances, including, but not limited to, building permits, grading permits and dust permits for
construction activities, including grading and trenching issued by the Southern Nevada health district. Demolition permits and temporary power permits do
not constitute a development permit.
FEE ASSESSMENT AREA: All real property located within the Clark County desert conservation plan fee assessment area as described in Clark County
code section 28.46.040.
INCIDENTAL TAKE PERMIT: The permit, effective as of February 1, 2001, issued by the secretary of interior pursuant to section 10(a)(1)(B) of the federal
endangered species act of 1973, 16 USC section 1539 which incorporates by reference the multiple species habitat conservation plan and implementing
agreement and allows the incidental taking of threatened or endangered species in the course of otherwise lawful activities.
MITIGATION FEE: The fee imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
PARCEL: All real property for which a development permit is applied.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, and designed for single-family residential purposes
only. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-5: INCIDENTAL TAKE PERMIT; COMPLIANCE WITH ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT:
A. Required: All applicants for a land disturbance permit shall complete a land disturbance/mitigation fee form described in section 7-2-9 of this chapter
prior to issuance of the permit.
B. Compliance With The Endangered Species Act:
1. All persons, firms or entities located within Clark County which engage in any activity covered pursuant to the Clark County multiple species habitat
conservation plan (MSHCP), including, but not limited to, residential and commercial development, agriculture, mining, grazing and off highway
vehicle activities must comply with the applicable provisions of the incidental take permit to be included, by certificate of inclusion, for coverage under
the incidental take permit.
2. All persons, firms or entities, their agents and employees, which comply with the provisions of this chapter are hereby permitted to incidentally take
any species for which the United States fish and wildlife service has issued the incidental take permit so long as such person, firm or entity has
complied and continues to comply with the applicable provisions of the incidental take permit.
3. All persons, firms, or entities which are not required to pay an MSHCP mitigation fee pursuant to the terms of this chapter, but are otherwise in
compliance with the applicable provisions of the incidental take permit, are hereby permitted to incidentally take any species covered by the
incidental take permit.
4. The certificate of inclusion that allows a person, firm or entity to comply with the federal endangered species act through the incidental take permit,
including the incidental take of species listed in the incidental take permit, shall be immediately revoked, without further action or notice, in the event
such person, firm or entity ceases to be in compliance with subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-6: DESIGNATION OF CLARK COUNTY DESERT CONSERVATION PLAN FEE ASSESSMENT AREA:
All those certain lands located in the incorporated boundaries of the city of Mesquite, state of Nevada, are hereby designated as the Clark County desert
conservation plan fee assessment area. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-7: MITIGATION FEE:
Except as hereinafter provided, all applicants for development permits within the boundaries of the fee assessment area shall pay an MSHCP mitigation
fee of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) per gross disturbed acre located within the parcel to be developed and the area disturbed by related off site
improvements except as provided in sections 7-2-8 and 7-2-12 of this chapter.
The purpose of this fee is to allow the applicant, by certificate of inclusion, to comply with the federal endangered species act through the incidental take
permit issued to the county. Fees collected are used to implement the terms of the incidental take permit. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-8: IMPOSITION OF FEE:
A. No development permit applicable to real property located within the boundaries of the fee assessment area shall be issued or approved without the
payment of the mitigation fees required by this chapter.
B. Applicants for a land disturbance permit who have paid per acre fees pursuant to section 7 of the federal endangered species act may be required to
pay a portion of the MSHCP mitigation fee as follows:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 262/565
1. If an applicant paid less than five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) per gross disturbed acre or any portion thereof located within the parcel as well as
the area disturbed by related off site improvements in section 7 fees, the applicant shall pay the difference between five hundred fifty dollars
($550.00) per acre and the amount per acre paid in section 7 fees. These acres shall be covered by and subject to the incidental take permit.
2. If an applicant paid five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) or more per gross disturbed acre or any portion thereof located within the parcel as well as the
area disturbed by related off site improvements in section 7 fees, the applicant shall not pay the MSHCP mitigation fee for those acres. Those acres
are not covered by or subject to the incidental take permit. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-9: DESERT CONSERVATION PLAN LAND DISTURBANCE/MITIGATION FEE FORM:
All applicants for development permits shall, prior to issuance thereof, complete a desert conservation plan land disturbance/mitigation fee form on the
forms furnished by the building department. The land disturbance/mitigation fee form must be complete, signed by the applicant for the development
permit and contain at a minimum, the following information: the assessor's parcel number, the number of acres within the parcel and the area disturbed by
related off site improvements, and the amount of mitigation fee actually paid. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-10: DESERT CONSERVATION PLAN COMPLIANCE FORM FEES:
All applicants for development permits that are required to submit a land disturbance/mitigation fee form shall pay processing fees to the building
department of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per residential development permit and fifty dollars ($50.00) per commercial development permit. (Ord. 479, 3-
11-2014)
7-2-11: PAYMENT OF FEE:
The mitigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any development permit following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 479,
3-11-2014)
7-2-12: EXEMPTIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following types of development shall not be required to pay a mitigation fee:
A. Reconstruction of any structure damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural causes;
B. Rehabilitation or remodeling of existing structures or existing off site improvements;
C. Development of any parcel which has previously been approved and issued a separate section 10(a) permit under the federal endangered species act
of 1973 for the desert tortoise. Such lands are covered by and are subject to the terms and conditions of a separate habitat conservation plan and
incidental take permit approved and issued by the United States fish and wildlife services. Such lands are not covered by or subject to the incidental
take permit. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
7-2-13: FEE ADMINISTRATION:
A. All mitigation fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited into a special reserve fund. The fund, including interest and
other income which accrues thereto, shall be expended solely for the implementation of the terms of the incidental take permit, as that document
currently exists or as it may hereinafter be amended.
B. MSHCP mitigation fees shall not be exempt nor refunded except as specified in this section. Clark County shall consider each refund request and may
order a refund of fees as provided in Nevada Revised Statutes 354.220 through 354.250. Applicants who request refunds after submitting an
application for a land disturbance permit and then withdrawing it prior to the permit issuance may receive up to eighty percent (80%) of the MSHCP
mitigation fee paid. (Ord. 479, 3-11-2014)
Chapter 2A
VIRGIN RIVER HABITAT CONSERVATION
7-2A-1: TITLE; APPLICATION:
The title of this chapter shall be INTERIM FEES FOR THE VIRGIN RIVER HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
all development in Mesquite city including, but not limited to, building permits, grading permits, encroachment permits, off site permits, subdivisions,
resubdivisions, minor subdivisions or other divisions of land for any purpose whatsoever. Existing structures are exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 387, 10-9-
2007, eff. 11-1-2007)
7-2A-2: PLAN ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city of Mesquite, being marked and designated as the interim fees for the Virgin
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 263/565
River habitat conservation plan and is hereby adopted by the city of Mesquite, state of Nevada facilitating the implementation of the Virgin River habitat
conservation plan for sensitive species in the Virgin River including the imposition of a mitigation fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per gross acre for
development permits for all property located within the city of Mesquite and requiring property owners within this area to complete a land disturbance
report prior to the issuance of a development permit; and in areas where finished lots exist, the five hundred dollars ($500.00) per gross acre will be
divided to the density set forth in approved planned unit development handbooks, or as defined by the city in the final action of the city council; and
providing for other matters properly relating thereto. (Ord. 387, 10-9-2007, eff. 11-1-2007)
Chapter 3
LAND DIVISION
7-3-1: STATE STATUTE ADOPTED:
That certain document, identified as the Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.471 through 278.4725, inclusive, as amended from time to time, is hereby
made a portion of the planning code of the city, and by designation and reference is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, the same as if it were
fully set forth herein. (Ord. 46, 10-13-1988)
7-3-2: DIVISION OF LAND INTO LARGE PARCELS:
The division of land wherein each proposed lot is at least ten (10) acres in area, including roads and easements, shall be subject to the provisions of
Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.471 through 278.4725, inclusive. (Ord. 46, 10-13-1988)
Chapter 4
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the residential construction tax is to raise revenue to enable the city to provide neighborhood parks and facilities for parks which are
required by the residents of new residential development. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: A person who has filed an application for a building permit for the construction of a residential use.
APPLICATION: The city's application for a building permit.
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required by this code for the construction of a residential use.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, Nevada.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of Mesquite, Nevada.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy and including, but not limited to, one-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings (apartment houses), condominium units, group dwellings and mobile home lots.
FACILITIES: Turf, trees, irrigation, playground apparatus, playing fields, areas to be used for organized amateur sports, play areas, picnic areas,
horseshoe pits and other recreational equipment or appurtenances designed to serve the natural persons, families and small groups from the
neighborhood from which the tax was collected.
IMPROVEMENT OF FACILITIES: The expansion, modification, redesign, redevelopment or enhancement of existing facilities or the installation of new or
additional facilities.
MASTER PLAN: The long range comprehensive master plan of the city of Mesquite adopted by the city council on September 13, 1994, including
amendments from time to time.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK: A site not exceeding twenty five (25) acres, designed to serve the recreational and outdoor needs of natural persons, families
and small groups.
PARK DISTRICT: A defined geographic area of the city which serves a particular neighborhood within the city, and which may be deemed to be the entire
city.
PARK FACILITIES: All facilities, recreational equipment and improvements to neighborhood parks and including, but not limited to, acquisition of the
neighborhood park site, grading and land preparation, construction and installation of playground apparatus, playing fields, picnic areas, landscaping,
access roads, trails, and all other recreational facilities, equipment and appurtenances designed to serve persons, families and small groups from the
neighborhood from which the tax was collected.
RECREATION PLAN: The recreation plan element (chapter 13) of the adopted master plan, which includes the specification of present and future sites for
neighborhood parks.
REFUND APPLICATION: The application form for a refund of residential construction taxes paid which must be filed by an applicant for a refund pursuant
to subsections 7-4-9C and E of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 264/565
REFUND PROCEDURES: The procedures for a refund of residential construction taxes paid which must be followed by an applicant for a refund pursuant
to subsections 7-4-9C and E of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX: A tax, authorized by state law, and imposed on the privilege of constructing dwelling units within the city to raise
revenue for the provision of neighborhood parks and park facilities to meet the needs created by residential development.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: The building or construction of dwelling units.
SPECIAL FUND OR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX SPECIAL FUND: A discrete fund established by the city for the receipt of residential
construction taxes collected from residential development. (Ord. 499, 4-26-2016)
7-4-3: APPLICABILITY AND TIME OF IMPOSITION:
A. Time Of Imposition: The residential construction tax shall be imposed at the time of application for a building permit on all applicants for a building
permit for dwelling units or residential development in the city.
B. No Permit Without Payment: No building permit for residential development shall be issued by the city unless and until the applicable residential
construction tax has been paid to the city.
C. Residential Construction Tax Installment Payments Permitted Upon Request; Requirements:
1. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsections A and B of this section, and subject to all other legal requirements being completed, the director of
development services of the city of Mesquite shall permit, upon written request, an applicant to pay the entire applicable residential construction tax
in three (3) equal installment payments.
2. In the event that a request is approved for an applicant to make three (3) equal installment payments of the residential construction tax, the first
payment must be made prior to issuance of the building permit for the requested residential development. Upon payment of the first equal installment
payment of the residential construction tax, and subject to all other legal requirements being completed, the director of development services or
his/her designee shall issue a building permit for residential development. The remaining two (2) installment payments shall be paid in successive
three (3) month intervals. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant making installment payments may pay any remaining residential construction
tax balance more quickly than is required under a permitted installment payment plan.
3. In no event will a certificate of occupancy be issued until the required residential construction tax is paid in full. (Ord. 467, 11-13-2012)
7-4-4: RATE OF RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX:
The rate of the residential construction tax as applied to a given applicant shall be one percent (1%) of the valuation of the residential dwelling unit for
which the building permit is being sought or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is less. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-5: IMPOSITION, CALCULATION AND COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX:
A. After the effective date hereof, no application for a building permit for residential development shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the
residential construction tax calculated to be due.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit for residential development, the building official shall: 1) determine the valuation of the proposed
construction based on actual construction costs in the area; 2) calculate one percent (1%) of said valuation; 3) determine whether the one percent (1%)
calculation results in an amount greater than or less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 4) if the one percent (1%) is equal to or greater than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), impose a residential construction tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and 5) if the one percent (1%) is less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), impose a residential construction tax equal to the one percent (1%) amount.
C. Upon determining the amount of the residential construction tax due, the building official shall collect the tax from the applicant prior to issuance of the
building permit. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-6: CREDITS:
A. The developer of a planned unit development or other applicant for residential development approval may elect to dedicate park land to meet park
needs resulting, in whole or in part, from a proposed residential development. No land dedication will be considered, however, unless and until the city
council has determined that the park land is appropriate and consistent with the recreation plan as to location, size, topography, hydrology, soils,
drainage, access and such other factors as the city council shall deem to be relevant. No dedication of land shall occur without the express approval of,
and acceptance of the land dedication by, the city council.
B. If the city council approves the land dedication, the ordinance accepting the land dedication shall state the value of the land dedicated and the extent to
which it offsets the otherwise applicable residential construction tax. No credit shall be given in an amount greater than the otherwise applicable
residential construction tax, even if the value of the land dedicated is determined to exceed the otherwise applicable residential construction tax. (Ord.
122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-7: ESTABLISHMENT OF PARK DISTRICTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 265/565
A. In accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.4983(4)(a) and the city recreation plan, the city hereby designates the entire city as a single
park district. In the future, pursuant to the annual review or at such other times as deemed appropriate, the city council may create additional or revised
park districts.
B. Park district boundaries may be amended by the city council, by ordinance, to maintain proper neighborhood service areas as required by state statute.
C. Funds collected from each park district shall be separately maintained and accounted for and expenditures from such district accounts shall be limited
to the acquisition, improvement and expansion of neighborhood parks or the installation of facilities in existing neighborhood parks within the
boundaries of the park district where such funds have been collected or for the benefit of the neighborhood from which such funds were collected. (Ord.
122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-8: RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION TAX SPECIAL FUND:
A. There is hereby created a segregated residential construction tax special fund.
B. The special fund shall be maintained separately from other city funds and the funds of such account shall not be commingled with the funds of other city
accounts.
C. The special fund shall be interest bearing and the interest earned shall become funds of the special fund and subject to the same limitations on
expenditure as applied to funds derived from payments of the residential construction tax.
D. The city shall establish and implement necessary accounting controls and procedures to ensure that the residential construction tax funds collected are
deposited to the special fund account in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and state law.
E. If additional park districts are established, the city shall similarly establish special fund subaccounts to ensure that funds collected in a park district are
expended for parks and park facilities in such district or benefiting the neighborhood from which such funds were collected. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-9: LIMITATIONS ON APPROPRIATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FUND MONIES; REFUNDS:
A. Residential construction tax funds collected and interest earned thereon must be expended for park improvements and park facilities within or benefiting
the park district from which the funds were collected. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
B. Such funds may only be used for the acquisition, improvement or expansion of neighborhood parks, or the installation or improvement of facilities in
existing or neighborhood parks in the city, that are attributable to the new construction or development for which the money was collected. Money in the
fund must be expended within the park district from which it was collected and must not be expended for maintenance or operational expenses. (Ord.
499, 4-26-2016)
C. If a neighborhood park has not been developed, or park facilities have not been installed in an existing park, in the park district created to serve the
neighborhood in which the subdivision or residential development is located within three (3) years after the date on which seventy five percent (75%) of
the residential dwelling units authorized within the subdivision or development first become occupied, all residential construction taxes paid by the
applicant, together with interest at the rate at which the city had invested the money in the special fund, must be refunded to the owners of the lots or
dwelling units in the subdivision or residential development at the time of the refund on a pro rata basis.
D. The three (3) year time limit for refunds set forth in subsection C of this section may be suspended for a period of time, but not to exceed one year,
during which the state or the federal government takes any action to protect the environment or an endangered species, which action prohibits, stops
or delays the development of a neighborhood park or the installation of park facilities.
E. Any refund of residential construction taxes paid pursuant to subsection C of this section, shall only be made upon receipt by the city of a refund
application form and appropriate documentation, as required by the refund procedures, which application and procedures shall have been adopted by
the city council. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-10: NEIGHBORHOOD PARK PLANNING PROCESS:
A. Upon receipt of an application for preliminary or final subdivision approval, site plan approval, rezoning, conditional use permit or other application for
development approval precedent to issuance of building permits, the city shall:
1. Identify the location of the proposed development by park district;
2. Identify the number of dwelling units to be constructed;
3. Estimate the residential construction tax funds to be paid;
4. Estimate the timing of build out of the proposed development;
5. Estimate when seventy five percent (75%) of the dwelling units will be built/occupied;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 266/565
6. Pursuant to the recreation plan, identify parks within the park district where the proposed development is located, or which would benefit the
proposed development; and
7. Preliminarily identify potential park facilities and improvements that may be provided with residential construction tax revenues derived from the
proposed development.
B. The city shall accomplish this neighborhood park planning by completing the neighborhood park planning form, adopted by the city, and by following the
neighborhood park planning review process. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-11: PROCEDURES FOR APPROPRIATION AND EXPENDITURE OF SPECIAL FUND MONIES:
A. The city, as part of the annual budget and capital improvements programming process, shall identify neighborhood park acquisition, improvement and
expansion projects and construction and installation of park facilities anticipated to be funded, in whole or in part, with residential construction tax
receipts, and to be provided during the upcoming fiscal year.
B. Proposed projects shall be consistent with the adopted city long range comprehensive master plan and with the recreation plan element.
C. Proposed projects shall be designated by park district.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed park project shall be listed.
E. The city shall verify that adequate residential construction tax funds are or will be available in the appropriate special fund account in the specified fiscal
year when the park improvement or facility will be provided.
F. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit or restrict the city council from authorizing and funding additional or substitute neighborhood park projects or
otherwise changing funding and/or project priorities at such times as it may determine to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-12: ANNUAL REPORT:
A. At least once each year in conjunction with the annual budget process, the city manager shall prepare a report on the subject of the residential
construction tax. Said report may be integrated within the city budget or provided separately as an independent report to the city council.
B. The annual report shall include the following information:
1. The amount of tax revenue collected annually, by park district;
2. The amount of residential development permitted annually, by park district;
3. The amount of tax revenue expended annually, by park district;
4. The park facility projects for which tax revenues were expended, by park district;
5. The account balances at the beginning of the fiscal year and the current account balances in each special fund account;
6. Recommendations for new parks and/or park facility projects to be funded in the upcoming fiscal year, by park district, and the estimated cost of
such projects;
7. Projected residential construction tax revenues anticipated to be received in the upcoming fiscal year;
8. Proposed changes, if any, to the boundaries of the park district or districts;
9. Proposed changes, if any, to the recreation plan element; and
10. Proposed amendments, if any, to this chapter or to the refund application form, refund procedures or other administrative procedures implementing
the residential construction tax.
C. The annual report shall be prepared by the city manager and forwarded to the city council.
D. The city council shall receive the annual report and take such action as it deems appropriate and consistent with this chapter and applicable state
statutes. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-13: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes in the interest of furthering, promoting and protecting the
public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
7-4-14: CONFLICT:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 267/565
A. To the extent of any conflict between other city ordinances, regulations or requirements and this chapter, the more restrictive is deemed to be
controlling.
B. This chapter is not intended to amend or repeal any existing city ordinance, regulation or requirement; provided, however, that the election by the city
council to impose the residential construction tax is mutually exclusive of any requirement to impose a park land dedication requirement and, therefore,
if a park land dedication requirement exists, it shall be deemed to be repealed and superseded by the residential construction tax adopted by this
chapter. (Ord. 122, 1-24-1995)
Chapter 5
SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
7-5-1: ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Where terms are not
defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. "Webster's Third New International Dictionary Of
The English Language", unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include
the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the masculine.
ACCESSIBLE: When applied to a fixture, connection, appliance or equipment shall mean having access thereto, but which first may require the removal of
an access panel, door, or similar obstruction. "Readily accessible" shall mean direct access without the necessity of removing any panel, door or similar
obstruction.
APPROVED: As to materials and types of construction, refers to approval by the building official as the result of investigation and tests conducted by the
building official, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
BODY OF WATER: Any body of water such as a reservoir, tank, pond, architectural pond, etc., not otherwise defined herein as a "wading pool", "spa", or
"swimming pool".
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The director of the department of building.
HEALTH DISTRICT: The Southern Nevada health district.
LISTED AND LISTING: Equipment or materials included in a list published by an approved testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of current production of listed equipment or materials. The published list shall state
that the equipment or material complies with approved nationally recognized codes, standards or tests and has been tested orevaluated and found
suitable for use in a specified manner.
MANMADE DECORATIVE WATER FEATURE: Any manmade stream, fountain, waterfall, or other manmade water feature that contains water that flows or
that is sprayed into the air, constructed for decorative, scenic or landscape purposes, except the following bodies of water:
A. "Manmade lakes", as defined in local ordinance or administrative code.
B. Swimming pools or spas as regulated in this chapter.
C. Water features utilized in a family entertainment theme park as regulated in local ordinance or administrative code.
D. Water features used in conjunction with and appurtenant to a single-family residence, and available only to the family of the householder or their
private guests.
MANUFACTURED: A pool or spa unit that is manufactured or constructed at another location, transported to the property, and placed and/or assembled at
the property.
NONSLIP SURFACE: A surface which minimizes slipping of bare feet such as, but not limited to, a nonslip finished tile or concrete with a brush or "lift"
finish.
NORMAL OPERATING WATER LEVEL: The overflow point on overflow gutters or the midpoint in the throat of skimmers.
PSI: An abbreviation for pounds per square inch.
PVC: An abbreviation for polyvinyl chloride, a plastic material approved for certain uses in the plumbing code.
POOL: See definition of Swimming Pool.
POOL DEPTH: The distance between the lowest point of the pool floor and the normal operating water level.
PORTABLE POOL (NONPERMANENTLY INSTALLED POOL)1: A pool that may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original
integrity, and is not permanently attached to plumbing or electrical services.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL OR SPA: Includes all artificiallyconstructed swimming pools or spas which are used in conjunction with and appurtenant to a
single-family residence, and available only to the family of the householder or their private guests.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 268/565
PUBLIC POOL OR SPA: Any swimming pool or spa, other than a private pool or spa, which is intended to be used for swimming or bathing and is
operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use.
RESORT POOL: Includes all artificially constructed swimming pools, wading pools, spas, or ornamental bodies of water which are appurtenant to or which
are built and/or maintained in connection with any building or other structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place
where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transient guests, in which three hundred (300) or more rooms are used for sleeping
accommodations of such transient guests, and which is licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages and maintain gambling games or devices and
complies with other requirements in the adopted plumbing code.
RURAL RESORT POOL: Includes all artificially constructed swimming pools, wading pools, spas or ornamental bodies of water which are appurtenant to
or which are built and/or maintained in connection with any building or other structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public to be a
place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to transient guests, in which seventy five (75) hotel or motel rooms, or fifty (50) hotel or motel
rooms, and fifty (50) recreational vehicle sites are developed as required in title 9 of this code and complies with the other requirements of the adopted
plumbing code.
SEMIPUBLIC: Includes swimming pools, wading pools and spas used in connection with multiple-family or cooperative groups (such as apartments,
hotels, motels, private clubs, residential subdivisions, etc.), and available only to such groups and their private guests, but not available to the general
public.
SLIP RESISTANT: A surface which reduces slipping.
SPA: An artificially constructed body of water, either portable or permanent, designed for recreation or therapeutic use that is not drained, cleaned or
refilled for each individual user. It may include, but is not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot tubs, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles,
or any combination thereof. It shall not include therapeutic facilities used by or under the direct control of licensed medical personnel.
STAIR, RECESSED TREAD, LADDER: A means of entry and exit to and from the pool or spa that may be used in conjunction witheach other.
A. Stair: A riser/tread or series of risers/treads extending down from the deck into the pool/spa area.
B. Recessed Tread: A series of vertically spaced cavities in the pool or spa wall creating tread areas for step holes.
C. Ladder: A series of vertically separated treads or rungs connected by vertical rail members or independently fastened to an adjacent vertical wall.
SWIMMING POOL: A permanently installed artificial body of water in excess of eighteen inches (18") in depth which includes all equipment necessary for
its use, and is used for swimming or recreational bathing.
WADING POOL: An artificially constructed body of water in a portable or permanent water container used for recreational wading purposes which at its
deepest point is not over twenty four inches (24") in depth.
WASTEWATER: Water resulting from filter cleansing, draining of a pool or spa, or lowering of the water level in a pool or spa.
WATER FEATURE: See definition of Manmade Decorative Water Feature.
WIDTH OR LENGTH: The actual dimension taken at the maximum location from inner wall to inner wall at the normal operating water level of a pool or
spa. (Ord. 188, 7-8-1997; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
7-5-2: ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION:
Electrical installation, modification, repair or alteration of pools, spas and water features shall conform to the provisions of the currently adopted national
electrical code, with emphasis placed on articles 110, 250, 300 and 680. Additionally, the following requirements shall be complied with:
A. Pool And Spa Lighting: Pools and spas shall be equipped with lighting that illuminates the entire bottom and volume, and may be an underwater or
overhead type. Underwater lights shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) watt or equivalent lumens per square foot of water surface area. Overhead lights
shall be a minimum of two (2) watts or equivalent lumens per square foot of water surface area and shall be protected from breakage of any glass
parts.
B. Area Lighting Of Public Pools And Spas: Area lighting shall be provided to illuminate the surface areas of the pool deck and spa deck. The lights shall
be a minimum of six-tenths (0.6) watt or equivalent lumens per square foot of deck area.
C. Subpanel Location: Electrical equipment shall be mounted on a permanent, secure wall, fence or other approved structure. Electrical equipment shall
be located on the property upon which the pool, spa or water feature is located. (Ord. 188, 7-8-1997)
7-5-3: PLUMBING INSTALLATION:
Plumbing installation, modification, repair or alteration of a pool, spa or water feature shall conform to the currently adopted plumbing code and the
additional following requirements:
A. Water Quality: All water treatment, filtration and recirculation devices, and hydraulic lines and systems shall be approved by the health district prior to
permit issue for a public pool or spa. Water features designed for full or partial human submersion open to the public shall be reviewed and approved
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 269/565
by the health district prior to permit issuance. Water quality in water features which do not come in contact with the public, and private pools and spas
shall be maintained in such a manner that a nuisance is not created pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 40.140.
B. Heating Equipment:
1. Heating equipment shall conform to the provisions of the currently adopted mechanical and electrical codes. Installation of such equipment shall be
according to the manufacturer's instructions with special attention paid to the adopted mechanical code sections 302.1, 302.2, 806.6, 806.6.1 and
806.7.
2. Heating equipment shall be located on a three inch (3") poured in place concrete pad. The top of the concrete pad shall be a minimum of three
inches (3") above adjacent grade. Alternate locations, such as vaults or pits, are subject to building official approval. Overflow pipe from the pressure
relief valve outlet shall be galvanized steel, hard drawn copper piping and fittings, or CPVC and PB (straight) may be used with fittings which will not
reduce the bore of the pipe; and shall extend from the valve to outside of any building with the end of the pipe not more than two feet (2') nor less
than six inches (6") above the ground and pointing downward. When pool or spa water heating equipment is installed with a full way type shutoff
valve between the outlet of the heater and the pool or spa, an approved pressure relief valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the water
heating equipment.
3. Pool and spa heaters shall be located to comply with the requirements of the currently adopted mechanical code and shall be accessible for
inspection and repair when installed according to the manufacturers's instructions. Vents shall terminate with clearances as follows:
a. A minimum of four feet (4') below, or one foot (1') above, or four feet (4') horizontally, from a door, and openable window or a gravity air inlet into a
building.
b. A minimum of three feet (3') above a forced air inlet that is within ten feet (10') of the vent.
c. A minimum of four feet (4') from a property line, except a public way.
C. Water Piping: Swimming pools, spas and water features shall be approved type "L" copper or approved PVC pipe of schedule 40, bearing the NSF PW
#14 (national sanitation foundation - potable water) mark or equivalent stamped on each length of pipe. This material shall be used on all water supply,
drain, vacuum, and circulating lines. This supersedes authorization in the currently adopted plumbing code to use any otherwise approved materials.
PVC pipe shall not be bent using heat unless by thermostatically controlled equipment such that listing is retained. All plastic pipe exposed to sunlight
must be protected with an approved tape wrapping or latex paint.
D. Gas Piping: Natural gas piping systems shall conform to the provisions of the currently adopted plumbing code. Liquefied petroleum gas piping systems
shall conform to the provisions of the national fuel gas code, NFPA 54.
E. Water Supply:
1. Pools, spas and water features shall have water directly supplied through a water supply inlet.
2. The water supply inlet shall be protected by a one inch (1") air gap or approved backflow protection device.
Exceptions: Private pools and spas may be provided with a water supply consisting of an approved backflow protection device (vacuum breaker)
located on the discharge side of the last valve or a sill cock (hose bib) from which a water hose may be attached.
F. Wastewater: Wastewater from pools, spas and water features shall be discharged to the public sewer through a permanently installed waste line.
Wastewater shall not be discharged to a septic tank.
Exceptions:
1. If a public sewer service is not available, the buildingofficial may authorize the wastewater to be discharged above ground and used for irrigation
purposes. The wastewater shall not be allowed to drain to adjacent properties or the public way. This authorization may be revoked if a hazardous,
nuisance or unsanitary condition occurs.
2. For private pools, spas and water features, a hose connection may be used as a waste line when the building official has deemed the installation of
a permanent waste line as impractical.
The permanently installed waste line shall discharge through an indirect waste connection of the following type: an approved interceptor; a sand trap
which is vented and provided with a cleanout on the discharge side; or a "P" trap of a minimum size of three inches (3").
G. Entrapment Avoidance: The suction outlet for pool and spa cleaning systems shall be protected against user entrapment. A minimum of two (2) suction
outlets shall be provided for each pump in the suction outlet system, separated by a minimum of three feet (3') or located on two (2) different planes, on
the bottom and one on a vertical wall, or one each on two (2) separate walls. The suction outlets shall be plumbed so water is drawn simultaneously
through the outlets to a common line to the pump.
H. Filtering And Recirculation: Pools, spas and water features shall be equipped with a filtering and recirculation system consisting of circulation pumps
and piping arranged for optimum circulation of the water within the unit. Equipment shall be mounted on a three inch (3") poured in place concrete pad.
The top of pad shall be a minimum of three inches (3") above adjacent grade. All equipment shall be listed by a recognized testing agency for the
appropriate use. The circulation system shall provide a complete turnover of water within the time frame specified below:
Public pool 6 hours
Private pool 12 hours
Public spa 1/2 hour
Private spa 1 hour
Water feature 8 hours
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 270/565
Scum gutters and skimmers in public pools, spas and water features shall conform to the requirements of the health district. Inlets for fresh or repurified
water in all pools, spas, and water features shall be located to produce uniform circulation of water throughout the entire pool, spa, or water feature,
without the existence of "dead" spots.
I. Over Sewer: Swimming pools, in ground spas or water features shall not be constructed over sewer lines unless thesewer line is of cast iron material
and prior approval from the building official is obtained. (Ord. 188, 7-8-1997)
7-5-4: STRUCTURAL DESIGN AND INSTALLATION DETAILS:
A. General: Pools, spas and water features shall be constructed of reinforced concrete conforming to the currently adopted building code, or other
materials as may be approved by the building official. If ground water is present, a hydrostatic valve shall be installed at the deepest point of the unit.
Approved, listed manufactured pools, spas and water features shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions and their
listing.
B. Concrete And Steel Reinforcement:
1. Concrete and steel reinforcement of concrete pools, spas and water features shall be designed by a licensed state registered professional engineer
or architect. The minimum design strength of the concrete shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds per square inch.
2. The continuity of a bond beam shall not be interrupted for the installation of skimmers or similar apparatus. Reinforcing steel shall be continuous
around the apparatus to tie in with the remainder of the bond beam.
C. Walls And Floors:
1. The materials used in pool, spa and water feature wall and floor construction shall conform to the provisions of the currently adopted building code.
Walls and floors shall be designed and constructed of nonabsorbent material in a manner to be leakproof, and structurally sound under all the
conditions of the site.
2. The inner surface of the pool or spa shall be coved, rounded or bullnosed at all joints, corners, angles of bases, walls, floors or curbs. No sharp
corners or projections shall be permitted.
D. Entry/Egress:
1. Pools and spas with a depth greater than two feet (2') at pool walls shall be provided with a means of entry/egress. Pools exceeding thirty feet (30')
in width or length shall have entries/egresses provided on opposite sides of the pool.
2. Water features with walls that are inclined greater than forty five degrees (45o) shall have a means of entry/egress.
3. An entry/egress for a pool, spa or water feature shall be constructed to minimize hazards and consist of a ladder, stairs or recessed treads or an
alternate method or meansapproved by the building official. The ladder, stairs or recessed treads shall comply with the following requirements,
respectively:
a. Ladder: Ladders shall be of a corrosion resistant material and be provided with two (2) handholds or handrails. Ladder treads shall have a uniform
vertical spacing of seven inch (7") minimum and twelve inch (12") maximum. Vertical spacing variation within each ladder shall not exceed one
inch (1"). Treads shall have a minimum horizontal depth of one and one-half inches (11/2"). The top tread of the ladder shall be a maximum of
twelve inches (12") below the coping, deck or exterior edge of the pool or spa.
b. Stairs: Stair steps shall have a slip resistant surface and rounded corners. Steps shall have a maximum riser height of ten inches (10") with a
minimum horizontal tread depth of twelve inches (12"). Riser height variation within each stair shall not exceed one inch (1"). (The distance from
the bottom of the pool to the bottom step shall not be considered a riser.) The top step of the stair shall be a maximum of ten inches (10") below
the coping, deck or exterior edge of the pool, spa or water feature.
Exception: Private pools, spas and water features may have a maximum riser height of twelve inches (12").
c. Recessed Treads: Recessed treads shall be provided with a set of handrails or handholds to serve all treads and risers. Recessed treads shall
have a uniform vertical spacing of seven inch (7") minimum and twelve inch (12") maximum. Recessed treads shall have a minimum depth of five
inches (5") and a minimum width of twelve inches (12"). The uppermost tread shall be a maximum of twelve inches (12") below the coping, deck or
exterior edge of the pool or spa.
E. Deck, Seat Or Handholds: Pools and spas greater than three feet (3') in water depth shall be provided with a deck, seat or handholds. The deck, seat or
handholds shall comply with the following requirements, respectively:
1. Deck: The deck shall run continuously around the pool or spa and be placed a maximum of twelve inches (12") above the water surface. Decks shall
be a minimum of thirty inches (30") wide for private pools and spas and a minimum of four feet (4') wide for public pools and spas. Decks shall be
sloped to effectively drain to either deck drains or perimeter areas away from the pool or spa.
2. Seat: An underwater seat, bench or swimout shall be located a minimum of every four feet (4') around the perimeter of the pool or spa. They shall be
a minimum of twelve inches (12") wide by twelve inches (12") long, and a maximum of twenty four inches (24") below the water surface.
3. Handhold: A handhold shall be located a minimum of every four feet (4') around the perimeter of the pool or spa. A handhold shall consist of any of
the following:
a. A continuous coping or ledge of a minimum width of six inches (6") and placed a maximum of twelve inches (12") above the water surface.
b. A permanently secured rope of a minimum diameter of three-fourths inch (3/4") or a railing of one and one-fourth inches (11/4") to two inches (2") in
diameter placed at a maximum of twelve inches (12") above the water surface.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 271/565
c. Ladders, steps or recessed treads complying with subsection D of this section.
F. Site Drainage: Site drainage shall be provided to direct all perimeter deck drainage, general site and roof drainage away from the pool, spa and adjacent
buildings.
G. Wind Sensors: Water features shall be equipped with an integral automatic wind sensor device calibrated to shut off airborne and moving water when
wind velocity exceeds twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord. 188, 7-8-1997)
7-5-5: SETBACKS AND CLEARANCES:
A. Location: In ground pools, spas and water features shall not be placed closer than five feet (5') to any building or structure. An exception may be
permitted when substantiation is provided by a Nevada licensed structural or civil engineer that no damage will occur to buildings, structures or
adjacent properties and that no unsafe structural conditions will exist.
B. Equipment: Pool, spa and water feature equipment shall be located a minimum distance of twelve inches (12") from the property line. The equipment
slab shall not be in contact with the foundation system of a property line structure. Equipment shall be installed in accordance with the currently
adopted mechanical code, approved listing requirements and the manufacturer's installation instructions.
C. Overhead Conductor Clearances: The following parts of pools shall not be placed under existing service drop conductors or any other open, overhead
wiring; nor shall such wiring be installed above the following:
1. Pools and the area extending ten feet (10') horizontally from the inside of the walls of the pool;
2. Diving structures; and
3. Observation stands, towers or platforms.
D. Exceptions:
1. Structures listed in subsections C1, C2 and C3 of this section shall be permitted under supply lines or service drops where such installations provide
the following clearances:
Table B
Insulated supply or service drop cables or wiring, 0-750 volts to ground,
supported on and cabled together with an effectively grounded bare
messenger or effectively grounded neutral conductor.
All other supply
or service drop
conductors.
Voltage to
ground
0-15 kV 15-50 kV
A. Clearance in any direction to the water level,
edge of water surface, base of diving platform or
permanently anchored raft.
18 feet
(5.49 m)
25 feet
(7.62
m)
27 feet
(8.23 m)
B. Clearance in any direction to the diving
platform or tower.
14 feet
(4.27 m)
16 feet
(4.88
m)
18 feet
(5.49 m)
C. Horizontal limit of clearance measured from
inside wall of the pool.
This limit shall extend to the outer edge of the structures listed in subsection
C1 and C2 of this section, but no less than 10 feet (3.05 m).
2. Utility owned, operated and maintained communications conductors, community antenna system coaxial cables complying with article 820 of the
mechanical code, and the supporting messengers shall be permitted at a height of not less than ten feet (10') (3.05 m) above swimming and wading
pools, diving structures, and observation stands, towers, or platforms.
(FPN): See sections 225-18 and 225-19 of the mechanical code for clearances for conductors not covered by this section. (Ord. 188, 7-8-1997)
7-5-6: ACCESSIBILITY AND SAFETY:
A. Access Barrier Required: Pools, spas or water features with a depth of eighteen inches (18") or greater shall be completely enclosed with access
barriers. Other manmade bodies of water with a depth of eighteen inches (18") or greater shall have access barriers erected at locations which would
allow public accessibility.
Exceptions:
1. Access barriers are not required if the location of the artificial body of water provides restricted access in itself, such as in a planned unit
development, golf course or business facility with entrance restricted solely to owners, members or guests.
2. Access barriers are not required for private or public irrigation channels, or publicly owned artificial bodies of water such as drainage channels, flood
control structures and ponds.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 272/565
B. Access Barrier Construction Requirements: Access barriers shall consist of a wall or fence not less than five feet (5') in height. The maximum size of
vertical openings in the access barrier shall not permit a sphere four inches (4") in diameter to pass through. Chainlink fences less than six feet (6') in
height shall not be used as access barriers unless slats, woven wire mesh over the chainlink, or other means approved by the building official is used
to prevent the openings from affording a climbing surface. Chainlink fences six feet (6') in height or greater are acceptable without
additionalmodification. Decorative features and horizontal members may be installed on access barriers, provided they are made unclimbable by
installation of rigid shielding material with openings that a sphere greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter may not pass through.
Exception: Building or structures may be used as an access barrier component, provided they meet the same standards as fences or walls detailed
above.
C. Gates Or Doors: Gates or doors may be installed within access barriers when all the following conditions are met:
Exception: Doors within buildings serving as components of the access barrier need not comply.
1. Gates or doors shall be at least as high as the required height of the access barrier.
2. Gates or doors shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices, mounted on the inside, at a minimum of four feet (4') above the ground
or floor level of the exterior side and not to be within six inches (6") of the top of the gate or door. These devices shall be capable of keeping the gate
or door securely closed and latched.
Exception: Gates spanning an opening of eight feet (8') or greater need not be self-closing and may use manually operated latching devices.
3. The required latching devices shall be designed to be inoperable from outside the enclosed area except with a key operated lock which is integral to
the gate; removable locks are unacceptable.
Exception: Gates spanning an opening of eight feet (8') or greater may use a removable lock. Such gates shall remain locked when not in use.
4. The latching devices must be protected from access from the exterior side by rigid shielding material for a distance of twenty inches (20") to either
side and below all portions of the latching device and to the top of the gate or door. The rigid shielding material may have openings such that a
sphere greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") may not pass through.
Exception: Latch shielding material need not be provided for gates spanning an opening of eight feet (8') or greater using a removable lock in
compliance with subsection C3 of this section.
D. Safety Glazing: Glazing in walls and fences used as an access barrier shall be considered as hazardous locations and shall comply with the
requirements for safety glazing contained within the currently adopted building code, when allof the following conditions are present:
1. The bottom edge of the glazing is less than sixty inches (60") above grade on the pool, spa or water feature side of the glazing; and
2. The glazing is within five feet (5') of the pool, spa or water feature water's edge.
E. Barrier Timeliness: All required access barrier elements shall be in place prior to:
1. Setting a manufactured pool, spa or water feature in place;
2. The preplaster inspection of a conventionally constructed pool, spa or water feature;
3. The filling with water of artificial bodies of water.
F. Surveillance Substitute: For artificial bodies of water for which access barriers would be required by this section, the building official may approve a
written plan from the owner for periodic, reasonable surveillance of the artificial body of water by a watchman or security guard as a substitute for the
required access barriers.
For resort hotels only, surveillance of the swimming pool, spa or water feature by a watchman or security guard may be substituted for both the
required access barriers and for the pool guard. A written description and statement of how surveillance is to be provided must be submitted to and
approved by the building official prior to filling the unit with water. This document will become a permanent part of the job record.
G. Guard Or Cover Substitute: For "planned unit developments", as defined in section 9-2-2 of this code or for resort hotels, in lieu of access barriers
required above for artificial bodies of water, swimming pools or spas, a pool guard may be provided so that observation is maintained at all times. In
lieu of access barriers, private spas may have a cover substitute. The cover shall provide structural support capacity of two hundred seventy five (275)
pounds distributed over a diameter of eight feet (8') and be tested by an approved agency as meeting ASTM standard 1346 or equal. The cover shall
be capable of being locked in the covered position.
H. Responsible Party: The party responsible to establish and maintain access barriers for pools, spas or artificial bodies of water is the owner of the
property upon which they are located. The owner or developer of land adjacent to an access barrier required by this section shall not reduce, degrade
or infringe on the access barrier's compliance with this code.
I. Alternative Plans Or Devices: The building official may approve written alternative plans or devices for access barriers which provide equivalent
protection, but the owner remains responsible for establishing and maintaining such approved alternative plans or devices. (Ord. 188, 7-8-1997)
Chapter 6
ROCKERY WALL CONSTRUCTION STANDARD
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 273/565
7-6-1: ADOPTED:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk at the Mesquite city hall, and the office of the building official at the
building and capital projects department, being marked and designated as the "Rockery Wall Construction Standard", as developed by the Southern
Nevada Organization of Building Officials structural committee. (Ord. 349, 7-11-2006, eff. 8-4-2006)
Title 8
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
DRAINAGE CONTROL REGULATIONS
8-1-1: UNIFORM DRAINAGE CONTROL REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopted the following uniform regulations for the control of drainage (city ordinances 62, 160, and 292) as mandated by Nevada Revised
Statutes 543.595(1), governing the subdivision of land, parcel maps, division of land and any new development and/or substantial improvement of land in
order to be eligible to participate in the regional fund for control of floods, and any other matters relating thereto.
UNIFORM REGULATIONS FOR THE CONTROL OF DRAINAGE
COUNTY OF CLARK
CITY OF LAS VEGAS
CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS
CITY OF HENDERSON
CITY OF BOULDER CITY
CITY OF MESQUITE
CLARK COUNTY REGIONAL FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT
AS REVISED DECEMBER 2007, AND SUBSEQUENT REVISIONS
DRAINAGE REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part I: DRAINAGE
Subpart A: TITLE, AUTHORITY, LEGISLATION, PURPOSE, GENERAL RULES AND INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION 1: TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.010 Uniform Regulations For The Control Of Drainage
SECTION 2: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT
2.010 Findings Of Fact
SECTION 3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
SECTION 4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES
4.010 Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
A. Review And Approval
B. Regulation
C. Implement Master Plan
SECTION 5: SHORT TITLE
SECTION 6: GENERAL RULES
6.010 Rules Established For Uniform Interpretation And Application Of The Regulations
SECTION 7: INTERPRETATIONS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 274/565
7.010 Provisions For Interpretation And Application Of The Regulations
Subpart B: DEFINITIONS, AMENDMENTS TO FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES, FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION, MASTER BASIN
PLANNING, AND DESIGN/IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION 8: DEFINITIONS
SECTION 9: AMENDMENTS TO FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES
9.010 Rules For Amendment
9.020 Process
9.030 Interpretation Of Floodplain Boundaries
SECTION 10:
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
10.005 Intent
10.010 Application
10.020 Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
A. Floodway
B. Floodway Fringe
C. Areas Of Shallow Flooding
10.030 Minimum Area Of Flood Hazard Delineation
10.040 Interim Delineations
A. General
B. Permitted Uses
10.045 Nonconforming Use
A. Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Uses
B. Alteration To Nonconforming Uses
C. Destruction Of Nonconforming Uses
10.050 Publication Of Floodplain Boundaries
10.060 Determinations In Case Of Dispute
10.070 Floodplain Use Permit
A. Application
B. Permit Contents
10.080 Responsibilities Of The Local Administrator
A. Designation Of The Local Administrator
B. Duties Of The Local Administrator
10.090 Certification Of Compliance For Floodplain Use
10.100 Hazard Mitigation
A. General Standards
B. Specific Standards
SECTION 11:
MASTER BASIN PLANNING
11.010 Amendment Of Master Plan
11.012 Coordination Of Flood Control Projects
SECTION 12: DESIGN/IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 275/565
12.010 (Not Used)
12.015 Intent
12.020 Regional Facilities
12.025 Submittal Of Drainage Plan And Study
A. Submittal To Entity
B. Areas With Regional Flood Control Significance
C. Other Areas
D. Drainage Plan Contents
E. Technical Drainage Study
F. Drainage Study
12.030 (Not Used)
12.035 Review Of Drainage Plan And Study
A. Review Responsibility
B. Permits
12.040 Excavation And Grading Standards
See Chapter 2 Of This Title
12.050 Construction/Operation/Maintenance
Subpart C: VARIANCES, FINANCING, LIABILITY, APPEALS, ENFORCEMENT, ABROGATION, EFFECTIVE DATE, SEVERABILITY
SECTION 13:
VARIANCES
13.010 FEMA Conditions
13.020 Entity And District Responsibilities
13.030 Master Plan Facilities
SECTION 14:
FINANCING OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
14.010 Intent
14.020 District Responsibilities In Capital Improvement Funding
14.021 Annual Priority Project List
14.030 Procedures
SECTION 15:
DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
SECTION 16:
APPEALS
SECTION 17:
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 18:
ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
SECTION 19:
LIABILITY
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 276/565
SECTION 20:
EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 21:
SEVERABILITY
SECTIONS
22-30:
(Not Used)
Part II: EXCAVATION AND GRADING1
SECTIONS
31-39:
(Rep. by Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
SECTION 40:
PUBLICATION
PART I: DRAINAGE
Subpart A
The purpose of subpart A is to define the title and authority, legislative findings of fact, statement of purpose, general methods of reducing flood
losses, short title, general rules for interpretation and application of these regulations, and guidelines for interpretation.
The provisions of subparts B and C also apply to this subpart.
SECTION 1: TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.010 Uniform Regulations For The Control Of Drainage
A. The Board of Directors (Board) for the Clark County Regional Flood Control District (District) (NRS 543.320), has adopted the following set
of Uniform Regulations for the Control of Drainage as mandated by the Nevada State Legislature (NRS 543.595(1)). The Board finds and
declares that these regulations, to be known as the Uniform Regulations for the Control of Drainage (regulations), have been developed in
accordance with District's master plan and will further the objectives set for the Clark County Regional Flood Control District as stated in
NRS 543.170.
B. The Board's adoption of these regulations will not preclude it from consideration and subsequent adoption of further drainage and flood
control regulations should it deem them appropriate after review and comment by the public and the District's citizens and Technical
Advisory Committees. The Board also finds that its regulations shall comprise the minimum level of regulatory control within the District and
that the entities within the District may adopt regulations which exercise a greater level of control consistent with the flood management
goals of the district.
C. These district regulations comprise the regulations required in NRS 543.595. Each entity must incorporate these regulations into their
ordinance governing the subdivision of land, parcel maps, division of land and any new development and/or substantial improvement of land
in order to be eligible for money from the regional fund for the control of floods.
SECTION 2: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT
2.010 Findings Of Fact
A. The district was formed, in part, to fund and coordinate the construction and maintenance of facilities to alleviate flooding and protect the
life and property of citizens within the boundaries of the district.
B. The existing storm water runoff control facilities within the district area cannot collect and convey effectively the increasing level of storm
water runoff caused by present and future development within the district's jurisdiction.
C. It is the intention of the district to manage the "regional fund" in a manner consistent with NRS 543 and require the entities to adopt and
incorporate the board's regulations into their ordinances for the subdivision of land, parcel maps, division of land into large parcels, and any
new development and/or substantial improvement of land.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 277/565
D. By adopting the district's regulations, the entities will retain direct enforcement responsibilities and will exercise all lawful powers necessary
for design, construction, maintenance and operation of facilities for the control of floods.
E. The board finds that much of the district is either within or affected by alluvial fans and these land features present unique flood control
problems to the district and entities.
F. The district has prepared a conceptual-level master plan which identifies the structural and nonstructural means necessary to effectively
provide the level of protection identified in the master plan.
G. The district, through its regulatory framework, is prepared to manage regional fund monies for the design, construction and maintenance of
those capital improvement priorities established by the board.
H. These regulations for development are necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, property, and commerce, and comprise the
minimum level of regulatory control within the district.
SECTION 3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The regulations are intended for the purpose of protecting the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the district from the hazards
and dangers of flooding and inadequate or improper runoff management and are designed to promote sound development policies and
construction procedures which respect and preserve the natural and manmade watercourses within the district; to encourage the incorporation
of multiple use recreation facilities in floodplains where feasible; to protect property owners adjacent to developing or developed land from
increased runoff which could cause property damage; to ensure the safety and utility of public roadways; and to decrease storm water runoff
damage to public and private property.
SECTION 4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES
4.010 Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses Will Include The Following:
A. Review And Approval
Securing review and approval of the method for handling and disposing of storm water runoff in the basins of the district and its entities; and
securing review, analysis and approval of the design, construction, and maintenance of drainage facilities.
B. Regulation
Regulating the development, excavation, grading, regrading, filling, berming, and diking of land within the floodplains of the district in order
to:
1. Prohibit developments which are dangerous to health, safety and/or property in times of flood;
2. Assure that developments vulnerable to flooding shall be constructed in a manner which protects against damage;
3. Comply with the regulations of the national flood insurance program.
C. Implement Master Plan
Implement and update a master plan and through this plan identify a list of priority capital improvement projects consistent with the goals of
the master plan and the evaluation criteria established by the board.
SECTION 5: SHORT TITLE
The regulations shall be known and may be cited as the uniform regulations for the control of drainage, herein referred to as the "regulations".
SECTION 6: GENERAL RULES
6.010 Rules Established For Uniform Interpretation And Application Of The Regulations
The following rules are established for uniform interpretation and application of the regulations:
A. The word "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive.
B. Words indicating the singular number may also be applied to the plural of persons and things; words indicating the plural may be applied to
the singular; words indicating the masculine gender may be extended to females also.
C. When not consistent with the context of the regulations, words used in the present tense will include the future tense.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 278/565
D. Unless otherwise specified, the time within which a referenced act is to be completed shall be computed by excluding the first day of the
time period identified and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, Saturday, or Sunday, in which case the next business day
applies.
E. Words or phrases used in the regulations shall be interpreted in the context of common usage in order to give the regulations the most
reasonable application.
F. If, during the adoption of the regulations, the application of a regulatory provision conflicts with a more stringent provision of the entity's
ordinances, the more stringent provision shall prevail.
G. The regulations shall apply to only that land which is to be developed and/or substantially improved or divided into lots or parcels after the
board adopts the regulations.
SECTION 7: INTERPRETATIONS
7.010 Provisions For Interpretation And Application Of The Regulations
In the interpretation and application of the regulations, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as a minimum;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the purposes of the regulations;
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under the regulations or the Nevada Revised Statutes.
Subpart B
The purpose of subpart B is to provide definitions for use in floodplain management and flood control, procedures for amendment of floodplain
boundaries, regulations for flood hazard reduction, master basin planning, and design/improvement standards.
The provisions of subparts A and C also apply to this subpart.
SECTION 8: DEFINITIONS
Alluvial Fan: "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine
sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject
to flash flooding, high velocity flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
Alluvial Fan Flooding: "Alluvial fan flooding" means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the
apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex: "Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appeal: "Appeal" means a request for review by the district of the interpretation and/or proposed application of the regulations by an entity.
Applicant: "Applicant" means the person or corporation applying for permits for development or approval from the entities.
Area Of Shallow Flooding: "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Bank: "Bank" means the side of a watercourse situated between the bed of the watercourse and the break in grade which distinguishes the
channel from the adjacent lands.
Base Flood: "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the
"100-year flood". The zone designation on the FIRM maps always includes the letter A.
Base Flood Elevation: "Base flood elevation" means the water surface elevation resulting from the base flood plus an allowance for sediment.
Within a flood hazard zone shown on the flood insurance rate map, the base flood elevation is the elevation that is the basis for that flood hazard
zone.
Basement: "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
Board: "Board" means the Clark County regional flood control district board of directors.
Calculations: "Calculations" means those computations, including coefficients and other pertinent data, used in the development of a drainage
plan.
Certification: "Certification" means the documentation which evidences that a required action by professional civil engineer, registered land
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 279/565
surveyor or entity has been completed in accordance with established standards.
Chief Engineer: "Chief engineer" means the chief engineer and general manager of the district as delineated in NRS 543.510.
Design Criteria: "Design criteria" are those criteria, standards, and specifications adopted by the board pertaining to calculations for design and
construction of flood control facilities. These criteria include, but are not limited to, the most recent edition of the "Hydrologic Criteria And
Drainage Design Manual".
Detention Facility: "Detention facility" means facilities designed to hold runoff and release the flows at a predetermined rate.
Development: "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials (excluding soils
testing).
District: "District" means the Clark County regional flood control district.
Drainage Plan: "Drainage plan" means a plan for collection, transport, treatment, and discharge of storm and nuisance water onto, within and
from the subject property.
Drainage Study: "Drainage study" means a study prepared in accordance with the most recent edition of the "Hydrologic Criteria And Drainage
Design Manual".
Dwelling: "Dwelling" means a building designed for use as a residence for no more than four (4) families.
Encroachment: "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, growth, fill, or structures into the floodplain.
Entities: "Entities" means the collective reference to the county and incorporated cities within the district.
Entity: "Entity" means the singular reference to either the county or one of the incorporated cities within the district.
Erosion: "Erosion" means the process of the wearing away of landmasses by the action of water and/or wind.
Existing Construction: "Existing construction" means, for the purposes of floodplain management, structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced before July 1, 1987. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed prior
to July 1, 1987.
Expansion To An Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): "Federal emergency management agency" means the agency created in 1978 to provide a
single point of accountability for all federal activities related to disaster mitigation and emergency preparedness and response.
Federal Insurance Administration (FIA): "Federal insurance administration" means the governmental unit, a part of the federal emergency
management agency, that administers the national flood insurance program.
Fill: "Fill" means any deposit of soil, rock, or other material placed by other than natural processes.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map: "Flood hazard boundary map" means the currently effective official map on which the federal insurance
administration has delineated areas of flood hazard.
Flood Hazard Elevation: "Flood hazard elevation" means the elevation of the base flood which determines the boundary of the flood hazard
zone.
Flood Hazard Zone: "Flood hazard zone" means that portion of the natural floodplain that would be inundated by the 100-year flood. The flood
hazard zone includes the floodway and the floodway fringe and is designated as follows:
Zone Explanation
A Areas of 100-year flood; base flood elevations and flood hazard factors not determined.
AO Areas of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet; average depths of inundation are shown,
but no flood hazard factors are determined.
AH Areas of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet; base flood elevations are shown, but no
flood hazard factors are determined.
A1-A30,
AE
Areas of 100-year flood; base flood elevations and flood hazard factors are determined.
A99 Areas of 100-year flood to be protected by flood protection system under construction; base flood elevations and flood hazard factors
not determined.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): "Flood insurance rate map" means the flood insurance administration's adopted document which specifies
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the entities within the district.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 280/565
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): "Flood insurance study" means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related
erosion hazards.
Flood Or Flooding: "Flood" or "flooding" means:
A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
3. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph A2 of this definition and are akin to a river of
liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the
path of the current.
B. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph A1 of this definition.
Floodplain: "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flood" as delineated on
the FIRM, the flood hazard boundary map, or as designated by the chief engineer or local administrator).
Floodproofing: "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities, including earthwork improvements, which would preclude the entry of water, and which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, utility or sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Structural components shall have the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.
Floodway: "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Floodway Fringe: "Floodway fringe" means that portion of the floodplain subject to inundation but lying beyond the floodway. The floodway fringe
serves as a storage area for the backwaters of the 100-year flood.
Highest Adjacent Grade: "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure: "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior (secretary) as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register of Historic
Places;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state or local inventory of historic places where the state or community has historic preservation programs that have
been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior;
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
Hydrologic Criteria And Drainage Design Manual: "Hydrologic Criteria And Drainage Design Manual" means the most recent edition of the
manual adopted by the board which defines hydrologic and drainage criteria for use within the jurisdictions of the district and the entities.
Interim Delineation: "Interim delineation" means a delineation of the flood hazard zone made from the most reliable data and source for an area
not having a floodway or special flood hazard area designation available.
Land Disturbance: "Land disturbance" means any activity involving construction, grading, filling, excavation, or stripping of vegetation.
Local Administrator: "Local administrator" means the public official or his designee, who will be charged with lead responsibility for administering
and implementing these regulations within his entity.
Lowest Floor: "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest
floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of
section 10 of these regulations.
Manufactured Home: "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for long term use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. For floodplain management
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 281/565
purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles when intended for long term use
(i.e., placed on a site for greater than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days), and in such cases will require compliance with
requirements for manufactured homes included in these regulations. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include
park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. See definition of "Recreational Vehicle" below.
Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale, rent, or lease.
Master Plan: "Master plan" means the most recent edition of the flood control master plan, including amendments, adopted by the board and
entities.
(Ord. 394, 2-12-2008, eff. 3-6-2008)
Mean Sea Level: "Mean sea level" (M.S.L.) means, for purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North American vertical datum
NAVD 88, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on the FIRMs are referenced.
(Ord. 472, 4-9-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): "National flood insurance program" means the federal program, created by an act of congress in
1968, that makes flood insurance available in communities that enact satisfactory floodplain management regulations.
New Construction: "New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after July 1, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 1,
1987.
Nonresidential: "Nonresidential" means a category of structure as used to underwrite flood insurance coverage under the national flood
insurance program and includes, but is not limited to, small business concerns, churches, schools, nursing homes, farm buildings (including
grain bins and silos), government buildings, mercantile structures, industrial plants, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals
for less than six (6) months' duration.
Obstruction: "Obstruction" means any structure or assembly of materials including fill which may impede, retard, or change flood flows either of
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
Operation And Maintenance Manual: "Operation And Maintenance Manual" means the most recent edition of guidelines adopted by the district's
board for operation and maintenance of master plan facilities.
Outfall: "Outfall" means that point or area at which runoff leaves a site and may include streams, washes, closed systems, or other well defined
natural or artificial drainage features as well as areas of dispersed overland flows.
Outfall Structure: "Outfall structure" means a structure designed to control the volume and velocity of runoff discharged from the facility over a
specific length of time.
Overlay District: "Overlay district" means a special district established in order to recognize and map public safety and environmental constraints
or amenities which should be taken into account for the purposes of delineating where additional development standards are required. The
standards which are more restrictive shall prevail.
Parcel Map: "Parcel map" means a division of any land for transfer or development into four (4) or fewer lots, for which a parcel map is required
under NRS 278.461, and for which any improvements are required by the entity per NRS 278.462.
Policies And Procedures Manual: "Policies And Procedures Manual" means the most recent edition of the manual adopted by the board which
states the policies and procedures of the district.
Predevelopment Condition: "Predevelopment condition" means an area in its natural state prior to development.
Principally Above Ground: "Principally above ground" means that at least fifty one (51) percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less
land value, is above ground.
Priority Projects: "Priority projects" means those projects deemed a priority by the board.
Professional Civil Engineer: "Professional civil engineer" means any person licensed to practice civil engineering in the state of Nevada pursuant
to NRS 625. Certification by a professional civil engineer shall consist of letters or studies stating or documenting the information required and
bearing the seal of a registered professional civil engineer in accordance with NRS 625.
Professional Land Surveyor: "Professional land surveyor" means any person registered to practice land surveying in the state of Nevada
pursuant to NRS 625. Certification by a professional land surveyor shall consist of a map or letter bearing the seal of a professional land
surveyor specifying the relationship of elevations of a particular parcel to M.S.L., in accordance with NRS 625.
Recreational Vehicle: "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: (A) built on a single chassis; (B) four hundred (400) square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (C) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (D)
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regional Flood Control Significance: "Regional flood control significance" means facilities, land alteration, portions of the natural drainage
system and regulatory actions which impact implementation of the master plan or lie within special flood hazard areas.
Regional Fund: "Regional fund" means the monies described in NRS 543.595(3) and managed by the district for funding of flood control projects
identified in the master plan.
Regulatory Discharge: "Regulatory discharge" means any discharge used on the effective adopted flood insurance study unless superseded by
another discharge adopted by the board for regulatory purposes.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 282/565
Sediment: "Sediment" means rock, sand, mud, vegetation, and other material produced by erosion or urban surface runoff which is carried by
floodwaters.
Shallow Flooding: "Shallow flooding" means a designated AO zone on the flood insurance rate map. The base flood depths range from one (1)
to three (3) feet and no clearly identifiable channel exists.
Special Flood Hazard: "Special flood hazard" means the land within the floodplain that is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. This area is designated as zone A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE or A99.
Start Of Construction: "Start of construction" means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other permanent improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: "Structure" means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
Subdivision: "Subdivision" means any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into five (5) or more lots, parcels,
sites, units or plots, for the purpose of any transfer, development or any proposed transfer or development unless exempted by one of the
following provisions:
A. The term "subdivision" does not apply to any division of land which is subject to the provisions of NRS 278.471 to 278.4725, inclusive.
B. Any joint tenancy or tenancy in common shall be deemed a single interest in land.
C. The term "subdivision" does not apply to any division of land exempted by NRS 278.320.
Substantial Damage: "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure (excluding land value) before the damage
occurred.
Substantial Improvement: "Substantial improvement" means any repair, alteration, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure: A) which may adversely impact implementation of the master plan; B) for which the value of cumulative improvements to the
structure equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the true and fair market value of the property (excluding land value) before the start of
construction of the improvement or repair, as determined by the county assessor or by an independent licensed appraiser. This term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual work performed. The term does not, however, include either: A)
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or B) any alteration of a
"historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure".
As applied to this regulation "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, regardless of whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
Ten-Year Construction Program: "Ten-year construction program" means the revolving ten-year capital facilities program identified by the board.
Variance: "Variance" means a grant of relief to a person or corporation from a specific requirement(s) of the regulations when strict application of
the regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance allows construction or development that is otherwise prohibited by these
regulations.
Violation: "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in these regulations is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Watercourse: "Watercourse" means any creek, wash, arroyo, channel, natural drainageway, or other conveyance which serves to give direction
to a flow of storm water.
SECTION 9: AMENDMENTS TO FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES
9.010 Rules For Amendment
Aerial extents of flood hazard areas and base flood elevations as published on the FIRM may increase or decrease resulting from physical
changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable but not later than 6 months after the date such information becomes available, the
floodplain administrator of the affected entity and/or the district shall cause FEMA to be notified of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium
rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
District floodplain boundaries may be amended in those cases where the proposed amendment meets one of the following criteria:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 283/565
A. A flood control project of the federal government, state, district, entities, or private development has substantially altered the floodplain
boundaries.
B. The best available data demonstrates that floodplain boundaries do not reflect current hydrographic conditions.
9.020 Process
The district shall maintain an information base which consolidates and interprets data affecting flood control in the district. This information
shall be supplied to the district by the entities on maps which identify proposed changes to the floodplain boundaries. The district shall review
the proposed changes to the floodplain boundary and requests from the entities for FIA map amendments, revisions, and conditional
amendments and revisions. The district shall, as a minimum, acknowledge receipt of the request.
9.030 Interpretation Of Floodplain Boundaries
Unless otherwise specially noted within the provisions of the district, where uncertainty exists as to the floodplain boundaries the following rules
shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines, section lines, quarter section lines, or city limits shall be construed as
following such lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
D. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall
be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals,
lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through D, above, shall be so construed;
F. In other circumstances not covered by subsections A through E, above, the local administrator shall interpret the floodplain boundaries.
SECTION 10: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
10.005 Intent
The provisions of this section apply only to areas of special flood hazard and areas with interim delineations of flood hazards.
10.010 Application
The provisions of this section shall be imposed in addition to existing land use regulations and shall be considered as an overlay district.
(Ord. 394, 2-12-2008, eff. 3-6-2008)
10.020 Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard within the district are those areas identified by the federal insurance administration, through the federal
emergency management agency, in the report entitled:
The Flood Insurance Study For The Clark County And Incorporated Areas, November 16, 2011 and subsequent amendments and revisions.
(Ord. 472, 4-9-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
The study is accompanied by flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRM). Each is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these
regulations. These studies and maps shall be superseded by more current information as it becomes available. Flood insurance studies and
rate maps are on file at the offices of the local administrators (see 10.080A).
The areas of special flood hazard, identified in the above listed studies and FIRMs, means the land within the floodplain that is subject to a
one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year and are identified as zones A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE, or A99.
These areas may be further defined as floodway and floodway fringe. The floodway fringe may include areas of shallow flooding. In general,
the following apply:
A. Floodway: Within areas of special flood hazard (established in section 10.020) are areas designated as floodways. Identification of the
floodway creates and preserves areas which are reasonably required to carry the flood flow. The floodway is designed to restrict
encroachments to the extent permitted in paragraph 2 below. Encroachments include but are not limited to fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development that would unduly affect the capacity of the floodway or unduly increase flood heights. Since the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 284/565
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential,
the following provisions apply:
1. Uses Allowed: Uses having a low flood damage potential may be allowed to the extent that they are not prohibited by other regulation,
code, or ordinance; provided, that they do not require permanent structures, fill or other obstruction to the flow of floodwater in the
floodway and provided that they do not adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main system,
drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. These uses may be allowed only upon application to the entity and the chief
engineer and issuance of a floodplain use permit by the entity. Permits for these uses do not preclude the appropriate requirements for
flood insurance. Allowed uses may include:
a. Nonstructural agricultural uses.
b. Nonstructural accessory residential uses such as low structures and lawns, gardens, parking, and play areas.
c. Flood control channels, levees, basins, and diversion drains.
d. Public and private recreational uses.
e. Excavation and extraction of rock, sand, and gravel.
2. Additional Uses Allowed: Encroachments, including fill, new structural construction, substantial improvements, and other development as
permitted by the underlying zoning on the property, provided all encroachments are certified by a professional civil engineer. This
certification must demonstrate that all encroachments are safe for their intended use and for residents living upstream or downstream of
the encroachment. This certification must further demonstrate that the encroachments shall not result in any increase in either the base
flood elevation or the energy grade line above the allowable increase used in the FEMA floodway determination. If no FEMA floodway is
designated, the certification must establish a floodway, allowing for an equal degree of encroachment on both banks, without a cumulative
increase in the base flood elevation of more than the height designated by the local administrator, which height may in no case be more
than one (1) foot.
3. All encroachments, including new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of these regulations.
4. Where the floodway is not delineated, compliance under section 10.040, "Interim Delineations", will be required prior to the construction
of any encroachments in the floodway.
5. No manufactured home or manufactured home parks shall be placed within a floodway; prohibition is not subject to variance.
6. No plants or facilities in which hazardous substances are manufactured shall be placed within a floodway; prohibition is not subject to
variance.
B. Floodway Fringe:
1. Purpose: Identification of the floodway fringe establishes standards which, while not restricting development, will protect new structures
and surrounding property from undue damage associated with flooding.
2. Uses Allowed: All uses allowed in the underlying zoning classification, subject to all applicable rules, regulations, and statutes are allowed
in the floodway fringe, unless modified by this section. Any use specified in the floodway may be allowed in the floodway fringe. If other
regulations or standards or other applicable provisions conflict with these regulations, the more stringent shall govern.
3. Any other use may be allowed if it is elevated above the base flood elevation and a determination is made by the entity (and the chief
engineer in areas of regional flood control significance) that the use will not unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of
tributaries to the main watercourse, drainage ditches, or other drainage facilities or systems.
4. The floodway fringe may be encroached upon with fill, permanent structures, or other uses only to the extent that the cumulative effect of
encroachment does not allow a rise of more than one (1) foot in the base flood elevation in the floodway fringe.
5. Structures or buildings, including residential structures, may be erected or moved in the floodway fringe, provided the lowest habitable
floor is placed at least eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation. Land may be filled provided the top of the fill shall at no point
be below the base flood elevation for at least twenty five (25) feet beyond the limits of any structure erected or placed thereon.
6. Structures or buildings, including residential structures, in special flood hazard areas may have the lowest habitable floor placed between
zero (0) and eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation if there is a flood control measure that is approved with a conditional
letter of map revision issued by FEMA, fully funded, and scheduled to be completed within one year of the issuance of the building permit
that would result in a letter of map revision that would either reduce the base flood elevation to an elevation that will allow the lowest floor
of the building to meet the eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation, or remove the special flood hazard area from the building
site.
7. Recreational vehicles may be located within the floodway fringe, provided they are either: 1) not on the site for more than 180
consecutive days; 2) fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 3) permitted as a permanent structure in accordance with section
10.070 and elevated and anchored in accordance with 10.100. A recreational vehicle is considered ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
C. Areas Of Shallow Flooding
1. Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AH or AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from
one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply if sheet flow
conditions are not to be substantially altered:
a. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures within AH or AO zones shall have the lowest floor elevated
above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, to at least eighteen (18) inches above the depth number specified on the FIRM
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 285/565
(at least three and one-half (31/2) feet if no depth number is specified).
b. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures within AH or AO zones may have the lowest floor elevated
between zero (0) and eighteen (18) inches above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified) if there is a flood control measure that is approved with a conditional letter of map revision issued by FEMA, fully funded, and
scheduled to be completed within one year of the issuance of the building permit that would result in a letter of map revision that would
either reduce the depth number specified on the FIRM to a depth that will allow the lowest floor of the building to meet the eighteen (18)
inches above the depth number specified on the FIRM, or remove the special flood hazard area from the building site.
c. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AH or AO zones shall either have:
(i) The lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, at least eighteen (18) inches or above the depth
number specified on the FIRM (at least three and one-half (31/2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified);
or
(ii) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components with the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by the
professional civil engineer to the local administrator and as required in section 10.080; or
(iii) The lowest floor elevated per (i) of this section or be floodproofed per (ii) of this section to an elevation between zero (0) and
eighteen (18) inches above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified) if there is a
flood control measure that is approved with a conditional letter of map revision issued by FEMA, fully funded, and scheduled to be
completed within one year of the issuance of the building permit that would result in a letter of map revision that would either reduce the
depth number specified on the FIRM to a depth that will allow the building to meet the eighteen (18) inches above the depth number
specified on the FIRM or remove the special flood hazard area from the building site.
d. Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed and existing
structures.
10.030 Minimum Area Of Flood Hazard Delineation
All zones designated with an A prefix on the flood insurance rate map(s) shall provide the minimum area for flood hazard management under
these regulations.
10.040 Interim Delineations
A. General
In areas not designated by an A prefix on the FIRM(s), where development is imminent or ongoing, flood hazard delineations may be
adopted and administered under the regulations. These delineations may be obtained from any source, provided they are approved by
the district or the entity.
Delineations in zones designated by an A prefix on the FIRM(s) shall be submitted by the entity to the district and shall be subject to
district review for consistency with accepted practices. The entity shall forward all such delineations to the chief engineer with a
recommendation for approval or denial within sixty (60) days of the receipt of all supporting information.
All delineations adopted by this procedure shall be submitted by the entity to the FIA after approval by the chief engineer. The entity's
submittal to the FIA shall include a request from the entity that these delineations be included on the flood insurance rate map for the
entity.
B. Permitted Uses
The uses specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 below are permitted within floodplains with interim delineations only upon issuance of a floodplain
use permit by the local administrator subject to the following provisions. Permits for these uses do not preclude the appropriate
requirements for flood insurance.
1. Any use allowed in section 10.020; provided, that the interim delineation of the base flood elevation is not more than two (2) feet above
the existing ground elevation, except that the lowest habitable floor shall be at least eighteen (18) inches above the interim delineation of
the base flood elevation, and nonresidential floors and all fill shall be at least eighteen (18) inches above the interim delineation of the
base flood elevation, or nonresidential floors shall be floodproofed to an elevation at least eighteen (18) inches above the interim
delineation of the base flood elevation.
2. Any use permitted or allowed in section 10.020; provided, that the applicant submits a drainage study prepared in compliance with the
district's "Hydrologic Criteria And Drainage Design Manual", presenting an analysis of the floodplain adequate to provide for interim
delineation of the floodway and floodway fringe and accurate profile. Such delineations shall be subject to review and acceptance by the
chief engineer.
10.045 Nonconforming Use
A. Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Uses
In the event that a nonconforming use of land, building, or structure is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, any
further use thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 286/565
B. Alteration To Nonconforming Uses
Any alteration, addition or repair to a nonconforming building, or structure which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by fifty
percent (50%) or more shall be in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
C. Destruction Of Nonconforming Uses
In the event that any such nonconforming use of land, building, or structure, is destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, act of God, or act of a
public enemy to the extent which would constitute "substantial damage" as defined in these regulations, as determined by the Clark County
assessor or by a licensed independent appraiser, then and without further action by the district, the future use thereof shall from and after
the date of such destruction be subject to all of the provisions of these regulations.
10.050 Publication Of Floodplain Boundaries
All flood hazard delineations adopted by the entity including all zones with an A prefix on the flood insurance rate map(s) shall be shown on
maps for each entity. The entity shall notify the district of all revisions and amendments to flood hazard delineations. Where available, the
floodway, floodway fringe, interim delineations, and areas of shallow flooding shall be so designated on these maps.
10.060 Determinations In Case Of Dispute
Where uncertainty exists, the boundary of any flood hazard zone with an interim delineation, floodway, floodway fringe, or area of shallow
flooding shall be determined by the district within areas of regional flood control significance and by the entity in all other areas. The
determination shall be made from the best technical data available, which are acceptable to the chief engineer, and in all cases, the base flood
elevation shall be the governing factor. Determinations shall be in accordance with sections 9, 13, 14, and 16 of these regulations.
10.070 Floodplain Use Permit
A. Application
It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any construction or development (erection, addition, alteration or change in use of any building,
ground cover, or land) within any area of special flood hazard as established in section 10.020 without an approved floodplain use permit.
The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes and manufactured home parks, as set forth in the "Definitions", and for
all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the "Definitions". Permits shall be issued by the entity.
B. Permit Contents
Applications for a floodplain use permit shall include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of material, drainage facilities; debris control
structures; and the location of the foregoing, and if required, a drainage plan and study. Specifically the following information is required:
1. Base flood elevation in relation to mean sea level.
2. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor of all structures.
3. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure would be floodproofed.
4. Certification by a professional civil engineer that the floodproofing methods for any development in excess of one dwelling unit, excluding
accessory buildings, meet the floodproofing requirements of these regulations.
5. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
6. Provisions are hereby made for issuance of a blanket floodplain use permit for applicants who need to install or erect a number of similar
structures within the various floodplains over an extended period of time. Such applicants shall submit typical plans for such structures.
After determining that such structures comply with the provisions of these regulations, the entity may issue a blanket permit for installation
or erection of such structures to be valid for one (1) calendar year. Extensions of time may be granted.
7. A drainage plan and study prepared in accordance with the "Hydrologic Criteria And Drainage Design Manual" may be required by the
entity as a part of the floodplain use permit submittal. The contents of the study will be determined by the entity based on the
characteristics of the proposed floodplain use and the associated floodplain and shall be prepared by a professional civil engineer. At a
minimum the study shall provide analysis and texts which demonstrate that the proposed development will:
a. Be protected from the 100-year flood.
b. Be compatible with the master plan.
c. Preserve required rights of way.
d. Not increase the flood hazard to any surrounding areas.
10.080 Responsibilities Of The Local Administrator
A. Designation Of The Local Administrator
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 287/565
The following persons or their designees are hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations within the limits of their
jurisdiction by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions:
Boulder City Public works director
Clark County Public works director
Henderson Flood zone administrator
Las Vegas Public works director
Mesquite Public works official
North Las Vegas Public works director
B. Duties Of The Local Administrator:
1. Permit Review
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of the regulations have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure
that the encroachment provisions of section 10.020 are met.
d. The chief engineer shall provide a review to determine that district requirements are met for applications having regional flood control
significance.
2. Use Of Other Base Flood Data
When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with section 10.020, the local administrator identified in section
10.080A shall obtain, review, and utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from the federal, state or other source,
acceptable to the chief engineer, in order to administer sections 10.020 through 10.100. The local administrator shall notify the district of
other base flood elevation data proposed for use by the entity.
3. Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
a. Where base flood elevation data are provided through the flood insurance study or required as in section 10.090; obtain and record the
actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures. The survey shall be
performed and certified by a professional land surveyor registered in the state of Nevada.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures, the professional land surveyor shall verify and record the actual elevation
(in relation to mean sea level), and the professional civil engineer shall obtain the floodproofing certifications required in section 10.090.
c. All records pertaining to the provisions of these regulations shall be maintained for public inspection.
4. Alteration Of Watercourses
a. Notify adjacent communities, the district, and appropriate federal and state agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal insurance administration.
b. Require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
c. Require that subsurface flow characteristics not be adversely impacted.
5. Notification Of Application For Floodplain Use Permit
Notify the district of all proposed development within the floodplain.
6. Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries
Make interpretations where needed, as to the most appropriate location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Revisions to the FIRM(s) shall be
made in accordance with section 10.050. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation, as provided in section 16.
7. Submission To FEMA Of Interim Delineations
Submit requests for inclusion of interim delineations on the FIRMs to FIA, as approved by the chief engineer as per section 10.040.
8. Enforcement
Take actions on violations of these regulations as delineated in section 17.
10.090 Certification Of Compliance For Floodplain Use
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 288/565
Prior to occupancy or use of any structures or areas in the flood hazard zone, a certificate of compliance for floodplain use will be submitted to
the local administrator by the professional civil engineer responsible for the project design.
10.100 Hazard Mitigation
A. General Standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required:
1. Anchoring
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
b. All newly installed or substantially improved manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard
Areas" guidebook for additional techniques).
2. Construction Materials And Methods
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood damage and
use methods and practices that minimize flood damage, erosion, and sedimentation.
b. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
c. All future regional control facilities shall be designed using the design criteria and standards adopted by the board.
3. Elevation And Floodproofing
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 10.020C1b and 10.020C1c(iii) new construction and substantial improvement of any
structure shall have the lowest floor elevated to eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures shall at
least meet the standards in subsection 10.100B2. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by
a professional land surveyor to the effect that the elevation is located a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation
as established by a professional civil engineer. Such certification shall be provided to the local administrator.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements in areas subject to subsidence shall also be elevated a minimum of eighteen (18)
inches above the base flood elevation equal to expected subsidence for at least a ten (10) year period.
4. Utilities
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize, prohibit or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid their impairment or production of contamination during flooding.
d. Storm drainage systems shall be designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation.
5. Subdivision Proposals
a. This subsection shall apply to the division of land into two (2) or more legal parcels located within areas of special flood hazard,
including "parcel maps" and "subdivisions". This subsection may be applied to other land divisions at the discretion of the local
administrator.
b. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
c. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
d. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage in a manner which does not
increase flood hazards to adjoining or downstream properties.
e. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated by a
professional civil engineer for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least twenty (20) lots or two (2)
acres (whichever is less or as deemed necessary by the local administrator).
f. No subdivision shall be approved within delineated floodways. If flood control facilities are proposed that result in an adjustment to a
floodway and these are approved by the flood insurance administration, the entity may approve the subdivision. Land may be
subdivided within a floodway to allow the dedication of flood control rights of way.
g. Subdivision drainage must be designed to preserve the existing drainage area boundaries.
h. Each subdivision must be protected against off site floodwaters and sediment in a manner which does not significantly increase flood
levels, deflect flows, or cause erosion or sedimentation problems.
6. Storage Of Material And Equipment
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 289/565
a. The storage or processing of materials that at time of flooding are buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other nonhazardous material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to
prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
7. Watercourses
Alteration or obstruction of watercourses having regional flood control significance without the written permission of the chief engineer, in
conjunction with the local administrator, shall be prohibited. As per NRS 202.180, the disposal of unwholesome substances in ditches and
washes is unlawful.
8. Review Of Building Permits
Where base flood elevation data are not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source (see
10.080B2), applications for building permits shall be reviewed by the entity to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
B. Specific Standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided by a flood insurance study (see section 10.020) or
from other sources (see 10.080), the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 10.020(C)(1)(b), new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor elevated to a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation. If the base flood
elevation is specified as a depth, it is to be measured from the "highest adjacent grade".
b. Fully enclosed, nonhabitable areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited or shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a professional civil engineer or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(i) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
2. Nonresidential Construction
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 10.020(C)(1)(c)(iii), new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor elevated to eighteen (18) inches above the level of the
base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(i) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to at least eighteen
(18) inches above the base flood elevation;
(ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
(iii) Be certified by a professional civil engineer that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications,
and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 10.090.
(iv) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as
described in subsection 10.100B1.
(v) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one
foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level).
3. Manufactured Homes
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10.020C1b all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A,
AO, AH, A1-A30, AE, or A99 except in "existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection 10.100A1.
b. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved in "existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" within zones A,
AO, AH, A1-A30, AE, or A99 shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
either: (i) at least eighteen (18) inches above the base flood elevation, or (ii) supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements
of at least equivalent strength that are at least thirty six (36) inches in height above grade. The manufactured home must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection 10.100A1.
c. A plan for evacuating residents of all manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within zones containing the letter "A" on the
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be developed by or for the responsible entity and filed with and approved by appropriate community
emergency management officials.
4. Other Development
Any development which is not a subdivision shall be required to meet the requirements for subdivisions as outlined in these regulations if
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 290/565
the local administrator determines that the flood hazard so requires. If the proposed development would impact the implementation of the
master plan, the local administrator shall defer to the chief engineer for a final determination.
SECTION 11: MASTER BASIN PLANNING
The board has caused to be made a master plan which addresses hydrographic areas in the district. As mandated in NRS 543.580 to 543.590, the
board has adopted the master plan and has incorporated into the study the planning previously conducted by the entities, insofar as possible. The
board has also developed a listing of immediate structural needs and prioritized these needs based on criteria developed through the board, its
advisory committees, and through open public meetings.
11.010 Amendment Of Master Plan
The board, in conjunction with its chief engineer, advisory committees, and input obtained through open public meetings, shall direct the process of
amending the adopted master plan document. This document shall be amended from time to time as the board deems necessary pursuant to NRS
543. Any amendments to the master plan must be adopted by the board and cannot become final until also adopted by the entities whose
hydrographic areas are impacted by the proposed revisions as delineated in NRS 543.590(4,5).
11.012 Coordination Of Flood Control Projects
It is the intent of the district, through these regulations, that drainage projects in general and master plan projects specifically be coordinated
among the entities. Therefore, in those cases where master plan approved and district-funded projects have regional flood control significance
impacting more than one jurisdiction, all impacted entities will be afforded opportunities to participate on the project management team, provided
the lead entity charged with primary project management responsibility shall be the jurisdiction in which the majority of construction takes place.
Where a determination of regional flood control significance cannot be established by the entities, the chief engineer shall arbitrate entity impacts.
Impacted entities and the district shall have the opportunity to support the lead entity with their input in compliance with the "Policies And
Procedures Manual".
SECTION 12: DESIGN/IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS
12.010 (Not Used)
12.015 Intent
This section applies to all areas for both local and regional drainage issues.
12.020 Regional Facilities
A. The facilities identified as priorities by the board and contained in the master plan shall be designed, constructed, located, operated and
maintained in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the district. Where at least as effective as the provisions of the
master plan, determinations as to specific sizing of facilities, location, and design criteria shall be made by the entity with the approval of the
district.
B. The entity shall be responsible for assuring that any facility constructed will not adversely affect the continued implementation of the master
plan. The manner in which such flow characteristics are attained and maintained within the hydrologic area will be determined by the entity
in accordance with the master plan and the provisions established by the district. The entity shall also be responsible for assuring that their
requirements are consistent with any applicable state and federal laws. Each entity shall submit to the district its plan for acquisition of
property rights or preservation of corridors for the ten (10) year construction program.
C. Each entity shall assure that regional flood control facilities are incorporated into their comprehensive planning documents. Provisions
within these documents shall include land acquisition requirements.
12.025 Submittal Of Drainage Plan And Study
A. Submittal To Entity
Drainage plans and studies shall be submitted for review and approval to the entity in which the development is proposed.
B. Areas With Regional Flood Control Significance
A drainage plan and study is required for any development or development plan, regardless of size, which is located within an area of
special flood hazard, or which has regional flood control significance.
C. Other Areas
A drainage plan and study is required for any development or development plan (including subdivisions and manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) greater than or equal to twenty (20) lots or two (2) acres, whichever is the lesser. Said drainage plan and study must contain
base flood elevation data.
D. Drainage Plan Contents
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 291/565
A drainage plan and study may be required for any other development, at the discretion of the local administrator.
E. Technical Drainage Study
Drainage Plan Contents: Drainage plans should be prepared in conformance with the most recent edition of the "Hydrologic Criteria And
Drainage Design Manual", and other design criteria of the district. As a minimum, the following is required:
1. All persons applying for any of the permits identified in this section shall provide a drainage plan for storm water runoff flows which enter,
flow within, and leave the subject property prior to, during, and after construction. The detailed form and contents of the plan submittal
shall be specified by the entity and shall contain at a minimum, the following requirements:
a. The name and address of the legal owner of the property for which the permit is requested.
b. A vicinity sketch and accurate map based on a legal description of the site for which a permit is requested including, but not limited to,
all existing and proposed easements.
c. Site drawings indicating each separate land area to be excavated, filled, graded, or leveled, the finished depth of each separate land
cut or fill, the present and future (as completed) points of entry and discharge for surface water on the subject property, and
identification of all temporary or permanent structures or other devices to be erected or established for the purpose of controlling or
regulating surface water and erosion on such property. This shall include existing and proposed flood control and drainage
improvements.
d. The applicant's plans for controlling water from his property during periods of construction, and a statement specifying the anticipated
time period for the completion of all drainage improvements.
e. The location of existing watercourse and centerlines thereof, washes, lakes, ponds, and springs on the land on which the development
is to take place.
f. The location of the floodplain.
g. Plans and specifications for any proposed alteration or improvement of a bed or bank of a watercourse.
h. A summary statement concerning the effect the proposed development will have on the existing and future drainage system of the
area.
F. Drainage Study
1. The contents of the drainage study shall be established by the entity and the study shall be prepared by a professional civil engineer
using, as a minimum, "design criteria" approved by the Board. The contents of the drainage study shall include, as a minimum, the
provisions contained in the most recent edition of the "Hydrologic Criteria and Drainage Design Manual".
12.030 (Not Used)
12.035 Review Of Drainage Plan And Study
A. Review Responsibility
The local administrator shall be responsible for review and approval of all drainage plans and studies, all flood control and drainage
improvements, and other submittals as required by these regulations for areas which lie within the entity's boundaries, and shall enforce the
following minimum criteria:
1. Improvements within such areas shall, as a minimum, meet the "hydrologic and drainage design criteria" of these regulations.
2. No development shall be constructed in a manner which adversely affects regional flood control facilities or the continued implementation
of the master plan.
3. In areas of "regional flood control significance", the entity shall provide, prior to its final approval, a copy of the drainage plan and study,
review findings, and recommendations to the Chief Engineer for concurrence. If the Chief Engineer cannot concur with the proposed
approval of the drainage plan and study, the Chief Engineer and the Local Administrator shall meet to review the differences. If no
agreement can be achieved, the proposed action shall be brought to the Board for final determination.
B. Permits
1. No permits authorizing start of construction, except grading, may be issued by the entity until such time as final approval of the drainage
plan and study is obtained.
2. No permits authorizing start of construction shall be issued in areas of regional flood control significance until such time as final approval
of the drainage plan and study is obtained from the Local Administrator, and concurrence with such approval is obtained from the Chief
Engineer.
12.040 Excavation And Grading Standards
See chapter 2, "Grading And Excavation Standards", of this title.
12.050 Construction/Operation/Maintenance
Construction, operation, and maintenance of master plan facilities shall be the responsibility of the lead entity as described in the most recent
edition of the District's "Policies and Procedures Manual" and delineated in the interlocal contract between the District and lead entity. The District
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 292/565
may also function as the lead entity for construction, operation, and maintenance of master plan facilities.
The role of the District and lead entity in funding regular maintenance of the facility shall be established through the interlocal contract formed as
part of the District's policies and procedures for facility funding. Maintenance shall be performed in compliance with the most recent edition of the
"Operation and Maintenance Manual".
Subpart C
The purpose of this subpart is to provide regulations, procedures and/or statements pertaining to variances, financing, liability, appeals,
enforcement, abrogation and greater restriction, effective date, and severability.
The provisions of subparts A and B also apply to this subpart.
SECTION 13: VARIANCES
13.010 FEMA Conditions
A. Governing bodies must consider the following in making their determination to grant a variance:
1. The granting of variances increases insurance premiums, and increases risk to life and property.
2. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to
actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
3. While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviations from that limitation may occur.
However, as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases.
4. Variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical
characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or
the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
6. Variances should only be granted when it would otherwise result in an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
B. Variances from any provision of the regulations may be granted, as a minimum, under the conditions specified by FEMA and shall consider
all technical evaluations delineated in these regulations, in addition to:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
4. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
5. The relationship of the proposed use to the floodplain management program for that area;
6. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
7. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
C. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
13.020 Entity And District Responsibilities
A. The entity shall be the primary review agency for all variances requested from their ordinance. Variances shall only be granted upon
finding:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
3. Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 293/565
B. In those cases where granting the variance has regional flood control significance (including special flood hazard areas, section 10.020),
the entity shall provide a copy of the variance application, review findings and recommendations to the chief engineer. The variance
application shall then be reviewed by the chief engineer and technical advisory committee. These recommendations will be forwarded to the
board for its consideration. The board's decision will be forwarded to the entity within sixty (60) days of receipt of the variance application.
Before granting such a variance, the board shall consider the effect of the proposed variance on the adjacent properties, the entire
hydrographic area, and the continued implementation of the master plan. The district may grant a variance from strict enforcement of these
regulations only if granting the variance will not:
1. Detract from the public good.
2. Impair any affected natural resources.
3. Deviate from the intent and purpose of the master plan.
C. The entity shall notify the applicant in writing that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
coverage; and
2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
D. The entity shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and written notifications issued under
paragraph C above.
13.030 Master Plan Facilities
A variance is not required for construction of facilities identified on the master plan.
SECTION 14: FINANCING OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
14.010 Intent
It is the intent and purpose of the board, as mandated in NRS 543, to administer the implementation of the master plan, through the regional fund,
in those entities which have adopted the regulations and have priority flood control projects.
14.020 District Responsibilities In Capital Improvement Funding
The district, through its board, shall establish and periodically review its criteria for prioritizing flood control projects identified in the master plan.
Annually, the board shall apply these criteria to those master plan facilities currently not funded in order to determine which of these projects will
receive funding during the coming fiscal year. The board, after a public meeting may raise the priority of a project.
14.021 Annual Priority Project List
The board shall cause to be prepared an annual list of projects to be considered priorities for the upcoming fiscal year. This listing shall be
generated in accordance with the adopted master plan and in compliance with the most recent edition of the district's "Policies And Procedures
Manual".
14.030 Procedures
The chief engineer shall prepare and the board may approve procedures for master plan project funding. These procedures shall address the
district and entities' responsibilities in the application, management, and control of regional fund monies. These procedures shall be consistent with
generally accepted governmental accounting and financial reporting principles, state of Nevada and Clark County financial management
regulations.
SECTION 15: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for the regulatory framework necessary to guide
development and floodplain management. It is recognized that storm events may, on occasion, exceed the level of regulation identified in these
regulations or that flood heights may be artificially increased due to obstructions. Changes in methods of hydrologic calculation may also make
prior calculated levels of protection obsolete. Decisions are to be made using the best available information at the time of project construction.
Compliance with the regulatory elements and design standards specified in these regulations does not imply a guarantee that properties will be
free from flooding or flood damage. Adherence to these regulations or any administrative rule made in accordance with these regulations shall not
create any liability on the part of the District or the enforcing entities or their officers, employees, or volunteers for any flood damages.
SECTION 16: APPEALS
Decisions of the entities regarding interpretation and application of these regulations may be brought to the Board only after the entity's internal
appeals process has been exhausted without remedy. Such appeals must be made within thirty (30) days after the appellant receives word of the
entity's final decision. All appeals must be in writing and in the form prescribed by the District setting forth the issues at conflict, the regulations,
and the alleged misapplication of the regulations to the specific issue at hand. The Board shall review this case file, the recommendation of the
Chief Engineer and move to either reverse the entity's recommendation, sustain its recommendation or remand the issue to the entity for further
review. The District shall respond within sixty (60) days of receipt of the appeal. The District's failure to respond within this time frame shall be
construed as concurrence with the entity's recommendation.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 294/565
SECTION 17: ENFORCEMENT
The entity is charged with enforcement of these regulations within its jurisdictional boundaries and shall adopt the most stringent penalties for
violation of these regulations. The District shall review through periodic case file and field checks that the entities are consistently and accurately
enforcing the provisions of these regulations. If this monitoring identifies a violation of enforcement of the regulations, the District shall notify the
entity in writing describing the specific nature of the violation, the corrective action indicated, and the time frame for completion.
A compliance check shall be conducted by the district to assure corrective action has been completed within the time frame specified. In those
cases where repeat violations of the regulations occur, the Chief Engineer will notify the Board and the entity describing the nature of these
violations and recommend to the board appropriate remedial measures which may include suspension of eligibility for regional fund support.
SECTION 18: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
The regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where the
regulations and another Code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap; that Code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
which is more stringent shall prevail.
SECTION 19: LIABILITY
The grant of a permit or approval is not a representation guarantee or warranty of any kind and shall create no liability upon any entity or the
District, or their officials, employees, or volunteers.
(Ord. 394, 2-12-2008, eff. 3-6-2008)
SECTION 20: EFFECTIVE DATE
These regulations became effective on July 1, 1987. Subsequent revisions became effective on November 12, 1990, August 1, 1992, January 1,
2003 and July 10, 2003. The regulations as amended by the district on February 14, 2013 shall become effective on June 1, 2013.
(Ord. 472, 4-9-2013, eff. 6-1-2013)
SECTION 21: SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of the regulations should be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of the regulations which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of the regulations
are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 394, 2-12-2008, eff. 3-6-2008)
SECTIONS 22-30: (Not Used)
Part II: EXCAVATION AND GRADING2
SECTIONS 31-39: (Rep. by Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
SECTION 40: PUBLICATION
A copy of the ordinance codified herein shall be filed with the Office of the City Clerk and notice of such filing shall be published immediately
following adoption of the ordinance codified herein by the City Council of Mesquite, Nevada. This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and
after its passage and the publication thereof by title only, together with the names of the City Council Members voting for or against its passage, in
a newspaper published in and having a general circulation in Clark County, Nevada, at least once.
THE ABOVE AND FOREGOING ORDINANCE was first proposed and read to the City Council on January 22, 2008, at a regular meeting of the City
Council. The City Council reported favorably on said ordinance on February 12, 2008, and approved it for passage by the following vote:
ADOPTED THIS 12TH DATE OF FEBRUARY, 2008
AYES: D. Bennett, B. Wells, B. Smith, R. Ence, K. Gustaveson
NAYS: None
ABSTENTIONS: None
BY:
SUSAN HOLECHECK, MAYOR
ATTEST:
BY:
CAROL WOODS, CITY CLERK
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 295/565
Publication date: February 15, 2008
Effective date: March 6, 2008
(Ord. 394, 2-12-2008, eff. 3-6-2008)
Chapter 2
GRADING AND EXCAVATION STANDARDS
8-2-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, property and the public welfare of the citizens of this District by establishing minimum
requirements for regulating grading, excavation and filling as they impact local or regional drainage, together with the procedures by which these
requirements may be enforced.
B. Authority: Nevada Revised Statutes 543. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows in this section unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is
intended. All words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular.
Each gender shall include the other; any tense shall include the other tenses. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. With regard to construction these may include
structural devices or nonstructural practices that are designed to prevent pollutants from entering water or to direct the flow of water. Additional information
can be obtained in the Nevada State Conservation Commission's "Best Management Practices Handbook" posted on the NDEP's web site.
CERTIFICATION: A signed written statement that the specific inspections, verifications of lines and grades and tests where required have been performed
and that such inspections, verifications of lines and grades and tests comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): An act passed by the U.S. Congress to control water pollution. It was formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act of 1972 or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.
CLEARING AND GRUBBING: Clearing and grubbing for site preparation and/or vacant land cleanup, removal of vegetation down to duff or bare soil, by
any method.
COMPACTION: The densification of fill by a mechanical means.
CONTAMINANT: Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter which is added to water.
DESIGNATED OFFICIAL: That individual required by individual entities to administer this grading chapter.
DISCHARGE: Any addition of a pollutant or pollutants to water.
DUST CONTROL PERMIT: A permit issued by Clark County Department of Air Quality and Environmental Management, for all clearing and grading
projects of one-quarter (1/4) acre or larger.
DUST PALLIATIVE: Hygroscopic material, non-toxic chemical stabilizer or other dust palliative material which is not prohibited for ground surface
application by EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) or NDEP (Nevada Division of Environmental Protection) or any applicable law or regulation, as
treatment material for reducing fugitive dust emissions.
ELEVATION: All elevations will be referenced from the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST: A geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGY: The application of geological data and principles to engineering problems dealing with naturally occurring rock and soil for the
purpose of assuring that geological factors are recognized and adequately interpreted in engineering practice.
ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: An agreement between the developer and the City of Mesquite to use best management practices, to
minimize hazards to the environment during construction. This is a requirement for developments in the 1996 and 1999 Mesquite Land Act properties.
EROSION CONTROL: Erosion control practices protect the soil surface from being detached by rainfall or wind. Erosion control treats soil as a resource
with value and works to keep it in place.
EXCAVATION OR CUT: An act by which soil, sand, gravel or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, displaced or relocated, and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL: Deposits of soil, rock or other earth material placed by man.
FINISH GRADE: The grade or elevation of the ground surface after grading is complete.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 296/565
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The area subject to flooding as defined on maps by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and/or the applicable map accepted by the local entity.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: A naturally occurring or manmade geologic condition or phenomenon that presents a risk or is a potential danger to life and
property. Examples of geologic hazards: land-sliding, flooding, earthquakes, ground subsidence, coastal and beach erosion, faulting, dam leakage and
failure, mining disasters, pollution and waste disposal, and seawater intrusion.
GRADING: Any excavating or filling, or combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled condition.
GRADING PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
GROUND WATER, PHREATIC WATER: That part of the subsurface water which is in the zone of saturation.
LAND DISTURBANCE: The clearing, excavating, grading, or other manipulation of the terrain.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR: The public official, or his designee, who will be charged with lead responsibility for administering and implementing the Uniform
Regulations for the Control of Drainage, Clark County Regional Flood Control District, within their entities.
NPDES: National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, a national program under section 402 of the Clean Water Act for regulation of discharges of
pollutants from point sources to waters of the United States. Discharges are illegal unless authorized by an NPDES permit.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
NONCONTIGUOUS SITE: A site that is not adjacent to another.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Notice requesting authorization to discharge stormwater pursuant to the NPDES Construction General Permit applicable to
that specific area (required on all sites 1 acre and larger).
ONSITE DETENTION: The temporary storage of runoff on the site.
ONSITE RETENTION: The permanent holding of runoff on the site through percolation to the ground.
OWNER: Any person who is the owner of, has a possessory interest in, has possession or control of, or occupies real property.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.
ROUGH GRADE: The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.
SEDIMENT: Material deposited in a stream, drainage course, or other area from eroded earth material that was carried by wind, gravity, and runoff.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Sediment control practices trap soil particles after they have been dislodged and moved by wind or water. Sediment controls are
generally passive systems that rely on filtering or settling soil particles out of the water or wind that is transporting them. Sediment control treats soil as a
waste product and works to remove it from stormwater runoff.
SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.
SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
SOIL: Naturally occurring superficial deposits overlaying in place solid rock.
SOILS/GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A Nevada Registered Engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soil engineering.
SOILS/GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING: The application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works,
involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.
SPECIFICATIONS: A description of the material, processes, standards of performance and workmanship required in a project. Specifications may be
indicated on plans or drawings or in written materials containing standard and special provisions such as soil reports. Other reports or standards as may
be necessary pertaining to the quality of the project.
STOCKPILING: Stockpiling of materials, such as dirt, fill, Type II, rock or debris, for future use or export.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A series of phases and activities to, first, characterize your site, and then to select and carry
out actions which prevent the pollution of stormwater discharges. (Part of Federal NPDES program and requirement of all sites 1 acre and larger, a copy to
be maintained on site and updated as changes are made to improve or correct conditions.)
TERRACE: A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.
TRACK-OUT: Soil on paved roadways deposited from vehicles that have passed from a construction site or from an unpaved access route onto the paved
surface. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
8-2-3: FEES AND BONDS:
A. Fees: Appropriate fees, procedures and regulations may be established for cost of enforcement of this chapter.
B. Bonds: Appropriate bonds and collection procedures may be imposed by the local entity to assure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017,
eff. 5-17-2017)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 297/565
8-2-4: ACTIVITIES REQUIRING GRADING PERMITS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Permit Required: A grading permit shall be required for any grading, clearing or stockpiling impacting local or regional drainage as indicated by the
Local Administrator. No other permits required under the jurisdiction's building code shall be approved for construction until the Local Administrator
approves the issuance of a grading permit. The permit may then be issued by the designated official.
B. Separate Permits: A separate permit shall be required for each noncontiguous site and may cover both excavations and fills. PUDs shall be considered
contiguous within the PUD boundaries.
C. Filling And Excavating: No person shall perform any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the designated official, except for the following
activities:
1. Landscaping surrounding an existing single-family residence which does not impact drainage to adjacent properties and complies with local
ordinances.
2. Grading or clearing of vegetation in any area less than one (1) acre in size if the Local Administrator finds that no apparent danger to private or
public property can now or thereafter result from the grading operation (the property owner shall be required to obtain a Clark County Dust Permit in
his/her name for all clearing and grading of sites of 1/4 acre and larger).
3. Cemetery graves.
4. Excavations for wells.
5. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations where the operation thereof does not block or divert any natural drainage course, or affect the
lateral support or unduly increase the stresses in, or pressures upon, any adjacent or contiguous property.
6. On site trenching for utility purposes.
7. Exploratory excavations under the direction of a Soil Engineer or Engineering Geologist.
8. Mining, quarrying, excavation, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, precious metals, aggregate or clay where established and provided for
by law, provided such operations preserve natural drainage and do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses upon any adjacent or
contiguous property.
9. The installation of SWPPP BMPs.
D. Exceptions For Emergencies: The provisions of this Code shall not apply to any grading operation which is conducted during a period of emergency or
disaster, and which is directly connected with or related to relief of conditions caused by such emergency or disaster. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-
2017)
8-2-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Grading Permit Required: Except as exempted in subsection 8-2-4D of this chapter, no person shall do any grading, nor shall any owner allow grading
on his property, unless the owner or his/her designee has a valid grading permit issued by the designated official. A separate grading permit shall be
required for each noncontiguous site and may cover both excavations and fills.
B. Application For Permit, Information: To obtain a grading permit, the applicant shall complete a form furnished by the designated official. A separate
application shall be required for each grading permit. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property or by the licensed contractor
performing the work. The following shall apply to every application:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the
proposed work, together with the name and address of property owner.
3. Indicate the intended use for which the site is being prepared.
4. Give proposed location of deposit area and name and address of person which will receive excavated material and evidence that the property owner
is willing to receive the material (if off site).
5. Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in subsection C of this section.
6. State the estimated quantities of earthwork involved, excavation and fill.
7. Be signed by the property owner or his/her authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
8. Give such other information as required in subsection E of this section.
9. A soils engineering report shall be required unless waived by the designated official.
10. A copy of the notice of intent filed with the Nevada EPA for sites one (1) acre and larger, signed by the general contractor.
C. Plans And Specifications: The designated official may require that plans and specifications be prepared by a professional licensed to practice in the
State of Nevada in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 625. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans
and specifications. The plans shall be drawn to scale upon Mylar or good quality, reproducible paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the
nature and extent of the work proposed and shown in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances,
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 298/565
rules and regulations.
The designated official, or his designee, shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications "approved". Such approved plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the designated official and all work shall be performed in accordance
with the approved plans. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the owner or developer
and persons by whom the plans and specifications were prepared.
The plans and specifications shall show, but need not be limited to, the following information:
1. A general vicinity map of the proposed site.
2. Show property limits and accurate contours of the existing ground and details of the terrain reference to a point approved by the Local Administrator.
Whenever possible, elevations shall be in accordance with the established United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey, and the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. Accurate contours beyond the property limits shall be displayed when appropriate to depict impacted topography.
3. Show limiting dimensions, elevations and finished contours to be achieved by the proposed grading.
4. Show locations of all existing or proposed buildings, structures, fences, block walls and retaining walls on the property where the work is to be
performed and the location of any buildings, structures, fences, block walls and retaining walls on land of adjacent owners which may be affected by
or affect the proposed grading operation.
5. Show locations and dimensions of all easements.
6. Show impacted utilities.
7. Delineate drainage which will impact, or be impacted by, the proposed grading.
8. Identify all existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, channels and other protective measures to be constructed with, or
part of, the proposed work.
The Soils Engineer shall review the final plans and specifications of the project and attest to, in writing, the soils reports applicability to the proposed
project. The written information provided by the Soils Engineer shall be submitted for acceptance to the designated official, or his designee.
D. Additional Information Required: The designated official may require additional information such as an engineering geology report, or a drainage study.
These studies and reports shall be approved by the designated official prior to the issuance of a grading permit. When specified by the soils
investigation report, the designated official shall require a ground water study.
E. Report Content: Plans, computations and specifications shall be prepared by a professional, licensed to practice by the State of Nevada in accordance
with Nevada Revised Statutes 625. The soils investigation report, ground water study and engineering geology report shall contain, but not be limited
to, the following information:
1. Plan Content:
a. A general vicinity map of the proposed site.
b. Show site limits and approximate contours. Whenever possible, elevations shall be in accordance with the established United States Coastal and
Geodetic Survey, and the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
c. Location of explorations and field test locations.
d. Depth to ground water, if less than fifteen feet (15'), that may affect the proposed development.
e. Known or encountered geologic hazards present on the site shall be accurately delineated.
f. Approximate limits of known and encountered existing fill.
2. Minimum Exploration Requirements For Non-Critical Structures As Determined By Local Administrator:
a. The minimum exploration requirements are as follows:
(1) The minimum depth of an exploration shall be ten feet (10'). Exploration depth shall be increased as necessary to evaluate the suitability of the
material within the foundation's depth of influence as determined by the registered design professional. The explorations can be terminated
should refusal be encountered. However, at least three-fourths (3/4) of the required explorations shall be to the minimum depth. The
geotechnical report shall clearly state the refusal criteria. When information regarding the proposed structure and the final grades is made
available, the registered design professional shall determine if the explorations originally documented in the geotechnical report meet the depth
requirements. In areas of deep cuts or excavations, the geotechnical explorations may be performed after excavations have been performed.
b. The minimum number of explorations performed shall be as follows:
(1) For areas less than or equal to one (1) acre, a minimum of two (2) explorations.
(2) For areas greater than one (1) acre, but less than five (5) acres, a minimum of one (1) exploration for the first acre and one (1) for each
additional two (2) acres, or portion thereof.
(3) For areas greater than five (5) acres, but less than twenty (20) acres, a minimum of three (3) explorations plus one (1) additional exploration for
each three (3) acres or fraction thereof above five (5).
(4) For areas greater than twenty (20) acres, a minimum of eight (8) explorations plus one (1) additional exploration for each five (5) acres or
fraction thereof above twenty (20).
c. Exceptions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 299/565
(1) A minimum of one (1) exploration is required for single story structures with a footprint less than two thousand (2,000) square feet whose
locations are known and only that area of the site is to be developed. This provision is limited to detached structures classified as Group U
occupancy or building additions of any occupancy. The exploration shall be performed within the proposed footprint.
(2) A minimum of one (1) exploration is required for signs, light poles and communication towers whose locations are known and only that area of
the site is to be developed. The exploration shall be performed within fifty feet (50') of the proposed foundation for the structure.
3. Report Content:
a. Continuous log of all explorations.
b. All elevations shall be referenced to a point approved by the Local Administrator. Whenever possible, elevations shall be in accordance with the
established United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey, and the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
c. Soil classification shall be as per ASTM D2487-83 (unified soil classification system).
d. A description of the exploration and sampling methodology.
e. Depth of ground water will be noted if ground water is encountered.
f. All field and laboratory tests shall comply with local recognized standards and methodologies and shall be properly referenced. Where applicable,
ASTM standards shall be used.
g. A special study shall be required if the proposed site development will adversely impact an adjoining property.
4. Recommendations And Conclusions: There shall be recommendations and conclusions concerning, but not limited to, the following:
a. Grading Recommendations:
(1) Provide grading recommendations for onsite and import soils (where applicable). Design recommendations for foundations, grading and earth
retaining structures shall specifically address the suitability of onsite soils for use as fill material, the potential negative impacts of the following
adverse soil conditions including, but not limited to: collapsible soils, expansive soils (swell), soluble soils, corrosive soils (including sulfates and
chlorides), chemical heave, and uncontrolled fill. The report shall include supporting test data and where any of these conditions are identified
on-site, mitigating measures shall be provided based upon the identified conditions. The requirements for imported fill shall specifically address
all of the above adverse conditions as well.
(2) Percent of compaction required.
(A) Percent of moisture content required.
(B) Placement procedures.
(C) Special requirements; e.g., fill placement on existing slopes or soft ground.
(D) Overexcavation depths.
(3) Minimum design consideration for drainage control structures.
(4) Known surface and subsurface hazards.
(5) The mitigation of all known adverse soil conditions and ground water.
(6) Observation and testing requirements during grading.
(7) Permanent slope recommendations including erosion potential mitigation for all slopes.
(8) Discuss the impact and approximate limits of adverse soil conditions:
(A) Expansive clay.
(B) Extent of caliche.
(C) Hydrocollapsible soils.
(D) Gypsiferous and/or soluble soil.
(E) Chemically reactive soil.
(F) Existing fill.
(G) Rock.
F. Certification: Grading plans, soils investigation reports and ground water studies shall be certified in the following manner:
1. Subsection C of this section shall be prepared by a professional licensed by the State of Nevada in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 625.
Prior to final inspection, the field grading shall be certified by a professional licensed by the State of Nevada in accordance with Nevada Revised
Statutes 625 as conforming to the final approved plans, which shall be designated by the Local Administrator on forms provided by the local entity.
2. Subsection E of this section must be prepared by a Nevada Registered Civil Engineer and shall certify that all drainage improvements were
constructed in accordance with the final approved plans, which shall be designated by the Local Administrator on a form provided by the local entity.
3. Soils grading report (post grading analysis), when required, shall be prepared and signed by a Nevada Registered Engineer, and correlated with
subsection E of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 300/565
The report shall include, but not be limited to, field test summary with locations, elevations, nature of tests and their results, laboratory test summary
with sample locations, elevations, nature of tests and their results and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading
and their effort on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report.
Limits of the engineered sub-grade, as well as other pertinent information will be shown on the as graded plan, with certification when appropriate, as
to the adequacy of the site for the intended use. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
8-2-6: PERMIT LIMITATIONS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Permit Limitation: A grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the permit
or on the plans and specifications approved by the designated official. The issuance of a permit, based upon drawings and specifications shall not
prevent the designated official from thereafter requiring the corrections of errors in said drawings and specifications or from stopping unlawful
construction operations being carried on thereunder.
B. Jurisdiction Of Other Agencies: Permits issued under the requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for securing permits
for work to be done which is regulated by any other governing agency or entity.
C. Permit And Plans On Site: One (1) set of approved plans and specifications, setting forth all conditions attached, shall be kept on such grading site by
the permittee at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. The permit shall be kept posted so it is easily visible, or must be
readily available upon request.
D. Pre-Construction Meeting: Prior to any grading work being started the contractor shall schedule with the City a pre-job meeting. Required attendees
shall be owner representative, grading contractor and City Inspector; recommended attendees include Soils Engineer, Civil Engineer, any contractor
involved with grading or utilities.
E. Time Limits:
1. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work required to be done pursuant to the grading permit within the time limit specified. If no
time limit is specified, the permittee shall complete the work within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of the issuance of the grading permit.
2. If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified time, he/she shall, prior to the expiration of the permit, present in writing to the
designated official a request for an extension of time, setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the designated official,
such an extension is warranted, then an extension of time, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, may be granted for the completion of the
work.
F. Drainage Precautions: All persons performing any grading operations shall put into effect all safety precautions which are necessary in the opinion of the
designated official and provide adequate anti-erosion and/or drainage devices, debris basins, or other safety devices to protect the health and welfare
of the community and property. Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Exception: Drainage facilities and terracing need not be provided where the ground slope is not steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal
(33 percent slope) or where slopes are intended and designed by a Geotechnical Engineer to be temporary or sacrificial in nature.
1. Terraces at least six feet (6') in width shall be established at not more than thirty foot (30') vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface
drainage and debris. Suitable access shall be provided to allow for cleaning and maintenance.
2. Swales or ditches shall be provided on terraces. They shall have a minimum gradient of one unit vertical in twenty units horizontal (5 percent slope)
and shall be paved with concrete not less than three inches (3") (76 mm) in thickness, or with other materials suitable to the application. They shall
have a depth not less than twelve inches (12") (305 mm) and a width not less than five feet (5') (1524 mm).
3. A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet (1256 m2)
(projected) without discharging into a down drain.
G. Excavations:
1. Maximum Slope: Temporary cut slopes for construction purposes shall be no steeper than allowed per OSHA standards. The slope of permanent cut
surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall be not more than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope)
or more than ten feet (10') in height unless the owner or the owner's authorized agent furnishes a geotechnical report justifying a steeper and/or
higher slope.
2. Exceptions:
a. A cut surface shall be permitted to be at a slope of 1.5 units horizontal to one unit vertical (67 percent slope) provided that all of the following are
met:
(1) It is not intended to support structures or surcharges.
(2) It is adequately protected against erosion.
(3) It is no more than eight feet (8') (2438 mm) in height.
(4) It is approved by the Building Code Official.
(5) Ground water is not encountered.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 301/565
b. A cut surface in bedrock shall be permitted to be at a slope of one unit horizontal to one unit vertical (100 percent slope).
H. Conditions And Approval: In granting any permit under this chapter, the designated official may attach such conditions as may be reasonably necessary
to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Compliance with dust control requirements of the Clark County Department of Air Quality and Environmental Management.
2. Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would otherwise be hazardous.
3. Improvements of any existing site condition to bring it up to the standards of this chapter.
4. Compliance with erosion control requirements of Nevada Division of Environmental Protection Bureau of Water Pollution Control and other best
management practices.
5. Haul routes for materials.
I. Unlawful Grading: The designated official shall not issue a permit in any case where the work, as proposed by the applicant, will endanger any private or
public property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or seriously interfere with any existing drainage course. However, if it can be
shown to the satisfaction of the designated official that the hazard would be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress
fills, drainage devices or by other means, the designated official may issue the permit after the applicant has complied with subsections 8-2-5B and C
of this chapter.
J. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability:
1. Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with the provisions hereof or with any conditions imposed
by the designated official, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose
any liability upon the District and entity for damage to persons or property.
2. The designated official, or his designee, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for entity or District in
the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties.
K. Hazardous Conditions: Whenever the designated official determines that any existing or proposed excavation, slope or fill has become a hazard to life
and limb, endangers property or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which
the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the designated official, shall
within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of the policies and plans. (Ord. 510, 4-
25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
8-2-7: PERMIT - NOT TO BE CONSTRUED AS APPROVAL OF VIOLATIONS - CORRECTIONS OF ERRORS:
A. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of
the provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, except insofar as
the work or use which it authorizes is unlawful.
B. The issuance of a permit based on plans and specifications shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in
said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations from being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of any other
law. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
8-2-8: DENIAL AND PERMIT REVOCATION:
A. Notice Of Noncompliance:
1. Whenever any construction or work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or not in accordance with the plans and specifications
submitted and approved as the basis for the issuance of the permit, or if a hazard to life and limb exists, if public or private property is or may be
endangered, the designated official, or his designee, shall issue a written notice to the permittee or his/her agent or other responsive employee
requiring cessation of work upon that portion of the site where noncompliance, hazard or other violation has occurred or exists.
2. The notice shall state the nature of the said condition and shall contain sufficient information to apprise the permittee of the nature and extent of the
correction required. No work shall be performed on said portion of the site unless or until the noticed condition is rectified and approved upon
inspection of the designated official or unless, as a condition of continuing the work, special precautions agreeable to the designated official are
performed by the permittee. Failure of the permittee to take such precautions or rectify such condition, hazard, nonperformance, noncompliance or
violation shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.
B. Permit Revocation:
1. A permit shall not be revoked until a hearing is held by the designated official. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served
upon the permittee at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement of the reasons for
revoking the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope registered and postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his address given in the application for the permit.
2. Any permit holder, owner or surety who feels that he has been aggrieved by the decision of the designated official may appeal any of the provisions
of this regulation pursuant to the appellant process of the local entity.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 302/565
C. Permit - Liability: Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any
conditions imposed in the permit issued under this chapter shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other person's property, nor
impose any liability upon the City, its officers, agents or employees, for damage to other person's property. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
8-2-9: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Violations And Penalties: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by such person, and he/she shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. (Ord. 510, 4-25-2017, eff. 5-17-2017)
Title 9
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall be known as and may be cited as the UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ("UDO"). (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY:
A. State Statute: These regulations are adopted pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278 and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto.
B. Amendments: Whenever any portion of these regulations refers to or cites a section of the Nevada Revised Statutes which section is later amended or
superseded, the regulations shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that nearly corresponds to the superseded
section. In the event that such an amendment is not possible, no action may be taken pursuant to the affected provisions of these regulations until such
time as the city council has had the opportunity to review all available options. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-3: PURPOSE:
These regulations are adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of mesquite,
dividing the city into districts, setting forth the regulations pertaining to suchdistricts in accordance with the master plan for Mesquite, and are designed to:
A. Preserve the quality of air and water resources;
B. Promote the conservation of open space and the protection of other natural and scenic resources from unreasonable impairment;
C. Provide for recreational needs;
D. Protect life and property in areas subject to floods, landslides and other natural disasters, and secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
E. Conform to the adopted Mesquite comprehensive master plan;
F. Develop a timely, orderly and efficient arrangement of transportation and public facilities and services;
G. Ensure that the development on land is commensurate with the character and the physical limitations of the land;
H. Take into account the immediate and long range financial impact of the application of particular land to particular kinds of development, and the relative
suitability of such land for such development; and
I. Promote health, safety, comfort, convenience morals and the general welfare of the city of Mesquite.
These regulations are with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular
uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout Mesquite. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 303/565
9-1-4: JURISDICTION; APPLICATION:
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all land, property and development in the incorporated area of Mesquite, Nevada, except as expressly
and specifically provided otherwise in this UDO. No development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 172,
9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of these regulations were originally adopted on September 24, 1996, and became effective on October 31, 1996. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996)
9-1-6: COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
A. Mesquite Code; Cross References: The use of buildings and land within the City shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this Code as well
as these regulations, whether or not such other provisions of this Code are specifically cross referenced in these regulations. Cross references to other
provisions of this Code in these regulations are for the convenience of the reader; lack of a cross reference should not be construed as an indication
that other provisions of this Code do not apply.
B. Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall be construed to be the minimum requirements
necessary for the promotion of public health, safety or the general welfare. Minimum values are not intended to be target values. In some instances,
topography or other conditions may create the need to exceed stated minimum standards. Whenever these regulations require a lower height of a
building or lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of the lot to be left unoccupied, or impose more restrictive standards than are
required pursuant to any other statute or local regulation, these regulations shall govern. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-7: CONSISTENCY WITH MASTER PLAN:
A. Intent: These regulations are intended to implement the goals and policies of the Mesquite comprehensive master plan ("master plan") and are hereby
deemed to be consistent with and in accordance with the adopted master plan for the City. Any amendments to or changes pursuant to such
regulations shall be consistent with the master plan, as it may be amended from time to time.
B. Amendments: An amendment to the text of these regulations is consistent with and in accordance with the master plan if it complies with the goals and
policies stated in the plan, as it may be amended from time to time. An amendment to the zoning map is consistent with the master plan if the map
amendment is consistent with the land use diagram contained in the plan, as it may be amended from time to time.
C. Predated Development: Where development is permitted under the regulations that predate these regulations, such development shall be deemed
consistent with the master plan, as long as such development conforms to the requirements of section 9-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 295, 3-10-2005)
9-1-8: RELATIONSHIP TO PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS:
A. The provisions of the UDO are not intended to affect any deed restriction, covenant, easement or any other private agreement or restriction on the use
of land; provided, that where the provisions of the UDO are more restrictive or impose higher standards than any such private restriction, the
requirements of the UDO shall control. Where the provisions of any private restriction are more restrictive or impose higher standards than the
provisions of the UDO, such private restrictions shall control if properly enforced by a person having the legal right to enforce such restrictions; the
Director of Development Services (hereinafter "Director") retains the right to reject any project on the basis that approval has not been obtained
pursuant to a valid common interest community (CIC), however the Director is required to notify an applicant, when relevant, that a proposed project is
located within a CIC; before submitting a matter to the consideration of the City Council, the Director is required to obtain from the board of directors of
the relevant CIC a statement of position regarding compliance with CIC requirements of a proposed project; this statement of position shall be included
in all applications submitted to the City Council; the City Council retains the right to reject any project on the basis of the position statement of the CIC;
private restrictions shall not be enforced by the City. (Ord. 545, 9-25-2018, eff. 10-16-2018)
9-1-9: DEVELOPMENT UNDER PRIOR REGULATIONS:
A. Previously Existing Regulations: Those regulations in effect immediately previous to the effective date of this UDO shall be referred to in this section as
the "previously existing regulations". The UDO shall be referred to either as "these regulations" or the UDO.
B. Administrative Permits: Administrative permits issued prior to the effective date of these regulations shall be valid until their expiration under the
previously existing regulations. Applications for administrative permits submitted after the effective date of these regulations shall be reviewed and
evaluated pursuant to the requirements of this UDO.
C. Subdivision: Complete applications for tentative map(s) submitted prior to the effective date of these regulations shall be processed under the
previously existing regulations. All applications for subdivision approvals submitted after the effective date of these regulations shall be reviewed
pursuant to this UDO. Subdivision development applications, approved under the previously existing regulations, that are allowed to lapse or expire will
be subject to reapplication under these regulations.
D. Zoning:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 304/565
1. Uses: Existing uses may continue either in compliance with these regulations or as legal nonconforming uses subject to the requirements of chapter
11 of this title.
2. Lots: Existing lots that do not comply with the requirements of these regulations will be allowed to be developed in compliance with chapter 11 of this
title.
3. Rezoning Applications: Rezoning applications that have been filed prior to the adoption of these regulations and which are complete shall be
processed pursuant to the previously existing regulations. If the application is denied or fails for any reason, new application must be made in
compliance with these regulations.
E. Conditional Use Permits: The city shall monitor all outstanding conditional use permits issued under the previously existing regulations and prior to
expiration of the existing conditional use permit, the permit holder may, if required under these regulations, apply for a conditional use permit as set
forth in section 9-5-3 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of these regulations should be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of these regulations which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of these regulations are declared to
be severable. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-11: SALE OR USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
A. According To Provisions: No person may use, occupy or sell any land or buildings or authorize or permit the use, occupancy or sale of land or buildings
under his/her control except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of these regulations.
B. Use, Occupancy Defined: For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to,
on or in that building or land. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-12: FEES:
A. Authority: Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to
applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, conditional use permits, subdivision plat approval, zoning amendments, variances and other applications.
The amount of the administrative fees charged shall be as established by resolution of the city council filed in the office of the city clerk.
B. Payment: Fees established in accordance with subsection A of this section shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of appeal.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 272, 7-29-2002)
9-1-13: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
A. Building Official: It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of these regulationspertaining to the use of land, erection,
construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or addition to any building or structure.
B. License Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city clerk and all officials charged with the issuance of licenses to enforce the provisions of these
regulations pertaining to the use of land or buildings for which any such license is required by any other ordinance of the city.
C. Health Department: It shall be the duty of the health department of Clark County to enforce the provisions of these regulations pertaining to the
maintenance and use of property, structures and buildings so far as matters of health are concerned.
D. Chief Of Police: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all officers of the city otherwise charged with the enforcement of the law to enforce these
regulations and all the provisions of the same.
E. City Attorney: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to prosecute any criminal or civil action necessary to enforce the provisions of these regulations
under such statutes and ordinances as are applicable.
F. Zoning Inspector: It shall be the duty of the zoning inspector, concurrent with the authority of the building official, to enforce the provisions of these
regulations pertaining to the use of land, location, use or addition to any building or structure.
G. Penalties For Violation: Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provisions of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term not
exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion
of which any violation of these regulations is committed, continued or permitted by such person and is punishable as herein provided.
H. Abatement Proceedings: Any building or structure set up, erected, built, moved or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to the provisions of
these regulations and/or any conditions attached to the granting of any conditional use permit or variance permit pursuant thereto is unlawful and a
public nuisance and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 305/565
abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps to grant such relief as will abate and remove
such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, moving ormaintaining any such building or
structure or using any property contrary to the provisions of these regulations.
I. Cumulative Remedies: All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
J. Penalty: All violations of prior land use regulations that have occurred in the city as of the effective date of these regulations shall continue to be
violations and shall not be considered to be legal nonconforming situations under this section. The city shall have the same authority to secure civil
remedies for violations of such regulations to the same extent that it may secure civil remedies for violations of the UDO. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-
31-1996)
9-1-14: PUBLICATION:
A copy of these regulations shall be filed with the office of the city clerk, and notice of such filing shall be published immediately following adoption of these
regulations by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-15: SALE OF REGULATIONS:
Copies of these regulations may be sold by the zoning department or the building department at the uniform charge of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per copy.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-1-16: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be completed is based upon calendar days. All acts must be completed within the
time frame specified, subject to extension periods provided herein. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
9-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
A. For the purpose of this unified development ordinance ("UDO"), certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as set forth in this chapter. If not
specifically defined herein, words and terms shall be defined as in a current volume of Webster's encyclopedic unabridged dictionary of the English
language.
B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
2. Words used in the plural number include the singular and words used in the singular include the plural;
3. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory;
4. The word "herein" means in the UDO;
5. Gender specific words, such as his or hers, shall include the opposite gender;
6. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership or an incorporated association of persons, such as a club;
7. The word "building" includes a structure;
8. A "building" includes any part thereof; and
9. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied". (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-2-2: TERMS DEFINED:
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, words and their derivations and phrases shall have the following meanings.
If any words and phrases are not defined by these regulations, but are defined in state or federal laws, the state or federal law definition shall apply.
ADA: The Americans with disabilities act.
ACCESS ROAD: Any roadway available to the public which provides access between a publicly dedicated or owned thoroughfare and the entrance or
operating area of a facility.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 306/565
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A building or use customarily incident to the primary building or use on the same lot or parcel.
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES: Storm water, water, wastewater, street, electric and telecommunications facilities at the minimum level of service
established in this title.
ADJACENT: A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land.
ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT: Any permit required for any type of development which may be approved by the zoning or building official or other employee
of the city, including, but not limited to, building or occupation permits.
ADULT USES: Adult uses are those which are not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public and excluding any minor by
reason of age, a minor being a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Adult uses involve specified sexual activities, including, but not limited to,
adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult saunas, adult rap/conversation parlors,
adult health clubs, juice bars and adult cabarets, or similar adult uses.
AGRICULTURAL USE: Any use involved with the cultivation of the soil, production of plants or crops or the raising of livestock.
AIRPORT: Any landing area, runway or other facility designed, used or intended to be used either publicly or by any person or persons for the landing and
taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
AIRPORT ZONES: Includes the following zones:
A. Approach zone: The area leading from each end of a landing strip.
B. Transition zone:
1. The area adjacent to each side of a landing strip.
2. The area outside of the circumference of a turning zone and adjacent thereto.
3. Area adjacent to each side of an approach zone.
C. Turning zone: The circular area centered upon an airport reference point.
ALLEY: A public way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a public street.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE: Any establishment other than a hotel-casino which maintains five (5) or more coin operated amusement machines, excluding
coin operated gaming devices.
ANIMAL ENCLOSURE AREA: Any area designed for the containment of animals, excluding: livestock grazing areas, terrariums, aquariums, small cages
kept within the living area of a residence and fenced yards.
ANIMAL EXHIBIT: Any use wherein exotic or wild animals are kept in captivity for the purpose of public display with or without charge. Exhibits of this type
typically display animals in temporary exhibits which are not representative of the animals' natural habitat. Animal exhibit shall not be interpreted to include
zoos.
ANIMAL, EXOTIC OR WILD: An animal which is not of a species customarily used as a household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined to a
zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful
of bodily harm or property damage. Fish and birds are not included in this definition.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
APARTMENT: Includes the following:
A. Apartment, hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodation to the general public and where rooms or suites may include kitchen facilities
and sitting rooms in addition to the bedroom.
B. Apartment house: A structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
C. Apartment, studio: One room and bath with or without cooking facilities, in a multiple dwelling.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting approval of any development application.
APPLICATION: A request for any development approval, including all required supplementary information.
ATTENTION GAINING DEVICES: Any streamers, flags, wheels, propellers, bunting or other artificial devices, figures, shapes, colors, sounds, lights and
exhibits, live, animated or still, intended for attracting attention of passersby.
AUTO WRECKING: The collecting, dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage or sale of dismantled, partially dismantled,
obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.
AUTOMOBILE OR TOURIST COURT: A group of two (2) or more detached or semidetached buildings (including groups designated as auto courts, motels
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 307/565
or motor lodges) containing individual dwelling or sleeping units furnished with a garage attached or parking spaces conveniently located to each unit, with
a daily maid service, a daily linen service, on site maintenance and a resident manager, designed for or used on a daily basis by automobile tourists or
transients. Ten percent (10%) of rooms may be designated for a stay up to but not exceeding twenty eight (28) days. A twenty four (24) hour security
guard, separate from the resident manager, will be required for all motels having fifty (50) units or more. RV parking is not allowed unless RV specific
parking is provided.
AUTOMOBILE, TRUCK AND/OR TRAILER SALES LOT: An open area used for display, sales and/or rental of new or used automobiles, trucks or trailers,
but where no repair, repainting or remodeling is done.
AVIARY: A house, large cage or enclosure for keeping and rearing of birds in confinement.
BANQUET FACILITY: An establishment that is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions such as banquets, weddings,
anniversaries, and other similar celebrations. Such a use may or may not include: a) kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food; b) the sale of
alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption only during an event; and c) outdoor gardens or reception facilities.
BASEMENT: A story completely or partly underground.
BICYCLE LANE: That portion of an existing roadway designated and marked by pavement markings or signing for the specific use of nonmotorized
bicycles.
BLOCK: A parcel of land bounded by streets or by streets and a natural or artificial barrier.
BOARD: The zoning board of adjustment ("ZBA"), an officially constituted body whose principal duties are to hear appeals and, where appropriate, grant
variances from the strict application of these regulations.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling unit or part thereof in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided; personal and financial services may be
offered as well.
BREEZEWAY: Any structure connecting two (2) buildings and with a roof in keeping with the design and construction of the main building.
BRIDGE: A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or an obstruction, having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving
loads, and having a clear span or multiple spans totaling twenty feet (20') or more, as measured in a horizontal plane along the centerline of the roadway.
BUFFER YARD: A strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another land use or to provide screening.
BUILDING: A structure which is permanently affixed to the ground, as provided by the building code, has a roof supported by columns or walls, and is
used for housing or enclosure of people, animals or personal property.
BUILDING CODE: An adopted description of building and structural specifications adopted by the city.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line specifically established which generally is parallel to and set back from a property line and which identifies an area into
which no part of a building shall project (see "Exhibit 9-2:1: Building Setbacks" of this definition).
Exhibit 9-2:1: Building Setbacks
BULK REGULATIONS: Standards and controls that establish the maximum size of buildings and structures on a lot and the buildable area within which the
building can be located, including coverage, setbacks, height, floor area ratio and yard requirements.
BUSINESS: Includes retail, commercial and industrial uses and districts, as herein defined.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM: A proposed schedule setting forth all proposed future capital facility projects in order of construction priority,
together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing such projects which are required to implement the master plan.
CEMETERY: Property used for the interment of the dead.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 308/565
CHECK CASHING SERVICE: Any person(s) engaged in the business of cashing checks for a fee, service charge or other consideration.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: An establishment operated and maintained for the purpose of furnishing care on a temporary or permanent basis during the day
or overnight to five (5) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age, if compensation is received for the care of any of those children. A community
residence is not a childcare facility.
CHURCH: Any building or structure regularly and primarily used as a place of worship, or other religious assembly, by any organized religious society,
organization or congregation recognized by the 1986 federal tax code section 501(c), regardless of whether or not such building or structure was originally
designed and constructed for such purpose.
CITY: The incorporated city of Mesquite, Nevada.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION FOR BUILDING: When a valid building permit is issued, and the footings and foundation are placed in the
ground.
Subdivisions: Field construction approved off site and grading plans.
COMMERCIAL HAULERS: Individuals or companies that transport nonhazardous and/or hazardous wastes for a fee or in the regular course of business.
COMMERCIAL USE: An activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for a profit.
COMMISSION: Mesquite, Nevada, planning commission or city council acting as planning commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water or easements, licenses or equitable
servitudes within the site designated for a planned unit development which is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the residents or owners of
the development. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit
and enjoyment of the residents or owners of the development.
COMMON OWNERSHIP AREA: Ownership by one or more individuals in any form of ownership of two (2) or more contiguous lots.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A residential living arrangement for six (6) or more unrelated individuals with disabilities in need of the mutual support
furnished by other residents as well as the support services, if any, provided by the staff. A community residence shall be considered a residential use of
property for purposes of all zoning and building codes. The term does not include "facilities for the treatment of alcohol and drug abuse", "modified medical
detoxification facilities", "transitional living facilities for released offenders", "facilities for treatment with narcotics", or "community triage centers" as each of
these terms is defined within chapter 449 of the Nevada Revised Statutes. The term also does not include an "institution", "hospital", "boarding house",
"lodging house", "fraternity", "sorority", "dormitory", or any other group living arrangement for unrelated individuals who are not disabled. The term
"community residence" includes the following two (2) categories:
Community Residence - Family: A relatively permanent living arrangement for six (6) or more unrelated persons with disabilities including, but not
limited to, "residential facilities for groups" of six (6) or more residents as defined by Nevada Revised Statutes 449.017. No limit is placed on the
length of tenancy.
Community Residence - Transitional: A temporary living arrangement, with a limit on length of tenancy, for six (6) or more unrelated persons with
disabilities, including, but not limited to, "halfway house for recovering alcohol and drug abusers" for six (6) or more residents as defined by Nevada
Revised Statutes 449.008.
COMPOSTING: Process by which biological decomposition of organic matter is carried out under controlled aerobic conditions.
COMPOSTING FACILITY: A solid waste management facility where yard wastes and other permitted wastes are processed using composting technology.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (MASTER PLAN): A comprehensive, long range plan intended to guide the growth and development of Mesquite.
CONCEPT PLAN: A plan submitted in connection with a multiphase subdivision application that provides the information and graphics sufficient to meet
the requirements of this ordinance for the purpose of implementing an integrated development scheme for all phases of the proposed subdivision.
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS: Complete construction drawings of a facility or improvement, including, but not limited to, road plans and profiles, drainage
plans and utility plans.
CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR HOME FOR AGED: A facility that provides nursing care and related medical services on a twenty four (24) hour per day
basis to three (3) or more individuals due to illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity in an institutional setting rather than the family like environment
of a community residence.
CORRAL: A space, other than a building, used for the confinement of animals.
COUNCIL: The Mesquite city council.
COUNTY: Clark County, Nevada.
COURT: An open, unoccupied area, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such a building. "Court
apartment" means any multiple dwelling arranged around two (2) or three (3) sides of a court which opens onto a street.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having a terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
CULVERT: Any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under any roadway, including pipe culverts and any structure so named in
the plans.
CURB: A stone, concrete or other improved boundary usually marking the edge of a road or other paved area.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 309/565
DAIRY: Any premises upon which three (3) or more cows or goats are kept for the commercial production or sale of milk and dairy products.
DECORATIVE LIGHTING: Superfluous light, not used as part of an advertising display, intended to increase attractiveness or other incidental use.
DEFERRED DEPOSIT SERVICE: A transaction in which, pursuant to a written agreement: a) a customer tenders to a person a personal check drawn
upon the account of the customer; and b) the person provides to the customer an amount of money that is equal to the face value of a check, less any fee
charged for the transaction and agrees not to cash the check for a specified period. Also known as a "payday loan".
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE: Waste materials such as brick and stone from the construction or destruction of residential, industrial or
commercial structure, but excluding hazardous materials such as asbestos.
DENSITY: The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, households or housing structures per unit of land.
DEPENDENT UNIT: A recreational vehicle which requires connection or access to external sources of electricity, water and sewage systems.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in the proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or any person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation
or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, clearing of roadways or building sites, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the
use of land. This definition excludes normal earth working associated with crop farming or landscaping at an individual lot.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of an individual's major life activities, impairs an individual's ability to live
independently, having a record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. People with disabilities do not include drug
addicts or alcoholics when they are using alcohol, illegal drugs, or using legal drugs to which they are addicted.
DISPOSAL FACILITY: A facility or part of a facility at which hazardous waste is intentionally placed into or on any land or water, and at which waste will
remain after closure.
DISTRICT: A part, zone or geographic area within the city within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
DIVISION INTO LARGE PARCELS: Division of property pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.471.
DORMITORY: A building used as group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding school,
convent, monastery or other similar institutional use.
DRAINAGE: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: Area reserved for the conveyance of stormwater, stormwater improvements and required access.
DRIVEWAY: A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles from a street to a lot, building, garage or other structure or facility.
DUMP: A place used for the disposal, by abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration or by other means, of garbage, sewage, trash,
refuse, waste material, offal or dead animals.
DWELLING: A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof used for occupancy containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: One of two (2) or more buildings having a common or party wall which is fire resistant separating dwelling
units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A detached building containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space on the
same lot or parcel (also referred to as single-family dwelling).
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A detached building having dwelling units for not more than two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more connecting rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter for occupancy by a single
household, which have direct access to the outside or to a common hall, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit.
Dwelling units are usually located in a dwelling but may be included as a mixed or accessory use in buildings or in group quarters.
EASEMENT: A privilege or right of use, access or enjoyment granted on, above, under or across a particular tract of land by the landowner.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH DIVISION: Division of the Clark County health department and sanitation department responsible for regulation of on site
disposal waste treatment systems.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT: A statement of the effect of proposed development on the environment.
ESCORT BUREAU: See license fee referred to in section 2-1-13 of this code.
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency, which promulgates flood boundary and floodway maps.
FACILITY FOR INTERMEDIATE CARE: An institution operated and maintained to provide twenty four (24) hour personal and medical supervision, for a
person who does not have illness, disease, injury or other condition that would require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or facility for
skilled nursing is designed to provide. A community residence is not a facility for intermediate care.
FACILITY FOR SKILLED NURSING: An institution which provides continuous skilled nursing and related care as prescribed by a physician to a patient in
the facility who is not in an acute episode of illness and whose primary need is the availability of such care on a continuous basis. A community residence
is not a facility for skilled nursing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 310/565
FACILITY FOR THE CARE OF ADULTS DURING THE DAY: An establishment operated and maintained to provide care during the day on a temporary or
permanent basis for the aged or infirm persons.
FAMILY: A group of up to five (5) individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and
stability.
FARMING SMALL LIVESTOCK: The raising or keeping of more than twelve (12) fowl of any kind or twelve (12) rabbits or twelve (12) similar animals; any
goats, sheep or similar livestock but not hogs; or the breeding, raising or keeping of any cats or dogs; provided however, that "small livestock farming" as
used in these regulations shall not include animal hospitals, commercial cat or dog kennels, hog raising or the breeding for commercial purposes of
horses, cattle or similar livestock as determined by the city council.
FENCE HEIGHT: The vertical distance between the finished grade and the highest point of the fence or wall. (See definition of Grade, Finished.)
FINAL MAP: A map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan that is presented to the approving authority for final approval.
FLAG: A piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular and of distinctive design which is used as a symbol, such as for a nation, state,
locality or corporation.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The floodplain consisting of the floodway and the flood fringe area.
FLOODPLAIN: The channel and adjoining lands of a river or other watercourse, either flowing, intermittent or ephemeral, which has been or may be
inundated partially or completely by floodwater (see exhibit 9-2:2 of this section).
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of nonstructural provisions and changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding for the
reduction or elimination of flood damage to properties, water and sanitary facilities, and other utilities, structures and the contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY: Regulation of the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent portion of the floodplain that must be reserved in order to
discharge the regulation base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than two-tenths (2/10) of one foot (1') (see exhibit 9-
2:2 of this section).
FLOODWAY FRINGE: The area of the floodplain, outside the floodway, that has a one percent (1%) chance of flood occurrence in any one year (see
exhibit 9-2:2 of this section).
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENT, GAMING: Any place where gaming is operated and maintained. "Gaming" means and includes all games of chance or
devices and any slot machines played for money or for checks or tokens redeemable in money, except, for the purposes of these regulations only,
"gaming" shall not be construed to include slot machines when such slot machines are operated incidental or accessory to the conduct of a business
permitted under the provisions of these regulations.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or a portion of a main building designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles
owned and used by the occupants of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or
storing of motor driven vehicles.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal or vegetable or mineral wastes resulting from the storage, handling, preparation, cooking, serving, sale or consumption of
food.
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for at least nine (9) holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways and hazards, and
that may include a clubhouse and shelter.
GRADE, FINISHED: "Finished grade" includes the following meanings:
A. The average level of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of the building.
B. The finished grade for the purpose of determining the height of fences, walls, and/or hedges shall be the top of curb grade along a street. Where the
finished grade line of a lot is above or below the finished grade line of an abutting lot, the finished grade shall be the point on the high side.
GRADE, NATURAL: The elevation of the ground level in its natural state, before construction, filling or excavation.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The total enclosed area of all floors in a building with a clear height of more than six feet (6'), measured to the outside surface of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 311/565
the exterior walls. Parking facilities, driveways and airspace above the atria ground floor are excluded from gross floor area calculations.
GROSS LAND AREA: All land contained within the boundaries of a particular lot or tract of legally described property, including all existing and proposed
public and private streets and one-half (1/2) of any abutting street rights of way, excluding state and federal street rights of way.
GROUND LEVEL: The average level of earth adjoining the foundation of a structure measured around the foundation's perimeter.
GROUNDWATER: Water occurring below the ground surface either intermittently or in a zone of saturation.
GROUP QUARTERS: A building or structure used as a place of residence by several persons who share the living accommodations and do not occupy
separate dwelling units. Group quarters are found in institutions, dormitories, rooming and boarding houses, lodges, sorority and fraternity houses, and
similar establishments. A community residence is not a group quarter.
GUEST HOUSE OR COTTAGE: A separate dwelling structure located on a lot with one or more main dwelling structures and used for the housing of
guests or servants of the occupant of the premises; and such building shall not have a kitchen and shall not be rented, leased or sold separately from the
rental, lease or sale of the main dwelling.
GUESTROOM: Any room in a hotel, dormitory, boarding or lodging house, or home for the aged, used and maintained to provide sleeping
accommodations for not more than two (2) persons. Each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof of floor area used for sleeping purposes shall
be considered to be a separate guestroom.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE: Any building or structure designed to accommodate occupancy residents, clients, workers or other persons on a regular basis.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any waste or combination of wastes that, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may
be detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance.
HEAD IN PARKING: Parking a motor vehicle in such a manner that it must be backed out of, or into the space directly from a public right of way.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure to the highest point of
the structure.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following,
whichever yields a greater height of building:
A. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot (5') horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when
such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
B. An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection A of this definition is more than
ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.
HELIPORT: Any area used or to be used for the landing or takeoff of helicopters or other steep gradient aircraft capable of hovering, and shall include any
and all the areas or buildings which are appropriate to accomplish these functions.
HOG RANCH: Any premises where three (3) or more hogs are kept.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental and accessory use in the resident's
dwelling unit.
HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons. This would include
sanitariums, institutions for the cure of chronic drug addicts and mental patients, rest homes, homes for the aged and alcoholic sanitariums.
HOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms,
entertainment and recreational facilities.
HOTEL, RESORT: Any building or group of buildings used as a hotel, and in which there are one or more dining rooms available for meals to be served
and where entertainment may be provided to transient guests. Additionally that in which there are facilities used, designed or intended to be used in order
to serve or sell intoxicating beverages. Also, those which permit the operation of gambling or games of chance, and meet all of the components found in
section 2-3A-2 of this code.
HOUSEHOLD PET: Those animals which are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment on a residential property (and which could normally be,
although not required to be, contained within a residential structure). "Household pets" shall include, but not be limited to, domesticated dogs, cats, small
mammals, birds, fish, common aquarium animals and rodents which are not exotic or wild animals.
IMPERVIOUS COVER: Surfaces which do not permit the absorption of storm water into the ground.
IMPROVEMENTS: On or off site street pavements, curbs, sanitary and storm sewers, permanent street monuments, sidewalks, drainage, culverts,
utilities, water lines and connections, sewer lines and connections, lighting fixtures and other similar capital and public facility projects.
INDUSTRY: The manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or distribution of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof, in
such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof, including but not limited to, the following: animal hospitals, bakeries, bottling
plants, building or contractor's yards, cleaning and dyeing establishments, creameries, dog pounds, junkyards, laundries, lumberyards, milk bottling and
distributing stations, stockyards, storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.
INFRASTRUCTURE: Facilities and services needed to sustain industry, residential, commercial and all other land use activities. Infrastructure includes
water, sewer lines and other utilities, streets and roads, communications and public facilities such as firehouses, parks, schools, etc.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 312/565
INTENSITY OF LAND USE: The number of dwelling units per acre for residential development and floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential development,
such as commercial, office and industrial.
JUNKYARD: A. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, used plumbing fixtures and other materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
baled or cleaned; and/or
B. A place or yard for the storage of salvaged materials and equipment from house wrecking and salvage structural steel materials and equipment.
KENNEL: A commercial establishment in which dogs or domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold, all for a fee or
compensation.
KITCHEN: Any room principally used, intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food. The presence of a range or oven, or utility
connections suitable for servicing a range or oven, shall normally be considered as establishing a kitchen.
LAND SALES PRESENTATION OFFICE: Any building or room therein or portion thereof wherein land sales presentations are presented, held or
conducted.
LAND SALES PRESENTATION UNIT BROKER OFFICE: Any building or room therein or portion thereof wherein prospective customers are solicited to
attend land sales presentations.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of all the land proposed to be included in a planned unit development. The holder of an option or contract of
purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than thirty (30) years, or another person having an enforceable proprietary interest in the land is a
landowner for the purposes of this title.
LIVESTOCK FEED YARD: A lot or parcel of land improved with corrals, fences, buildings or improvements, and used primarily for the feeding and
fattening of livestock for subsequent sale, and includes the feeding of garbage for disposal.
LIVING AREA: That portion of the dwelling unit utilized for living purposes within the exterior walls of the structure and does not include porches,
breezeways, garages and carports.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LODGING HOUSE: A facility in which rental sleeping accommodations are provided and in which meals also may be supplied as part of the fee.
LOT: A parcel of land that is defined on a subdivision plat of record, which is intended to be occupied by a principal building(s) or building(s) and open
space. Streets are not included in this definition.
LOT AREA: The area of the lot shall be the net horizontal area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets, alleys and water bodies.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more intersecting streets. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least
dimension (see exhibit 9-2:3: Lot Types).
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance from the front property line to the rear property line. If front and rear property lines are not parallel, the lot depth is
the shortest distance between the front and rear property lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH LOT): An interior lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets (see exhibit 9-2:3: Lot Types).
LOT, FLAG: A lot having no frontage or access to a street or place except by a narrow strip of land (see exhibit 9-2:3: Lot Types).
LOT, FRONT LINE: The shortest line of a lot separating the lot from the street. In case a corner lot has equal frontage on two (2) or more streets, or in the
case of a through lot, the lot shall be considered to front on that street on which the greatest number of buildings have been erected on or within the same
block, except in those cases where the latest deed restriction or record map of a tract specify another side or sides as the front or fronts of such a lot.
LOT FRONTAGE: The length of the front lot line measured at the street right of way line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot whose side lines do not abut on any street (see exhibit 9-2:3: Lot Types).
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT, REAR LINE: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore shaped lot, a line ten
feet (10') in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT, WIDTH: The horizontal distance between side property lines measured parallel to the street side property lines or to the tangent of a curved street
property line.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 313/565
MANUFACTURED HOME: Factory built, single-family structures that meet the national manufactured home construction and safety standards act (42
USC § 5401, 1978, as amended) commonly known as HUD (U.S. department of housing and urban development) code and are permanently affixed to a
permanent foundation in a subdivision of record.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MAP, TENTATIVE: A plat prepared in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision regulations and is submitted for the purpose of showing the design
of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it.
MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting beyond the face of the building.
MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH STUDIO AND BATHHOUSE: A commercial enterprise that is established to serve the general public and not including any
commercial enterprise at which the human anatomy is exposed in a lewd, lascivious or salacious manner.
MASTER PLAN: The adopted comprehensive plan of Mesquite, Nevada.
METES AND BOUNDS: A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions (bounds) and distances (metes) from a point of reference.
MOBILE HOME: A single-family dwelling, factory built and factory assembled residence which does not comply with the national manufactured homes
construction safety and standards act.
MOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and that may provide services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and
entertainment and recreational facilities. All guestrooms are accessed from the structure's exterior.
MOTORIZED HOME (MOTOR HOME): A portable home designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
MULTI-OCCUPANT BUILDING: A building containing two (2) or more commercial units, including units that are located one over the other.
NRS: Nevada Revised Statutes.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any nonmanmade outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or any other body of surface or ground water.
NO BUILD ZONE: An area identified on a plat which is reserved for conveyance of drainage and precludes the construction of buildings, fences or other
obstructions which reduce drainageway capacity.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A structure or portion thereof which was lawfully erected or altered, but which does not comply with the
regulations applicable to new structures in the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which was lawfully established and maintained, but which does not comply with the use regulations applicable to new
uses in the zoning district in which it is located; the use of any land, building or structure which does not conform with currently applicable use regulations,
but which complied with use regulation in effect at the time the use was established.
OCCUPANT: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved real
property, either as owner or as a tenant.
OFFICE BUILDING: A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government or like activity, and may
include ancillary services for office workers, such as restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, and childcare facilities.
OFFICE/WAREHOUSE COMPLEX: A structure or group of structures offering compartments of varying size for rental to different tenants for the storage of
commercial goods or wares, conducting of certain retail trade activities, or provision of those personal or business services permitted by zoning.
OFFICIAL MAP: An ordinance in map form adopted by the governing body that indicates the location and width of proposed streets, public facilities, public
areas and drainage rights of way.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of recurring in any year or a flood of magnitude equaled or exceeded once in one hundred
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 314/565
(100) years on average over a significantly long period.
OPEN STORAGE: The location of bulk items, assemblies, or subassemblies in areas exposed to weather, in whole or in part, for the end use of further
manufacturing process, sale or transportation. This shall include, but not be limited to, open display of transportation vehicles, marine craft, aircraft, mobile
homes, modules, recreation vehicles, junkyards or "piggy back" containers. It does not include storage that is totally enclosed in a structure.
OUTSIDE STORAGE: The keeping, in an unroofed and unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for
more than twenty four (24) hours.
PARCEL: A contiguous lot or tract of land owned and recorded as the property of the same person or controlled by a single entity.
PARCEL MAP: A subdivision of land creating no more than four (4) lots.
PARKING LOT, PUBLIC: An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether
free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: Space within a building, lot or parking lot for the parking or storage of one automobile.
PATIO COVER/RESIDENTIAL PATIO COVER: A structure, not exceeding twelve feet (12') in height, and that is entirely open on two (2) or more sides.
Patio covers may be attached or detached and shall be reviewed and approved as an accessory use. Patio covers shall only be used for recreational and
outdoor living purposes, and not as carports, garages, storage areas, or as habitable space.
PAVEMENT: The uppermost layer of material placed on the street usually as the wearing or riding surface.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision,
organization of any kind or its legal representative, agent or assigns.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Service shops, such as shoe repair, dry cleaning, jewelry repair, hair care or accounting, which derive little or no income from the
sale of goods. Adult uses are not considered personal services.
PERVIOUS COVER: Land which permits storm water to absorb into the ground. This may include walkways and driveways which are pervious to storm
water.
pH: A measure of acidity or alkalinity, measured as the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the reciprocal of the number of gram ionic hydrogen equivalents
per liter of solution.
PLAN: The provisions for development of a planned unit development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, public and/or private streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space
and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the plan" means the written and graphic materials referred to in this title.
PLAN, SKETCH: The plan for discussion before a formal development application.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of land controlled by a landowner, which is to be developed as a single entity for one or more planned
unit residential development(s), one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas, or both.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: An area of land controlled by a landowner, which is to be developed as a single entity for a number of
dwelling units, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the regulations
established in any one residential district created, from time to time, under the provisions of the UDO.
PLAT: A. A map representing a tract of land showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets;
B. A map of a subdivision or site plan.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary or predominant use to which a property is or may be devoted and to which all other uses on the premises are accessory.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of a member of a recognized profession which is legal to conduct business in the city of Mesquite.
PROPERTY LINE: A line marking the boundary of one or more lots in a proposed subdivision or subdivision of record.
PUBLIC RESERVATION: A right created and retained by the city, including, but not limited to, easements and right of way interests.
PUBLIC SERVICES: Those services or facilities typically provided by the city or other public or quasi-public service provider, including, but not limited to,
water, wastewater, stormwater management, streets and solid waste treatment.
REAL ESTATE OFFICE: Any building or room therein or portion thereof, maintained by a licensed real estate broker or salesperson.
RECORD OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having a sufficient proprietary interest in land to seek
development of the land.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES: Amusement parks and mechanical amusement devices; commercial baseball, athletic fields and racetracks; circuses,
carnivals and fairgrounds; commercial fishing lakes; riding or boarding stables and exercising tracks; pony rides, hayrides; or any other similar activity,
including temporary amusements.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Includes "housecar", "camp car", or "travel trailer" unit and means any building or structure designed and/or used for living or
sleeping purposes and equipped with wheels to facilitate movement from place to place, and automobiles when used for living or sleeping purposes and
including pickup coaches (campers), motorized homes, travel trailers and camping trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK OR TRAILER PARK: A tract, lot or parcel of land on which temporary accommodations are provided for two (2) or more
automobile trailers, recreational vehicles, tents or housecars, and which is open to the public either free or for a fee.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 315/565
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SITE (OR SPACE): A plat of land in a recreational vehicle park, used or intended to be used for the accommodation of not
more than one recreational vehicle and one tow motor vehicle which is not in itself a recreational vehicle.
REFUSE: See definition of Solid Waste.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY: Religious services involving public assembly intended primarily for purposes connected with faith, such as customarily occurs in
churches, temples, mosques, and synagogues.
REMODEL: The internal or external alteration or change, in whole or in part, of a structure.
REPAIR: The mending or restoration of a building or structure to a sound or good state at or nearest to its original designed condition. Such work shall not
change the size or shape in whole or in part of a building or structure to expand a use. It shall include the terms "renovation", "rebuilding" and
"reconstruction".
RESIDENTIAL: Land designated for buildings consisting only of dwelling units. May be improved, vacant or unimproved.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a recorded subdivision plat if that change affects any street layout or area reserved for public use, or any lot line.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road or for another special use.
ROAD: Includes streets, bridges and roadways.
ROADWAY: The improved portion of a thoroughfare, exclusive of berm or shoulder, used for vehicular travel.
SALVAGE YARD: A place where used parts of automobiles or other equipment are collected and processed for resale.
SANITARIUM: A building or institution for the recuperation and treatment of persons with physical or mental disorders.
SANITARY SEWERS: Pipes that carry domestic or commercial sanitary sewage and into which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
SCHOOL: Any building which is regularly used as a public, private or parochial school, elementary school, middle school or high school.
SCREENING: A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted
vegetation.
SCREENING, OPAQUE: A combination of screening elements, designed to substantially or completely obscure horizontal views between abutting or
adjacent properties.
SERVANT'S QUARTERS: Living quarters in the main building or in an accessory building for the sole use of persons employed on the premises. Such
quarters shall not have a kitchen nor cooking facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
SERVICE STATION: Any building or structure, premises or other place used to supply motor fuels, lubricants, tires, batteries and other small accessories
to motor vehicles; and where repair work is not done other than minor repairs made by the attendant in the installation and servicing of such lubricants,
tires, batteries and other small accessories.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER, PUBLIC: Any lateral or main, sanitary sewer construction in a street, alley, place, easement or right of way, which is owned and operated by any
county, municipality, sewer district or agency thereof, but not including a building sewer.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group or cluster of stores or buildings, divided for separate commercial or service facilities, organized in a balanced arrangement
for retail trade, with provisions for parking.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: A triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is permitted which limits or obstructs the sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE: A place where cattle, sheep, hogs or other animals, that are not poultry or rabbits, are killed or butchered for market or for sale.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid state, including, but not limited to, garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish,
dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes, discarded appliances, special wastes, industrial wastes and demolition and construction
wastes.
SOLID WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY: An incinerator, compost plant, transfer station or any facility where solid wastes are salvaged or composition is
changed.
SOLID WASTE, RESIDENTIAL: Waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units.
SOLID WASTE STORAGE: Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection or disposal.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 316/565
B. Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Display or exhibition of specified anatomical areas or human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL: A stable where horses are left, hired, used, boarded or sold on a commercial basis for remuneration.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.
STATE: The state of Nevada.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The control and management of stormwater to minimize the detrimental effects of surface water runoff.
STORY: A space within a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the ceiling above.
STREAM, RECEIVING: Any natural watercourse into which sewage is discharged.
STREET: Any vehicular way that:
A. Is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to these regulations;
C. Is approved by other official action; or
D. Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the adoption of these regulations which meet the
minimum width requirements of these regulations.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street intended to link communities and urban centers, carrying high traffic volumes at high speeds. Traffic flow is continuous and
access is tightly controlled.
STREET LINE: A property line marking the boundary between a street and a lot or parcel.
STREET, LOCAL: A street intended to provide access to individual lots carrying low volumes of traffic at low speeds.
STREET, MAJOR COLLECTOR: A street intended to link major arterials and small developments and/or communities carrying moderately high traffic
volumes at moderate speeds. Traffic flow is continuous with controlled access.
STREET, MINOR COLLECTOR: A street intended to link local streets with arterial streets carrying moderate traffic volumes at low speeds.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in a supporting member of a building or structure, including, but not limited to, bearing walls, columns, beams
or girders.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of
land or water.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person having an interest in land that is the subject of an application for subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, sites, units or plats.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision not defined as a "parcel map" or "division into large parcels".
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: See definition of parcel map.
SUBDIVISION OF RECORD: A subdivision which has been recorded by the County Recorder.
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE: The drainage of surplus surface water that does not seep into the earth but flows over land to flowing or stagnant bodies
of water.
TAVERN: An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or
sold only as accessory to the primary use.
TOURIST HOME: A home which has been converted into premises offering rooms to transient guests for remuneration.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singularly or together while using any street, trail
system or path for purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of how effectively a road is accommodating "traffic", as defined in subsection 9-9-6A2 of this title.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 317/565
TRAILER: Any automobile trailer, trailer coach, housecar or other vehicle designed and constructed to permit occupancy of that vehicle as a temporary or
permanent dwelling or sleeping quarters for one or more persons and designed or constructed so that it is mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance
on major or State highways, County roads or City streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power.
TRANSIENT GUEST: Any individual occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy to any sleeping room/space in a transient lodging
establishment for twenty seven (27) consecutive days or less.
TRANSIENT LODGING ESTABLISHMENT: Any facility, structure, or portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by a
person or persons who pay rent for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, resort hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, lodging house,
timeshare condominium, vacation home, apartment house, or other similar structure or facility. (The term "transient lodging establishment" does not
include any of the following: any room within a private dwelling house or other single-family unit if the permanent or principal owner also resides in and
occupies the dwelling; any unit within a timeshare project occupied by an owner, or the nonpaying guests of an owner; any medical facility, nursing home,
assisted living facility, or other group home or group care facility.)
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC): Any business entity that uses a digital network or software application service to connect a passenger
to a driver who can provide transportation services to the passenger as defined by Nevada Revised Statutes title 58.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER: Any person providing transportation network services and who enters into an agreement with a
TNC to receive connections to potential passengers and related services.
USGS: United States Geological Survey.
USP; UNIFORM STANDARDS: The uniform standard drawings for public works construction, off site improvements, Clark County area, Nevada.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land and buildings are designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
USE, MULTIPLE: The development of land or buildings for a variety of complementary or integrated residential, nonresidential or community services
uses.
VACATION HOME RENTAL: A privately owned residential dwelling, such as, but not limited to, a single-family detached or multiple-family attached unit,
apartment house, condominium, cooperative apartment, duplex, or any portion of such dwellings, rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period
of not less than two (2) days and not more than twenty seven (27) consecutive calendar days, counting portions of calendar days as full days.
VARIANCE: An exception to these regulations in a specific instance, permitting a modification to the requirements in order to alleviate undue burden or
unnecessary hardship on the property owner which these regulations otherwise impose.
VEHICLE: As defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 484A.320:
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except:
1. Devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails; and
2. Electric personal assistive mobility devices as defined in NRS 482.029.
WASTE TREATMENT SYSTEM, PRIVATE: A sewage disposal system consisting of a house sewer, a septic tank or other approved sedimentation tank,
an approved mechanical treatment plant, or an individual home aerobic plant and an acceptable absorption system.
WASTES, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL: The water carried wastes from commercial and industrial establishments as sanitary sewage.
WASTES, YARD: Grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings.
WATER BODY: Any natural or artificial collection of water, whether permanent or temporary.
WATER MAIN: In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the water system to which branches or lines may be connected.
WATERCOURSE: A channel or other location in which a natural flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently.
WATERSHED: A region or area bounded peripherally by a water parting and draining ultimately to a particular watercourse or body of water.
WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. A wetland generally includes swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. A wetland is not an area that is artificially created on dry land and maintained for the treatment of mine drainage,
stormwater control and drainage associated with road construction. This definition is consistent with both the United States Army Corps of Engineers 33
CFR 328.3(b) and the United States Environmental Protection Agency 40 CFR 232.2(r).
YARD: An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
YARD, FRONT: An open space unoccupied by buildings or structures across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the building to the front
property line of the lot or parcel (see exhibit 9-2:5: "Yard Types", of this section).
YARD, FRONT DEPTH: The minimum horizontal distance from the front line of the building to the front property line of the lot or parcel (see exhibit 9-2:5:
"Yard Types", of this section).
YARD, REAR: An open space, unoccupied between the rear lot line and rear line of the principal building and the side property lines (see exhibit 9-2:5:
"Yard Types", of this section).
YARD, REAR DEPTH: The minimum horizontal distance from the rear line of the principal building to the rear lot line (see exhibit 9-2:5: "Yard Types", of
this section).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 318/565
YARD, SIDE: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending
from the front yard to the rear yard (see exhibit 9-2:5: "Yard Types", of this section).
ZOO: A permanent facility where exotic or wild animals are housed and maintained, under the supervision of professional staff, and exhibited to the public
on a regularly scheduled basis, in a variety of natural or habitat like settings, for the purposes of education, conservation, scientific studies and recreation.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 263, 1-16-2002; Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006; Ord. 363, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-16-2007; Ord. 377, 6-
12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008; Ord. 437, 5-25-2010; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-
2011; Ord. 455, 10-23-2012; Ord. 475, 11-26-2013, eff. 12-18-2013; Ord. 537, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
Chapter 3
USING UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
9-3-1: QUESTIONS; INFORMATION:
This information is intended to provide a general overview of the development application and review process. If you have questions or need further
information, please call the zoning official. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-3-2: KEY PROVISIONS:
A. Consistency With Master Plan: All applications, except those for master plan amendment, must be consistent with the Mesquite master plan. Questions
about master plan consistency may be addressed to the zoning official.
B. Preapplication Conference: All applicants for development approval are encouraged to schedule a preapplication conference with the staff review
committee. The purpose of this initial meeting is to provide an early opportunity for the city to review the proposed development to ensure that it
complies generally with applicable regulations and to discuss the review and approval process with the applicant.
C. Development Applications: Applications for all of the processes described in these regulations are available through the office of the zoning official.
Applicants are required to comply with all of the items requested in the application form, which may be more extensive than the requirements outlined
in these regulations.
D. Application Submission Deadlines: The city is required to follow specific statutory requirements regarding the provision of notice for development
applications that require a public hearing. No applications will be accepted following the city deadline for notice for a particular hearing. Questions
regarding submission deadlines and notice requirements may be addressed to the zoning official.
E. Complete Applications And Fees: Applications will not be submitted to the city council or other decision maker until the zoning official determines that
the application is complete. A complete application meets all of the requirements of the application form, as determined by the zoning official, and is
accompanied by payment in full of the appropriate fees. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant for changes. A schedule of current
filing fees may be obtained from the zoning official.
F. Submission Date: Unless otherwise provided in these regulations, applications will be considered submitted on the date that the decision making body
first meets to review the application. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 319/565
9-3-3: PROCEDURES GOVERNED BY THESE REGULATIONS:
A. Zoning Applications: The following zoning procedures are governed by these regulations:
1. Master plan amendments, section 9-5-1 of this title;
2. Development code amendments, section 9-5-2 of this title; (Ord. 434, 2-23-2010)
3. Conditional use approval, section 9-5-3 of this title;
4. Site plan approval, section 9-5-4 of this title;
5. Variances, section 9-5-5 of this title;
6. Street vacation and abandonment, section 9-5-6 of this title;
7. Administrative permits (building, occupation, grading), sections 9-5-7 through 9-5-10 of this title;
8. Street name or number change, section 9-5-11 of this title.
B. Subdivision Applications: The following subdivision procedures are governed by these regulations:
1. Sketch map, section 9-6-2 of this title;
2. Concept plan, section 9-6-3 of this title;
3. Tentative map, section 9-6-4 of this title;
4. Construction drawings, construction of improvements, section 9-6-5 of this title;
5. Improvement agreements, section 9-6-6 of this title;
6. Final map, section 9-6-7 of this title;
7. Parcel maps, section 9-6-8 of this title;
8. Division of land into large parcels, section 9-6-9 of this title;
9. Amendment of plats, section 9-6-10 of this title;
10. Abandonment of maps, section 9-6-11 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-3-4: APPROVAL PROCESS IN GENERAL:
A. Approval Process: All development applications submitted pursuant to these regulations will be required to follow a specified approval process.
B. Decision Makers: Development applications are reviewed and approved by the decision maker designated in these regulations, pursuant to the
requirements of the Nevada Revised Statutes. The following officials or bodies may act in a decision making mode:
1. City Council: The elected representatives of Mesquite, Nevada, sitting as the officially constituted city council.
2. Zoning Board Of Adjustment: An officially constituted body whose principal duties are to hear appeals and, where appropriate, grant variances from
the strict construction and/or application of these regulations.
3. Zoning Official/Director Of Public Works: Administrative department heads.
C. City Council Approval: A majority of development applications require city council approval. The process for council approval is generally as follows:
1. Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
2. Zoning official determines completeness of application.
3. Zoning official gives notice of public hearing.
4. Planning commission holds public hearing and reviews application. (Note, this step will become effective if the city council establishes a planning
commission.) If there is no planning commission, the staff review committee will review the application and prepare a recommendation for the city
council.
5. City council holds public hearing, reviews and acts on application.
6. Letter of city council action is sent to applicant.
7. Applicant may appeal negative city council decision.
D. Administrative Approval: Some development applications require only administrative approval. The process for administrative approval is generally as
follows:
1. Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 320/565
2. Zoning official determines completeness of application.
3. Administrative official or body reviews and acts on application.
4. If authorized, administrative permit is issued.
5. Applicant may appeal negative determination to zoning board of adjustment. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The terms of these regulations will be strictly enforced pursuant to section 9-1-13 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 4
APPLICATIONS AND GENERAL PROCEDURES
9-4-1: APPLICATION PROCESS AND OFFICIAL FILING DATE:
A. Standard Forms: Requests for any development approvals required by these regulations shall be made on applications provided by the city, and
available from the zoning and building department. The city may promulgate submittal requirements, instructions for completing applications and other
forms, internal procedures for acceptance and filing of applications and provisions for waiver, by establishing administrative guidelines. Additional
information may be required for particular applications at the discretion of the responsible city official. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
B. Submission And Determination Of Complete Application:
1. All development applications shall be submitted to the zoning official for a determination of completeness. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
2. Applications will be considered complete when all items required by these regulations for submission have been submitted to the zoning official.
3. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant with a written explanation of deficiencies. No further action shall be taken by the city on
incomplete applications. Site plan for all zoning items shall submit a copy twenty four inches by thirty inches (24" x 30") and a copy eight and onehalf
inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11").
4. Complete applications shall be processed in accordance with this chapter and chapter 5 or chapter 6 of this title. The zoning official shall notify the
applicant in writing that the application was deemed complete. A copy of the applicant's completion letter shall be simultaneously forwarded to thecity
clerk. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
5. Reserved.
6. Modification of the application by the applicant without approval of the zoning official or pursuant to the instructions of the planning commission or
city council following a determination of completeness shall void the determination. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
7. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of these regulations.
8. A determination that the application is incomplete may be appealed to the zoning board of adjustment. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
C. Processing Of Application And Report: Following the determination that a development application is complete or is deemed complete pursuant to this
section, the zoning official shall review the substance of the application, forward the application for review to applicable advisory bodies, and prepare a
report, if necessary, to the planning commission or city council, as may be required. Upon filing of the report with the city clerk, the zoning official shall
schedule the matter for public hearing and/or decision in the manner required by these regulations.
D. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
E. Examination And Copying Of Documents: At any time, upon reasonable request, any person may examine the application and the materials submitted
in support of or in opposition to an application for a development permit or approval. Copies of such material shall be made available at cost. At the
request of the applicant, financial information relevant to the project shall not be made available to the public. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-2: NOTICE PROVISIONS:
A. Published Notice:
1. Except as otherwise specifically provided in these regulations, in any instance in which a public hearing is required, a notice setting forth the date,
time, place and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and identification of the subject property must be published once at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing in a newspaper ofgeneral circulation throughout the city1.
2. In computing the time, both the day of the publication and the day of the hearing shall be excluded.
3. Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall provide the information required for the notice to the zoning official who
shall be responsible for preparing the notice for publication.
B. Personal Notice Of Public Hearing:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 321/565
1. Whenever personal notice of a public hearing is required by these regulations to be sent to surrounding landowners, notice shall be sent by the
zoning official at the applicant's cost by U.S. mail at least ten (10) business days before the hearing to each current owner of real property, as listed
in the official records of the Clark County, Nevada, assessor, located within five hundred feet (500') of the exterior boundary of the property in
question unless otherwise specified by these regulations. If the matter to be considered is an appeal, notice shall be provided to all parties to the
appeal, including interested parties.
2. Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall provide the information required for the personal notice, including a list
of the current owners of record of the real property located within five hundred feet (500') of the exterior boundary of the property in question.
3. The responsibility for personal notice to all surrounding landowners lies solely with the applicant for development approval.
4. Personal notice shall be in letter form stating the date, time and place of the hearing, a general description of the proposal, the location of the
property which is the subject of the hearing and other such requirements as further specified in these regulations. The mailed notice must also
include a statement explaining that members of the public may be heard at the public hearing. Newspaper clippings of the published notice shall not
be used for personal notice.
5. The failure of a property owner to receive notice by mail, if timely sent and properly addressed to the current owner of record, shall not be grounds
for invalidating any action taken by the responsible decision making body.
C. Posted Notice: When required by these regulations, the zoning official shall post distinctive twenty four inch bytwenty four inch (24" x 24") signs giving
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing and of the action requested. The zoning official shall post at least one sign on the subject property at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in conspicuous places visible from every street along the frontage of the subject property. The sign(s) shall
remain posted on the property until after the close of the public hearing.
D. Agenda Notice: Notice of all public hearings will be included in the city council agenda which shall be posted at city hall at least three (3) business days
prior to any public hearing. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
E. Notice Of Final Determination: Written notification of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant, stating the action taken and including all conditions
imposed and times established for satisfaction of such conditions, if any. If the final decision maker denies the application, a written statement setting
forth the basis for the decision to deny the application shall be included. Record of such notification shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 382, 8-28-
2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
F. Substantial Compliance Required: Notice shall be deemed to be complete where there is substantial compliance with the requirements of this section.
Minor technical deviations in the language of published, personal or posted notice or in the number of signs on a property where multiple signs are
required shall not be deemed to impair the notice where the actual notice has been given. The requirement for the number of days of notice, for the
general types of notices and for specifying the time, date and place of a hearing and the general location of the property shall be strictly construed;
where there is a question raised at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the city council shall make a formal finding as to whether there was
substantial compliance with the notice requirement of these regulations.
G. Notification Of Appeal Or Revocation: Whenever an appeal is taken from a final decision, or whenever the city determines to revoke a development
permit which was obtained following a public hearing, personal notice of the appeal or revocation shall be prepared and made in the manner prescribed
by this section. If no public hearing was held prior to obtaining the development permit, personal notice of revocation shall be given only to the holder of
the permit.
H. Costs Of Notice: All actual costs incurred by the city in preparing and publishing the notice required by these regulations shall be paid by the applicant
prior to publication, mailing or posting of such notice according to a schedule of fees established by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
9-4-3: REVIEW AND DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
A. Public Hearing And Recommendation By Planning Commission: Planning commission public hearings shall be held according to the procedure
established in section 9-4-7 of this chapter. If no public hearing is required, the commission shall consider the matter at a regularly scheduled public
meeting. The commission's written recommendation, if any, together with the staff report and recommendation, if any, shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
B. Decision By Planning Commission: If the planning commission has been delegated final decision making authority for a development application
pursuant to these regulations, whether by original jurisdiction or upon appeal, it shall hold a public hearing on the application following receipt of the
report and recommendation of the zoning official. Following the public hearing or meeting, the commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny
the application and prepare a written statement setting forth the basis for its decision. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
C. Notification And Appeal From Decision Of Planning Commission: The zoning official shall notify the applicant of the decision of the planning commission
in the manner provided in subsection 9-4-2E of this chapter. Within fifteen (15) days, the applicant may appeal the decision of the planning commission
in the manner provided in subsection 9-4-9B of this chapter. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
9-4-4: REVIEW AND DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL:
A. Public Hearing By City Council: City council public hearings shall be held according to the procedures established in section 9-4-7 of this chapter. If no
public hearing is required, the city council shall consider the matter at a regularly scheduled public meeting. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 322/565
B. Decision By City Council: If the city council is the final decision making body for a development application pursuant to these regulations, whether by
original jurisdiction or on appeal, it shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application at a public hearing, following the
receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission (where applicable). If the city council denies the application, it shall prepare a written
statement setting forth the basis for the decision. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
C. Notification And Appeal From Decision Of City Council: The zoning official shall notify the applicant of the decision or the city council in the manner
provided in subsection 9-4-2E of this chapter. The applicant may appeal the decision of thecity council in the manner provided in subsection 9-4-9B of
this chapter. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
9-4-5: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
A. Authority To Conditional Development Approvals: After review of the application, other pertinent documents and any evidence made part of the public
record, the zoning official, the planning commission, the city council or the zoning board of adjustment may impose conditions as are reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with applicable general or specific standards stated in these regulations. Any conditions imposed by recommendation
of the zoning official, planning commission or zoning board of adjustment may be modified by the city council.
B. Record And Notification Of Conditions: The zoning official shall include a copy of the conditions with the record of the decision which is filed with the city
clerk. The applicant shall be notified of any conditions imposed on the application in the manner provided in subsection 9-4-2E of this chapter. (Ord.
172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-6: SCOPE OF ACTION:
The reviewing body may take any action on the application that is consistent with the notice given, including approval of the application, conditional
approval of the application or denial of the application. The reviewing body may allow amendments to the application if the effect of the amendments is to
allow a lesser change than that requested on the original application, or to reduce the impact of the development or to reduce the amount of land involved
from that indicated in the notices of the hearing. The reviewing body may not, in any case, permit a greater amount of development, or a use falling in a
different general use category, or a larger land area than indicated in the original application, or a greater variance than was indicated in the notice. (Ord.
172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-7: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. Setting Of Hearing: When the zoning official determines that a development permit application is complete and that a public hearing is required by these
regulations, the zoning official shall consult with the city clerk and shall select a place, date and a time certain for the required hearing, and shall cause
notice of such hearing to be prepared and made pursuant to section 9-4-2 of this chapter.
B. Purpose Of Hearing: The purpose of a public hearing is to allow the applicant and all other interested parties areasonable and fair opportunity to be
heard, to present evidence relevant to the application, and to rebut evidence presented by others.
C. Conduct Of Hearing:
1. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization. Each person who
appears at a public hearing shall state, for the record, his or her name, address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, the name and mailing
address of the organization.
2. The body conducting the hearing shall exclude testimony or evidence that it finds to be irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious. At the
chairperson's discretion, any person appearing as a witness may ask relevant questions of other persons appearing as witnesses, but shall do so
only through the chairperson of the body conducting the hearing. At any point, members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of the
applicant, staff or public. The order of proceedings shall be as follows:
a. The zoning official or appropriate staff member shall present a description of the proposed development and a written or oral recommendation, if
required. The recommendation shall address each factor required by these regulations to be considered prior to action or approval on the
development permit. Unless otherwise specified by these regulations, the written recommendation shall be made available to the applicant at least
five (5) business days prior to the hearing upon the applicant's request;
b. The applicant shall present any information that the applicant deems appropriate;
c. Public testimony shall be heard first in favor of the proposal, then in opposition to it;
d. The zoning official or other staff member may respond to any statement made by the applicant or any public comment;
e. The applicant may respond to any testimony or evidence presented by the staff or public; and
f. The body conducting the hearing shall close the public portion of the hearing and conduct deliberations.
D. Record Of Proceedings:
1. The body conducting the hearing shall record the proceedings by any appropriate means and according to such procedures as the city council may,
from time to time, prescribe by rule. Such record shall be provided at the request of any person upon application to the city clerk andpayment of a fee
set by the city council to cover the cost of duplication of the audio record or tape or preparation of the transcribed record.
2. The tapes of all proceedings, including testimony and statements of personal opinions, the minutes of the secretary, all applications, exhibits and
papers submitted, all staff and advisory body or commission reports and recommendations, and the decision and report(s) of the body before which
the hearing is heard shall constitute the record.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 323/565
3. All such records shall be public records, open for inspection at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice.
E. Continuance Of Proceedings:
1. Any applicant or authorized agent of an applicant shall have the right to one continuance before the planning commission, zoning board of
adjustment or city council; provided, that a written request is filed with the city clerk at least five (5) business days prior to the date of the scheduled
hearing unless unusual circumstances exist.
2. An applicant requesting a continuance shall make reasonable efforts, through personal notice, to notify all persons previously advised of the
application and hearing that a continuance has been requested. The applicant (at his/her cost) shall also cause written notice of the rescheduled
public hearing date to be sent to surrounding property owners in the same manner and in accordance with the same time schedule as for the original
meeting.
3. The planning commission, zoning board of adjustment or city council may grant a continuance at any time for good cause shown. All motions to
grant a continuance shall state the date on which the matter is to be heard. A majority vote of those members in attendance shall be required to grant
a continuance.
a. The record shall indicate the reason such continuance was made and any stipulations or conditions placed upon the continuance.
b. If the planning commission, zoning board of adjustment or city council continues a public hearing on its own motion, it may direct the city clerk or
appropriate department to renotify property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the subject property, if such notice was required in the first
instance.
c. If the continuance of a public hearing is made at the request of an applicant, the planning commission, zoning board of adjustment or city council
may direct the applicant to renotify property owners within five hundred feet (500') of the subject property, if such notice was required in the
firstinstance.
d. Renotification shall be made by first class United States mail, postage prepaid.
e. Where an applicant is required to renotify property owners, the applicant shall submit an affidavit to the zoning official indicating that such
renotification has actually occurred at least two (2) business days prior to the continued hearing.
F. Additional Rules: Where appropriate, additional rules governing the public hearing may be applicable, including, but not limited to, other provisions of
this code applicable to the body conducting the hearing and any of the body's adopted rules or procedures as long as the same are not in conflict with
these regulations. The body conducting the hearing may adopt rules of procedure to limit the number of applications for development approval which
may be considered per meeting and to limit the time for each presentation or each speaker. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-8: EXPIRATION OF APPLICATION NOT ACTED UPON:
Any development application shall be deemed expired and/or withdrawn where it is not acted upon by the city council due to:
A. Failure To Be Represented At Public Hearing: The failure of the applicant to be represented at a scheduled public hearing on such application; or
B. Request To Withhold; Inactive Status: The request or consent of the applicant to withhold action on any application; and such application remains in an
inactive status for more than one hundred eighty (180) days without a request by the applicant for a rehearing of the application. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-9: POSTDECISION PROCEEDINGS:
A. Reapplication Following Denial: Whenever any development application is denied for failure to meet the substantive requirements of these regulations,
an application for a development permit or development approval for all or a part of the same property shall not be considered for a period of six (6)
months from the date of denial unless the subsequent application involves a proposal that is materially different from the previously denied proposal or
unless a majority of the members of the body charged with conducting the initial public hearing determine that the prior denial was based upon a
material mistake of fact. The body charged with conducting the initial public hearing shall address and resolve any questions concerning the similarity
of the second application,material differences, mistakes of fact or other related issues. Denial of a second application following the six (6) month period
shall result in a prohibition on the submission of another application for a period of one year from the second date of denial. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996)
B. Appeals:
1. Any person, including any officer or agency of the city, aggrieved by a final administrative determination on a development permit or administrative
development approval by the zoning official or final decision maker may appeal such final determination to the governing body designated by these
regulations, if any, in the manner provided in this subsection.
2. A written appeal must be filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the date of the final decision. The appeal shall contain a written
statement of the reasons for which the appellant claims the final decision is erroneous. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by
the city council.
a. The written statement may consolidate the appeals requested.
3. The governing body shall hear and render its decision on the appeal within forty five (45) days after the filing of the appeal. The hearing before the
governing body shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 9-4-7 of this chapter.
a. The governing body is prohibited from granting to an aggrieved person more than two (2) continuances on the same manner, unless the governing
body determines, upon good cause shown, that the granting of additional continuances is warranted.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 324/565
C. Judicial Appeals: Where appropriate, further appeal may be made to the district court within twenty five (25) days after the date of filing of notice of the
final action with the clerk or secretary of the governing body. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
D. Amendments And Revisions To Approval:
1. The zoning official may approve minor revisions to the terms of approval of an application for development. Minor revisions must be authorized in
writing by the zoning official and are subject to appeal to the zoning board of adjustment pursuant to subsection B of this section. Minor revisions that
may be authorized are limited to those that are necessary in light of technical considerations discovered after the decision on the development
application by the applicant or the zoning official.
2. If the holder of an approved application for a development permit requests a revision that the zoning official determines is not a minor revision,
approval of the revision by the original final decision maker is required in accordance with the procedures established for the original approval of the
subject development permit. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-10: EXPIRATION OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL2:
Unless otherwise specifically provided for in these regulations, development applications shall automatically expire and become null and void, and all
activities taken pursuant to such development application shall cease and become null and void, and all activities pursuant to such approval thereafter
shall be deemed in violation of these regulations, if:
A. The applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed as part of the original or revised approval of the development application, or that was made
pursuant to the terms of any development agreement application, including the failure to abide by specified time limits established therein; or
B. The applicant fails to present a subsequent development application as required by this title within the time so required or as may be required by the
Nevada Revised Statutes. If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the original or revised approval of the development application, the
time shall be presumed to be one year from the date such approval was filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-4-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Duties Of Zoning Official: If the zoning official determines, based upon an inspection by city staff, that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of a
development permit or approval authorized by these regulations, the zoning official shall set a hearing before the original decision maker. If the decision
was made by the zoning official, the hearing shall be conducted by the zoning board of adjustment. If the city council was the original decision maker, it
may refer the proposed revocation to the planning commission for its report and recommendation prior to the hearing3.
B. Notice And Public Hearing: Notice of the permit revocation hearing shall be given in the same manner as provided in section 9-4-2 of this chapter. The
public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established in section 9-4-7 of this chapter.
C. Decision And Notice: Within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the decision maker shall render a decision to revoke the permit or
allow the applicant to retain the development permit or to reconsider the permit, and shall notify the holder of the permit and any other person who has
filed a written request for such notice in the manner provided in subsection 9-4-2E of this chapter.
D. Effect And Appeals: A decision to revoke a development permit shall become final fourteen (14) days after the date the decision is rendered, unless
appealed. After such effective date of revocation, any activities continuing pursuant to such permit shall be deemed to be in violation of these
regulations. An appeal from the decision to revoke the permit shall be to the city council and shall conform to the procedures established in subsection
9-4-9B of this chapter.
E. Reconsideration: The reviewing body may determine that it is necessary to reconsider the appropriateness of the development permit. Based upon this
determination, the city council shall schedule a public hearing and provide such notice as was required pursuant to the original development approval.
At the hearing, the city council shall reconsider the criteria governing the permit approval, the evidence submitted at the public hearing and the
circumstances of the permit. Following the public hearing, the city council may revoke the permit or allow the applicant to retain the development
permit.
F. Right Cumulative: The city's right to revoke a development permit, as provided in this section, shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by law.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 5
ZONING AND COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN PROCEDURES
9-5-1: MASTER PLAN AMENDMENTS:
A. Purpose: It may be necessary or advisable, from time to time, to amend the master plan and associated maps, charts and text. This section explains the
method for amending the master plan. Requests to change a regulatory zone affecting a parcel of land, or a portion of a parcel, are processed under
this section.
B. Quarterly Consideration:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 325/565
1. Timing Of Amendments: Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210, each element of the master plan may be amended by the city council no
more than four (4) times per calendar year. Applications may be filed with the planning and redevelopment department at any time before the
specified deadline date. For the purposes of this section, the restriction on the number of times that the master plan may be amended does not
restrict the number of applications that may be submitted, but only refers to the number of times each component of the master plan may be modified
by the city council. The restriction on the number of times the master plan may be amended does not apply to minor amendments to the master plan
as defined in subsection M of this section.
2. Initiation Of Amendments: An owner of real property within the city, or that owner's authorized representative, may, upon proof of ownership, apply
for a master plan amendment for that landowner's property. Such amendments also may be initiated by the planning commission, city staff and the
city council. The planning and redevelopment director may initiate a minor amendment as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 278.225. Advisory
boards established by the city council may petition the planning commission or city council to initiate an amendment.
3. Application: When the owner of the affected property initiates an amendment to the master plan land use plan and zoning map, an application for
such amendment shall be obtained from the planning and redevelopment department and by paying the application filing fee. Before any application
is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the planning and redevelopment director to discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements
for an amendment request pursuant to these regulations. If no planning commission exists, the city council shall consider the application pursuant to
this section.
4. Completeness: No master plan amendment shall be processed until the information necessary to review and decide upon the proposed master plan
amendment is deemed complete by the planning and redevelopment director.
C. Neighborhood Meeting Notice: Pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210, the applicant shall conduct a neighborhood meeting, to be held prior to a
public hearing before the planning commission (or city council if no planning commission exists), for any proposed master plan amendments that
concern only particular parcels. The applicant shall provide, at the applicant's sole expense, notice of this neighborhood meeting as follows:
1. A neighborhood meeting shall be held no less than ten (10) days and no more than thirty (30) days prior to a scheduled public hearing for a
proposed master plan amendment.
2. The neighborhood meeting shall be for the sole purpose of providing information on the proposed amendment and shall be conducted by the
applicant.
3. The applicant shall prepare and deliver notice of this neighborhood meeting pursuant to subsection D1 of this section. Property owner address labels
are produced by the city, as described under subsections D4 and D7 of this section, and supplied to the applicant. A notice shall also be sent to the
planning and redevelopment department, in order to verify the ten (10) day requirement. Alternatively, the applicant may pay separate neighborhood
noticing fees, and the city will prepare and deliver notice.
D. Public Hearing Notice: The planning commission and/or city council shall hold a public hearing on each proposed amendment. Public hearing notice for
all master plan amendments shall be given by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section, when payment of noticing fees is received.
1. Notice Of Property Owners By Mail: A notice setting forth the time, place, purpose of hearing, map or physical description of the land involved,
existing and proposed land use designations, and a brief summary of the proposed change shall be sent by mail, at least ten (10) days before the
meeting to the following persons:
a. All owners of real property that are the subject of the master plan amendment;
b. Advisory boards created by the city council for the subject area;
c. All owners of real property within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the subject property;
d. All tenants of any mobile home park that is located within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the subject property;
e. All general improvement districts (GID) for the subject area; and
f. The commander or administrator of a military installation that is within three thousand feet (3,000') of the subject property.
2. Posted Notice: The planning and redevelopment director or designee shall post a sign on the subject property in accordance with subsection 9-4-2C
of this title.
3. Notice Of Property Owners By Electronic Means: If requested by a party pursuant to subsection D1 of this section and if receipt can be verified, an
electronic notice must be provided at least ten (10) days before the meeting, setting forth the time, place, purpose of hearing, and map or physical
description of the land involved.
4. Number Of Notices: If the number of notices sent pursuant to this section does not identify thirty (30) or more separate property owners, the city shall
send out additional notices to achieve a total of at least thirty (30) separate property owners.
5. Notice In The Newspaper: A notice setting forth the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in Clark County not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date, pursuant to subsection 9-4-2A of this title.
6. Additional Property: When the planning commission deems it necessary or expedient, the commission may consider other property for a change or
amendment in addition to the property described in the application; provided, that such additional property is included in the hearing notices.
7. Compliance With Noticing Requirements: Owners of all real property to be noticed pursuant to this section shall be those owners identified on the
latest county assessor's ownership maps and records.
8. Amendment Not Affecting Land Use Boundaries: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, a proposed master plan amendment that does
not change the boundaries of the land use categories (i.e., regulatory zones) of the master plan land use and zoning map shall only require notice as
set forth in subsection D5 of this section.
9. Amendment Reducing Density/Intensity: Notice to property owners as set forth in subsections D1 and D3 of this section shall include a ballot that an
owner of property may complete and return to the city council to indicate his/her approval of, or opposition to, the proposed amendment to reduce the
density or intensity with which a parcel of land may be used. The ballot must be returned prior to the date and time of the public hearing listed on the
notice.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 326/565
E. Planning And Redevelopment Director Review And Report: The planning and redevelopment director shall review each proposed master plan
amendment in light of the approved findings of subsection F4 of this section and, as deemed necessary, distribute the application to other reviewers.
Based on the results of that review, the planning and redevelopment director shall provide a report and recommendation to the planning commission. If
no planning commission exists, the report and recommendation shall be provided to the city council.
F. Planning Commission Review And Recommendation: The planning commission, if one exists, shall review a master plan amendment in conformance
with this section.
1. General Provisions: The planning commission shall conduct at least one public hearing with notification, for the purpose of receiving oral and written
evidence relative to the application.
2. Concurrent Processing Of Applications: If a proposed project requires more than one application under the provisions of the development code, the
applications may be filed at the same time and processed concurrently. If more than one review authority is involved, the planning and
redevelopment director shall determine the sequence for action by the review authorities.
3. Action: The planning commission may take action to recommend approval, modification or denial of the master plan amendment request. A
recommendation of approval of the master plan amendment shall be by resolution of the planning commission, carried by the affirmative votes of not
less than two-thirds (2/3) of the membership. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter, or other matter intended by the
planning commission to constitute the amendment. If a motion for approval fails to reach the two-thirds (2/3) affirmative votes, then the amendment
request is technically denied.
4. Findings: When making its recommendation to the city council for approval, modification of an amendment or denial, the planning commission shall,
at a minimum, make at least one of the following findings of fact (subsections F4a through F4e of this section), unless a military installation is
required to be noticed, then in addition to findings listed below, a finding of fact (subsection F4f of this section) shall also be made:
a. Consistency With Master Plan:
(1) Approval: The proposed amendment substantially complies with the policies and action programs of the master plan.
(2) Denial: The proposed amendment does not substantially comply with the policies and action programs of the master plan.
b. Compatible Land Uses:
(1) Approval: The proposed amendment will provide for land uses compatible with (existing or planned) adjacent land uses, will support the
character of the neighborhood, and will not adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare.
(2) Denial: The proposed amendment would result in land uses which are incompatible with (existing or planned) adjacent land uses, does not
support the character of the neighborhood, and would adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare.
c. Responds To Changed Conditions:
(1) Approval: The proposed amendment responds to character changing events, changed conditions, or further studies that have occurred since
the plan was adopted by the city council, and the requested amendment represents a more desirable utilization of land.
(2) Denial: The proposed amendment does not identify and respond to character changing events, changed conditions, or further studies that have
occurred since the plan was adopted by the city council, and the requested amendment does not represent a more desirable utilization of land.
d. No Adverse Effects:
(1) Approval: The proposed amendment will not adversely affect the implementation of the Mesquite master plan policies and action programs,
with respect to traffic capacity or safety, site conditions, public services or facilities, or environmentally sensitive areas or resources.
(2) Denial: The proposed amendment will adversely affect the implementation of the Mesquite master plan policies and action programs, with
respect to traffic capacity or safety, site conditions, public services or facilities, or environmentally sensitive areas or resources.
e. Desired Pattern Of Growth:
(1) Approval: The proposed amendment will promote the desired pattern for the orderly physical growth of the city and guides development of the
city based on the projected population growth with the least amount of natural resource impairment and the efficient expenditure of funds for
public services.
(2) Denial: The proposed amendment does not promote the desired pattern for the orderly physical growth of the city. The proposed amendment
does not guide development of the city based on the projected population growth with the least amount of natural resource impairment and the
efficient expenditure of funds for public services.
f. Effect On A Military Installation:
(1) Approval: The proposed amendment will not affect the location, purpose and mission of the military installation.
(2) Denial: The proposed amendment will affect the location, purpose and mission of the military installation.
5. Effect Of Planning Commission Denial: In the event the planning commission denies a master plan amendment application, that action is final unless
appealed to the city council, in accordance with subsection 9-4-9B of this title.
6. Planning Commission Report: A report describing the amendment, discussion at the public hearing, and recommendation and vote of the planning
commission shall be transmitted to the city council. If the planning commission does not recommend approval, it should state why it could not make
the findings for approval in subsection F4 of this section.
G. City Council Review And Decision: The city council shall review a master plan amendment in accordance with the provisions of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 327/565
1. Time Period For Hearing: The clerk of the city council shall schedule a public hearing before the city council on a recommendation of approval or the
appeal of a denial by the planning commission.
2. Notice Of Hearing: The public hearing shall be noticed as required by subsection D of this section.
3. Additional Criteria If Amendment Reducing Density/Intensity: Any proposed amendment that would reduce the density or intensity of uses on
property (i.e., result in a "downzoning") is subject to additional approval criteria in accordance with Nevada Revised Statutes 278.260. These criteria
apply if at least twenty percent (20%) of the property owners to whom notices were sent indicate an opposition to the proposed amendment on the
ballot returned per subsection D9 of this section. The criteria require the city council to:
a. Consider separately the merits of each aspect of the proposed amendment to which any property owner(s) expressed opposition.
b. Make a written finding that the public interest and necessity will be promoted by the approval of the proposed amendment.
4. City Council Action:
a. If no planning commission exists, final action to approve the amendment shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the total membership of the city
council. If a motion for approval fails to reach the two-thirds (2/3) affirmative votes, then the amendment request is technically denied. The city
council shall refer to findings listed under subsection F4 of this section.
b. If the city council is considering a recommendation of approval, it may take final action to adopt the master plan amendment as recommended by
the planning commission, if no modification of the planning commission's recommendation is proposed. Final action to approve the amendment
shall require a simple majority vote of the total membership of the city council.
c. If the city council is considering an appeal from a denial of a master plan amendment request, it may use the record and any additional evidence
relative to the application and may confirm or reverse the denial based upon its interpretation of the findings required and the evidence submitted.
Final action to reverse the denial shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the total membership of the city council.
d. If the city council proposes to modify the recommendation of approval from the planning commission, the proposed modification shall be referred
to the planning commission for consideration, pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.220. The planning commission shall not be required to
hold a public hearing on the modification. The planning commission shall submit a report on the proposed modification to the city council within
forty (40) days from the date of referral by the city council. Failure to report shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. Prior to making a final
decision, the city council shall be required to conduct a public hearing and notice this hearing pursuant to subsection D of this section. If the
planning commission does not recommend approval of the modification, approval of the proposed modification shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the total membership of the city council.
e. The final action by the city council shall be final for purposes of judicial review.
H. Written Record: When taking final action on the planning commission's or planning director's recommendation, the city council shall make part of the
record their affirmation, modification or rejection of the findings of fact provided in the planning commission's or planning director's final
recommendation, as well as any other findings of fact that the city council deems to be relevant.
I. Appeals Of City Council Decision: Appeals of the city council's decision on master plan amendments shall be made to the courts, as provided by law.
J. One Year Wait On Denials: After the denial of a master plan amendment, no application for a master plan amendment for the same or similar
amendment may be accepted for one year immediately following the denial. This section shall not apply to applications denied without prejudice, which
may be refiled in less than one year's time.
K. Modification Of A Master Plan Amendment: Proposed modifications of an approved master plan amendment shall require a new application following
the same procedure required for the initial application.
L. Certification Of Maps By Electronic Means: Adopted land use and zoning maps may be certified by the planning and redevelopment director as true and
accurate originals and copies through an electronic signature.
M. Minor Master Plan Amendments:
1. Purpose: The purpose of the minor amendment section is to provide a process for adopting changes that do not have substantial effect on the intent
of the master plan, and therefore, do not require action by the planning commission.
2. Timing Of Minor Amendments: Minor amendments are not limited to quarterly consideration per Nevada Revised Statutes 278.210(5)(b) and may be
processed at any time.
3. Initiation Of Application And Findings: The planning and redevelopment director shall have the sole authority to initiate a minor amendment to the
master plan by making findings that the proposed amendment is consistent with Nevada Revised Statutes and consists of one of the following
findings:
a. A change in a boundary that is based on a geographical feature, including, without limitation, topography, slopes, hydrographic features, wetland
delineation and floodplains, when evidence is produced that the mapped location of the geographical feature is in error;
b. A change made to reflect the alteration of the name of a jurisdiction, agency, department or district by the governing body, governing board or
other governing authority of the jurisdiction, agency, department or district, as applicable, or by another entity authorized by law to make such an
alteration; or
c. An update of statistical information that is based on a new or revised study.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 328/565
4. Notice: Before adopting any minor amendment, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which
must be given as set forth in subsection D5 of this section.
5. Decision By City Council:
a. Action Taken: Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the city's professional staff and any written public input, the city council shall consider the
minor amendment application and may approve or deny the recommendation of the city's professional staff or take such other action it deems
appropriate. Final action to approve a minor amendment requires a simple majority vote of the total membership of the city council. (Ord. 434, 2-
23-2010)
9-5-2: DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS:
A. Purpose: It may be necessary or advisable, from time to time, to amend the text of this title, unified development code. This section explains the method
for amending the development code. Requests to change a regulatory zone affecting a parcel of land, or a portion of a parcel, are processed under
section 9-5-1, "Master Plan Amendments", of this chapter.
B. Requirements For Application:
1. Initiation Of Text Amendment: An owner of real property within the city, or the property owner's authorized agent, may request an amendment
through an application. Such text amendments may also be initiated by the planning commission, city staff and the city council.
2. Application: When the owner of the affected property requests an amendment to these regulations, an application for such amendments shall be
obtained from the planning and redevelopment director and by paying the application filing fee. Before any application is made, the applicant is
encouraged to confer with the planning and redevelopment director to discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for an amendment
request pursuant to these regulations.
a. Information Required: When the applicant seeks to amend the text of these regulations, the applicant shall complete the form provided by the
planning and redevelopment director, which requires the applicant to provide a typewritten copy of the proposed changes to the regulations in a
format clearly indicating the proposed changes and the reasons supporting the amendment and the specific circumstances, if any, requiring the
change.
3. Completeness: No development code amendment shall be processed until the information necessary to review and decide upon the proposed
development code amendment is deemed complete by the planning and redevelopment director.
C. Planning And Redevelopment Director Review And Report: The planning and redevelopment director shall review each proposed development code
amendment in light of the approved findings of subsection E3 of this section and, as deemed necessary, distribute the application to other reviewers.
Based on the results of that review, the planning and redevelopment director shall provide a report and recommendation to the planning commission. If
no planning commission exists, the report and recommendation shall be provided to the city council.
D. Public Hearing Notice: The planning commission, if one exists, shall hold a public hearing on each proposed amendment. Notice for all development
code amendments shall be given in accordance with the provisions of this section.
1. Notice In The Newspaper: A notice setting forth the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in Clark County not less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date, pursuant to subsection 9-4-2A of this title.
E. Planning Commission Review And Recommendation: The planning commission, if one exists, shall review a development code amendment in
conformance with this section.
1. General Provisions: The planning commission shall conduct at least one public hearing with notification for the purpose of receiving oral and written
evidence relative to the application. The evidence shall be reviewed to determine if the proposed development code amendment is consistent with
the Mesquite master plan. The planning commission shall recommend approval or denial of the application based on the results of this review.
2. Action: The planning commission may take action to recommend approval or deny the development code amendment request. A recommendation of
approval of the development code amendment shall be by resolution of the planning commission, carried by a simple majority vote of the quorum
present.
3. Findings: When making its recommendation to the city council for approval or denial, the planning commission shall, at a minimum, make at least
one of the following findings of fact:
a. Consistency With Master Plan:
(1) Approval: The proposed development code amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the Mesquite master plan.
(2) Denial: The proposed development code amendment is not consistent with the goals and policies of the Mesquite master plan.
b. Promotes The Purpose Of The Development Code:
(1) Approval: The proposed development code amendment will not adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare, and will promote the
original purposes and intent of the development code.
(2) Denial: The proposed development code amendment would adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare, and will not promote the
original purposes and intent of the development code.
c. Responds To Changed Conditions:
(1) Approval: The proposed development code amendment responds to changed conditions or further studies that have occurred since adoption
by the city council, and the requested amendment allows for a more desirable use and management of land within the land use and zoning
districts.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 329/565
(2) Denial: The proposed development code amendment does not respond to changed conditions or further studies that have occurred since
adoption by the city council, and the requested amendment does not allow for a more desirable use and management of land within the land use
and zoning districts.
4. Effect Of Planning Commission Denial: In the event the planning commission denies a development code amendment application, that action is final
unless appealed to the city council, in accordance with subsection 9-4-9B of this title.
5. Planning Commission Report: A report describing the amendment, discussion at the public hearing, and recommendation and vote of the planning
commission shall be transmitted to the city council. If the planning commission does not recommend approval, it should state why it could not make
the findings for approval in subsection E3 of this section.
F. City Council Review And Decision: The city council shall review a development code amendment in accordance with the provisions of this section.
1. Time Period For Hearing: The clerk of the city council shall schedule a public hearing before the city council on a recommendation of approval or the
appeal of a denial by the planning commission. Development code amendments are adopted by ordinance, which require first and second readings.
The second reading comprises the public hearing.
2. Notice Of Hearing: The public hearing shall be noticed as required by subsection D of this section.
3. City Council Action:
a. If no planning commission exists, final action to approve the development code amendment shall require a simple majority vote of the quorum
present. The city council shall refer to the findings listed under subsection E3 of this section.
b. If the city council is considering a recommendation of approval, it may take final action to adopt the development code amendment. Final action to
adopt the amendment shall require a simple majority vote of the quorum present.
c. If the city council is considering an appeal from a denial of a development code amendment request, it may use the record and any additional
evidence relative to the application and may confirm or reverse the denial based upon its interpretation of the findings required and the evidence
submitted. Final action to confirm or reverse denial of the development code amendment shall require a simple majority vote of the quorum
present.
d. The final action by the city council shall be final for purposes of judicial review.
G. Written Record: When taking final action on the planning commission's or planning director's recommendation, the city council shall make part of the
record their affirmation or rejection of the findings of fact provided in the planning commission's or planning director's final recommendation, as well as
any other findings of fact that the city council deems to be relevant.
H. Appeals Of City Council Decision: Appeals of the city council's decision on development code amendments shall be made to the courts, as provided by
law. (Ord. 434, 2-23-2010)
9-5-3: CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL:
Conditional Use Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Zoning official gives notice of public hearing.
Step 4 Planning commission holds public hearing and makes recommendation.
Step 5 City council holds public hearing and acts on application.
Step 6 If authorized, zoning official issues conditional use permit.
A. Purpose: Conditional uses are those uses which generally are compatible with the permitted land uses in a given zoning district, but which require
individual review of their location, design and configuration and the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a
particular location within a given zoning district.
B. Applicability:
1. The designation of a use in a zoning district as a conditional use does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be approved.
2. Approval of a conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which the permit is issued.
3. No use authorized by a conditional use permit shall be enlarged, extended, increased in intensity or relocated unless an application is made for a
new conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in these regulations.
4. Development of the conditional use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all the permits and approvals required by these
regulations, other appropriate provisions of this code or any permits required by county, regional, state or federal agencies.
C. Application For Conditional Use Permit:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 330/565
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and the staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for a conditional use request pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative of the property owner shall initiate a conditional use request by filing an application with
the zoning official and paying a conditional use request fee as determined by the city council. Nonprofit organizations and public entities shall be
exempt from the fee payment.
3. Contents: A conditional use application shall include:
a. A site plan, as defined in section 9-5-4 of this chapter. The site plan shall include a vicinity map, floor plans and an elevation and shall indicate
clearly the nature and location of the requested conditional use. Specific requirements of site plan preparation may be waived by the zoning official
if circumstances so require.
b. Evidence of the applicant's ability and intention to proceed with construction in accordance with the site plan within one year after the effective
date of the permit. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
D. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
E. Conditional Use Review And Recommendation:
1. Review: Upon a determination of completeness, the zoning official shall forward copies of the conditional use application to the appropriate
recommending body. If a planning commission exists, the planning commission shall review the conditional use request and make a
recommendation to the city council. If no planning commission exists, the staff review committee shall review the conditional use request and make a
recommendation to the city council.
2. Public Hearing: The planning commission, if one exists, shall hold a public hearing on a conditional use request pursuant to section 9-4-7 of this title.
a. Personal notice of the public hearing shall be mailed in accordance with the requirements of subsection 9-4-2B of this title.
b. Personal notice shall also be mailed pursuant to subsection 9-4-2B of this title to each tenant of any mobile home park located within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property. The names of such tenants shall be supplied to the planning commission or city council by the
applicant.
c. If an advisory board has been established for the affected area by the city council, notice shall also be mailed pursuant to subsection 9-4-2B of this
title to that board.
3. Criteria: The planning commission or the staff review committee, as appropriate, shall consider the following criteria when making its
recommendation to the city council:
a. Whether the proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the policies embodied in the adopted master plan;
b. Whether the proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations and complies with the
requirements of the zoning ordinance;
c. Whether the proposed conditional use may be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or may result in
material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity;
d. Whether the proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent development and neighborhoods and includes
improvements or modifications either on site or within the public rights of way to mitigate any adverse impacts which may result from the
development, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual nuisances or other similar adverse effects. Such improvements or modifications may include, but
shall not be limited to, the placement or orientation of buildings and entryways, parking areas, buffer yards and the addition of landscaping, walls
or both, to ameliorate such impacts;
e. Whether the proposed use will generate pedestrian and vehicular traffic which will be hazardous to the existing and anticipated traffic in the
neighborhood.
4. Recommendations: The planning commission shall make its recommendation at the public hearing, on the record. The staff review committee shall
make a written recommendation to the city council, which report shall be available to the applicant and public at least five (5) business days prior to
the city council hearing for which it is scheduled. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
F. Conditional Use Approval:
1. Public Hearing: The city council, upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission or the staff review committee, as appropriate, and
within sixty five (65) days of the filing of the complete application, shall hold a public hearing on a conditional use request, pursuant to section 9-4-7
of this title. Notice of the public hearing shall be given according to the requirements of subsection E2 of this section. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-
2007)
2. Decision; Criteria: The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the conditional use application at the public hearing. In approving or
conditionally approving a conditional use application, the city council shall consider the criteria specified in subsection E3 of this section.
3. Denial; Reasons Recorded: If the city council denies a conditional use application, it shall record the reasons for denial in the record.
a. No conditional use application will be approved or permit granted that is in violation of or in conflict with any laws of the state.
b. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the application for conditional use permit shall be denied as being incompatible
with existing uses or uses permitted by right in the zoning district.
4. Restrictions Imposed: In conditionally approving a conditional use application, the city council may impose such conditions, safeguards and
restrictions upon the premises or permittees benefited by the conditional use as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially injurious
effect of such conditional use upon other property in the neighborhood, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of these regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 331/565
5. Conditional Use Permit Issuance:
a. The city council, in their resolution of approval, shall authorize the zoning official to issue a conditional use permit.
b. The conditional use permit shall set out regulations, restrictions, limitations and a termination date so that reasonable control may be exercised
over the use.
c. Upon approval by the city council, the zoning official shall forward a letter of approval to the applicant and file a copy of the same with the city
clerk.
G. Revocation/Expiration Of Conditional Use Permit: Any conditional use permit granted under the authority of these regulations is subject to revocation
pursuant to section 9-4-11 of this title for any or all of the following reasons:
1. Noncompliance: Noncompliance with any special conditions imposed on the conditional use permit by the city council or these regulations at the time
of approval of the conditional use;
2. Land Use Violation: Violation of any provisions of these regulations pertaining to the use of land, the construction or use of buildings or structures or
activities conducted on the premises by the permittee or agents of the permittee;
3. Violation Of Applicable Regulations: Violation of any other applicable zoning regulation or this code provision or any county, state or federal law or
regulation by the permittee or agents of the permittee; provided, that such violations relate to the conduct or activity authorized by the conditional use
permit or the qualifications of the permittee or its agents to engage in such conduct or activity;
4. Construction Commencement: If a conditional use authorized or granted under the provisions of this section is not actually established or the actual
construction commenced on the buildings or structures involved within one year from the date of the conditional use approval, the approval shall be
deemed to be revoked and any further activity on the site shall be treated as a violation of these regulations;
5. Permit Expiration: Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if
the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or if the building
or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days. Before such work can be commenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so;
6. Use Discontinued: If any use of land, building, structure or premises established under the provisions of this section has been discontinued for a
period of one year, it is unlawful to again use such land, building or premises for such discontinued use until a subsequent conditional use permit is
granted.
H. Extension Of Time: Extensions of conditional use permits may be granted pursuant to section 9-4-10 of this title.
I. Appeal Procedure: If the city council denies an application for a conditional use, an appeal of the city council decision may be taken to the district court in
accordance with subsection 9-4-9C of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-5-4: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site Plan Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Zoning official reviews and acts on application. Major site reviews shall be forwarded to planning commission/city council for action.
(Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
A. Purpose: The purpose of requiring site plan review is to ensure that proposed development conforms with these regulations and proposes a compatible
arrangement of buildings, off street parking, lighting, signage, landscaping, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, site drainage and open spaces. Site plan
review shall consider the siting of proposed construction and its impact on the existing topography and natural vegetation, and the relationship of
proposed construction to existing public and private improvements in the immediate area and its conformance to the policies and standards of the
master plan. The design shall encourage the elimination of unnecessary grading and endeavor to retain the natural character of the site, including the
preservation of trees and other natural features.
B. Applicability:
1. A site plan shall be required for all new construction, exterior additions or changes in use to any structure used for multi-family, commercial, industrial
or public use, whether such use is a permitted use in the district, authorized by a special use permit or allowed as a planned development. No
building permit shall be issued for a development subject to site plan review until such site plan has been approved in accordance with these
regulations.
2. Development in the following zoning districts is required to obtain site plan review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit: (Ord. 172,
9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
MF-4
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 332/565
CR-1
CR-2
CR-3
PB
IR-1
IR-2
HT
RV
MH
PF
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
3. Site plan review is not required for permitted uses (but shall be required for special uses and planned development uses) in the following zoning
districts:
LR
A
RE-1
RE-2
RE-3
SF
PROS
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
4. Nonresidential projects greater than ten (10) acres in size and residential projects greater than twenty (20) units are considered major site plan
reviews and shall be forwarded to the planning commission for action. If no planning commission exists, the application shall be forwarded to the city
council for action.
C. Application For Site Plan Review:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official to discuss, in general, the procedures
and requirements for site plan approval pursuant to these regulations. This is not a part of construction plans. (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative of the property owner may initiate site plan review by filing an application with the zoning
official and paying the site plan application fee as established by the city council.
3. Phases: A site plan may be prepared and submitted for the entire development or for individual development phases.
4. Preparation: All site plans must be prepared by a registered architect, engineer, surveyor or planner.
5. Information: All site plans shall contain the following information:
a. Name and address of record of owner, architect, engineer, surveyor, planner and contractor;
b. Date, north arrow and scale;
c. A scale of not less than one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') if the site is less than three (3) acres and one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') if the site is three (3) acres or more;
d. A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000');
e. Location (horizontal and vertical) of existing and proposed rights of way, easements and infrastructure (streets, sewers, water lines, etc.);
f. Size, use and location of existing and proposed structures and drives on the subject property, and existing structures and drives within one
hundred feet (100') of the property;
g. A legal description and accompanying map exhibit of the property, showing the location and type of boundary evidenced. The legal description
shall include the following data:
(1) Metes and bounds or subdivision description of all property lines;
(2) Total area of property;
h. Existing topography with maximum contour interval of two feet (2'), except where existing ground is on a slope of less than two percent (2%), then
either one foot (1') contours or spot elevations shall be provided where necessary;
i. Location of floodplain areas, floodways, centerlines of drainage courses, base flood elevations and finished floor elevations of proposed buildings;
j. The height, number of floors and proposed square footage of all buildings, both above and below or partially below the finished grade;
k. The yard dimensions from the development boundaries and adjacent streets and alleys; (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
l. The traffic and the pedestrian circulation system, including the location and width of all streets, driveways, entrances to parking areas and parking
structures, walkways and bicycle paths. A traffic impact analysis may be required pursuant to subsection 9-9-6C of this title; (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008,
eff. 4-3-2008)
m. Off street parking and loading areas, including dimensions of proposed drives and parking spaces, and structures and landscaping for parking
areas;
n. Greenbelt and other active recreation space areas, together with proposed private recreational areas, specifying the proposed improvement of all
such areas, and delineating those areas proposed for specific types of recreational facilities; (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 333/565
o. Architectural elevations of proposed structures and a detailed list of proposed building materials shall be submitted if concurrently processing an
architectural review application; (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
p. A master sign plan, detailing all proposed signage for the site;
q. A plan or statement showing the location and design of all screening measures and indicating the type, building materials and height of such
screening;
r. When the development is to be constructed in stages or units, a development schedule showing the order of construction of such stages or units,
and approximate completion date for the construction of each stage or unit;
s. A copy of all covenants, restrictions and conditions pertaining to the use, maintenance and operation of private open space areas, common areas
or common facilities;
t. A statement in tabular form (chart) which sets forth the following data, when such data is applicable to a given development plan:
(1) Total number of dwelling units, if applicable;
(2) Residential density and units per gross acre, if applicable;
(3) Total floor area (in square feet) and floor area ratio for each type of use;
(4) Total area in open space;
(5) Total area in developed recreational open space; and
(6) Total number of off street parking spaces, required and provided and total off street loading spaces, required and provided. (Ord. 172, 9-24-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
u. The location and size of landscape areas;
v. General drainage information across the site; (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
w. Comments or reports of advisory body reviewing application;
x. The existing zoning of the property;
y. The existing zoning of adjacent property;
z. The existing land use of adjacent property.
6. Number; Size: Applicant shall provide four (4) sets of plans, twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and one set of plans, eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17") or eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"). (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
D. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
E. Site Plan Approval:
1. Criteria: The city council or planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the site plan, based upon the following criteria. If no
planning commission exists, the zoning official shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the site plan, based upon staff's determination that the
following criteria are satisfied: (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
a. The site is capable of accommodating the building(s), parking areas and drives with appropriate open spaces and is in compliance with all
requirements of these regulations.
b. The site plan provides for safe and easy ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation.
c. All development features, including the principal building and any accessory buildings, open spaces, service roads and parking areas are located
so as to minimize the possibility of adverse effects on adjacent properties.
d. The plan is consistent with accepted land planning and site engineering design principles.
e. The plan represents an overall development pattern that is consistent with the general plan, design guidelines and other adopted planning policies.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
2. Conditions: The city council, planning commission or zoning official may condition site plan approval on the following: (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-
2008)
a. Phasing of development to assure that the density or intensity of the development is coordinated with the provision of adequate public facilities;
b. Dedication of necessary rights of way or easements;
c. Provision of setbacks or buffers in addition to those required in the district to separate the use from incompatible adjacent uses;
d. Limitations on hours of operation;
e. Any other factor deemed relevant to carrying out the intent and purpose of this section. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
3. Record Of Final Determination: The applicant shall be notified of the final determination of the application pursuant to subsection 9-4-2E of this title.
(Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
4. Waiver Of Requirements: An applicant may, by formal request to the city council, obtain a waiver from the requirements of this section upon a
showing of hardship. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 334/565
F. Site Plan Amendments: The zoning official shall be authorized to review and approve amendments to previously approved site plans, when the
amendment is for the expansion of floor space which is less than ten percent (10%) of the gross square footage approved by the site plan and not to
exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of the previously approved site plan; and, provided, the amendment meets all requirements of these
regulations. (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
G. Site Plan Expiration:
1. Specified: Unless a longer time shall be specifically established as a condition of approval, site plan approval shall lapse and become void one year
from the date of site plan approval unless prior to the expiration, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued to
completion.
2. Extension: Site plan approval may be extended only upon the applicant's written request for extension of the plan as approved by the zoning official
prior to expiration. Such extension, if granted, shall not exceed a period of one year. The request for extension shall be reviewed in relationship to
any change in ordinance or code requirements, development of surrounding land uses and adjacent properties and the expansion or provision of
public facilities and utilities.
3. Suspension; Revocation: Upon violation of any applicable provision of this section or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with
conditions, the site plan approval shall be suspended and shall be subject to revocation pursuant to section 9-4-11 of this title upon notification to the
owner of the subject property.
4. Validity: A site plan approval pursuant to these provisions shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the
site or structure which was the subject of the application. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
H. Architectural Review: If architectural review is required pursuant to section 9-5-9 of this chapter, site plan review shall be completed prior to or
concurrent with architectural review.
I. Appeal Procedure: Denied applications may be appealed to the city council in accordance with subsection 9-4-9B of this title. (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff.
4-3-2008)
9-5-5: VARIANCES:
Variance Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Staff review committee reviews application and makes recommendation.
Step 4 Zoning official gives notice of public hearing.
Step 5 Zoning board of adjustment holds public hearing and acts on application.
Step 6 If authorized, zoning official issues variance permit.
A. Purpose: The zoning board of adjustment may authorize a variance from the strict application of these regulations where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of these provisions will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. The granting of a variance shall not result in a
substantial detriment to the public good, substantial impairment of affected natural resources or substantial impairment of the intent, purpose and spirit
of these regulations.
B. Applicability: A variance may be granted where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of
the enactment of these regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of
the piece of property, the strict application of these regulations would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardships upon, the property owner.
C. Application:
1. Staff Conference: Before an application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and the staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for a variance request pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative shall initiate a variance request by filing an application with the zoning official and paying
a variance request fee as established by the city council. Nonprofit organizations and public entities shall be exempt from fee payment.
3. Contents: A variance application shall include:
a. A site plan, as defined in section 9-5-4 of this chapter. The site plan shall include floor plans and an elevation and shall indicate clearly the nature
and location of the requested variance. Specific requirements of site plan preparation may be waived by the zoning official if circumstances so
require;
b. Evidence that the property was acquired in good faith and that because of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the parcel at the
time of the effective date of these regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
circumstances, the strict application of the terms of these regulations actually prohibits the practical use of applicant's property in the manner
similar to that of other property owners in the zoning district where the property is located;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 335/565
c. Evidence of the ability and intention of the applicant to proceed with actual construction in accordance with the submitted site plan after issuance
of the variance. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
D. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
E. Variance Review And Recommendation:
1. Required: Upon a determination of completeness, the zoning official shall forward copies of the variance application to the staff review committee,
who shall review the variance request and make a recommendation to the zoning board of adjustment.
2. Criteria: The staff review committee shall consider the following criteria when making its recommendation to the zoning board of adjustment:
a. The variance requested arises from a condition or conditions which are unique to the property in question and which are not ordinarily found in the
same zone or district; that the condition was not created by an action or actions of the property owner or applicant; and that the condition existed
prior to enactment of these regulations;
b. The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents;
c. The strict application of the provisions of these regulations would constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner;
d. The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or general welfare;
e. The granting of the variance will not conflict with the general spirit and intent of these regulations.
3. Availability Of Recommendation: The staff review committee's recommendation shall be available to the applicant and the public at least two (2)
business days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
F. Variance Approval:
1. Public Hearing: The zoning board of adjustment, upon receipt of the recommendation of the staff review committee and within sixty five (65) days of
filing of the complete application, shall hold a public hearing on the variance request pursuant to section 9-4-7 of this title. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff.
9-20-2007)
2. Notice: Personal notice of the hearing shall be mailed pursuant to subsection 9-4-2B of this title to:
a. The applicant;
b. Each owner of real property located within five hundred feet (500') of the subject property;
c. If a mobile home park is located within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property, each tenant of the mobile home park (whose names are
supplied to the zoning board of adjustment by the applicant); and
d. Any advisory board that has been established for the affected area by the city council.
3. Decision; Criteria: The zoning board of adjustment shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for a variance at the public hearing. If
the zoning board of adjustment approves a variance application, or approves a variance application with conditions, the zoning board of adjustment
shall make a determination as to each of the criteria listed in subsection E2 of this section and the findings shall be entered in the record.
4. Conditional Approval: If the zoning board of adjustment conditionally approves a variance application, the zoning board of adjustment may impose
such conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the premises benefited by the variance as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially
injurious effect of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of these regulations. The
zoning board of adjustment, in approving a variance, shall impose (at a minimum) the following conditions:
a. Commencement of construction within one year and completion within two (2) years;
b. Conformance to plans approved as a part of the variance permit.
5. Variance Permit Issuance:
a. The zoning board of adjustment, in their resolution of approval, shall authorize the zoning official to issue a variance permit.
b. Upon approval by the zoning board of adjustment, the zoning official shall forward a letter of approval to the applicant and file a copy of the same
with the city clerk.
G. Revocation Of Variance: Any variance granted under the authority of these regulations shall be subject to revocation pursuant to section 9-4-11 of this
title for any or all of the following reasons:
1. If a variance authorized and granted under the provisions of this section is not actually established or the actual construction commenced on the
principal buildings or structures involved within one year from the date of the variance approval, the approval shall be revoked;
2. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work
authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized
by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such
work can be commenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so;
3. If any use of land, building, structure or premises established under the provisions of this section has been discontinued for a period of one year, it is
unlawful to again use such land, building or premises for such discontinued use until a subsequent variance permit is authorized and granted;
4. If a variance is conditionally approved, and any of the required conditions are not being fulfilled, the variance approval will be revoked. (Ord. 172, 9-
24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 336/565
H. Appeal Procedure:
1. Time Limit: An appeal of a zoning board of adjustment decision may be made to the city council and shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the
zoning board of adjustment's denial of the request. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
2. Review Considerations: In reviewing the zoning board of adjustment's decision, the city council must be guided by the statement of purpose
underlying the regulation of land improvement contained in Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.020, which is as follows:
a. For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the community, governing bodies of cities and counties are
authorized and empowered to regulate and restrict the improvement of land and to control the location and soundness of structures;
b. Any such regulation, restriction and control shall take into account the potential impairment of natural resources and the total population which the
available natural resources will support without unreasonable impairment. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-5-6: STREET VACATION AND ABANDONMENT:
Street Vacation And Abandonment Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Planning commission/staff review committee reviews application and makes recommendation.
Step 4 Zoning official gives notice of public hearing.
Step 5 City council holds public hearing and acts on application.
Step 6 If authorized, zoning official issues street vacation permit.
A. Purpose: Where deemed to be in the public interest, and where no private rights will be injured or endangered and the public will suffer no loss or
inconvenience thereby, all or a portion of any dedicated public street, right of way, or of any easement may be vacated.
B. Applicability: This section applies to the vacation and abandonment of all dedicated public rights of way and easements.
C. Application For Vacation And Abandonment:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made pursuant to these regulations, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and the
staff review committee to discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for a vacation and abandonment request pursuant to these
regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative of a property owner shall initiate a vacation request by filing an application with the
zoning official and paying a vacation request fee as established by the city council.
3. Contents: A vacation application shall include:
a. A legal description of the property to be vacated;
b. Evidence of the property owner's interest in the property adjoining the right of way or easement to be vacated;
c. A street vacation plan, which shall include a map indicating the area to be vacated and abandoned, as well as all buildings, structures, drives and
uses within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed area to be vacated. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
D. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
E. Vacation And Abandonment Review And Recommendation:
1. Planning Commission; Staff Review Committee: Upon a determination of completeness, the zoning official shall forward copies of the vacation
application to the appropriate recommending body. If a planning commission exists, the planning commission shall review the vacation request and
make a recommendation to the city council. If no planning commission exists, the staff review committee shall review the vacation request and make
a recommendation to the city council.
2. Considerations: The planning commission or the staff review committee, as appropriate, shall determine whether the public will be materially injured
by the proposed vacation when making its recommendation to the city council. If the public will not be materially injured, the planning commission or
staff review committee shall recommend approval.
F. Vacation Approval:
1. Public Hearing: The city council, upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission or the staff review committee, as appropriate, shall
hold a public hearing on a vacation request, pursuant to section 9-4-7 of this title. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the
following requirements:
a. Notification shall be by certified mail pursuant to subsection 9-4-2B of this title to each owner of property abutting the street, right of way or
easement proposed to be vacated;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 337/565
b. Notice of the proposed vacation or abandonment shall be published pursuant to subsection 9-4-2A of this title not less than ten (10) days nor more
than forty (40) days before the date of the hearing;
c. The notice shall clearly describe the extent of the proposed vacation or abandonment and the date, time and place of the public hearing.
2. Decision: The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the vacation application at the public hearing.
a. Public Safety: In approving or conditionally approving a vacation application, the city council shall be satisfied that the public will not be materially
injured by the proposed vacation. If the application meets this criteria, the city council shall approve the vacation.
b. Denial: If the city council denies a vacation application, it shall record the reasons for denial in the record.
c. Conditional Approval: In conditionally approving a vacation application, the city council may impose such conditions, safeguards and restrictions as
may be necessary to carry out the general purpose and intent of these regulations. Conditional approval will become effective only upon fulfillment
of the conditions prescribed.
d. Utility Easement: If a utility has an easement on the subject property, the city council shall provide in its order for the continuation of that
easement. In vacating or abandoning a street, right of way, easement or any portion of it, the city council may reserve and except from the
vacation any easements, rights or interests therein which the city council deems desirable for the use of the city or any public utility.
e. Partial Vacation:
(1) In the event of partial vacation of a street, easement or right of way, where the vacated portion is separated from the property from which it was
acquired by the unvacated portion of it, the city council may sell the vacated portion upon such terms and conditions as it deems desirable and
in the best interests of the city.
(2) If the city council sells the vacated portion, it shall afford the right of first refusal to each abutting property owner as to that part of the vacated
portion which abuts his/her property, but the owner shall not be required to purchase the vacated portion.
(3) No portion of a vacated street may be sold to any person other than the abutting owner if the sale would result in complete loss of street
access.
f. Payment:
(1) If the street was acquired by dedication from the abutting property owners or their predecessors in interest, no payment is required from the
abutting property owners for title to the street to revert to each abutting property owner upon vacation or abandonment.
(2) If the street was not acquired by dedication, the city council may make its order conditional upon reasonable payment by the abutting property
owners for their proportionate part of the street. If the city council determines that the vacation has a public benefit, it may apply the benefit as an
offset against any determination of reasonable consideration which did not take into account the public benefit.
3. Vacation Permit Issuance:
a. The city council, in its resolution of approval, shall authorize the zoning official to issue a vacation permit.
b. The vacation permit shall set out regulations, restrictions and limitations so that reasonable control may be exercised over the vacation or
abandonment.
c. Upon approval by the city council, the zoning official shall forward a letter of approval to the applicant and shall instruct the city clerk to record the
vacation or abandonment.
G. Appeal Procedure: If the city council denies an application for a vacation or abandonment, an appeal of the city council decision may be taken to the
district court. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-5-7: ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS; GENERAL:
Administrative Permits
All steps Administrative permits are issued through the building and zoning or public works departments.
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the technical codes adopted by the city.
B. Applicability: This section applies to all properties located within the city's land use regulation jurisdiction, except as specifically exempted herein. The
zoning official, or director of public works on matters related to streets, may waive permit requirements for minor repairs and maintenance to private
property. Unless specifically exempted, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the following:
1. Building: Erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a valid
building permit;
2. Plumbing: Install any plumbing or gas fitting pipes, fixtures or equipment within or on any building, structure or premises, or make any alteration,
change or repair or otherwise perform the plumbing or gas fitting work without first obtaining a valid building permit;
3. Electrical: Install any electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment within or on any building, structure or premises, or otherwise make any alteration,
addition, change or repair to electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment without first obtaining a valid building permit;
4. Heating Or Cooling Systems: Install any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration equipment or duct work, or make any alteration, addition, change
or repair to heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration equipment or duct work without first obtaining a valid building permit;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 338/565
5. Driveway: Locate, construct, alter, place, replace, pave or surface a driveway approach without first obtaining a valid building permit;
6. Grading: Grade, excavate or undertake any activity precedent to development of open, vacant or unimproved land or previously improved land for
any use other than agricultural use without first obtaining a valid grading permit;
7. Occupancy: Occupy or use any new or existing building or change the character or use of land or a building without first obtaining a valid occupancy
permit;
8. Wastewater Systems: Install or repair any on site wastewater systems or part thereof without first obtaining a valid building permit;
9. Street Alteration: Construct or structurally alter any street, road, sidewalk, curb, gutter, public utility or public facility or cut, grade, clear or fill any
property without first obtaining a valid construction permit.
C. Application And Processing: The applicant may initiate the administrative permitting process by completing and filing the appropriate permit application
form with the zoning official. The application form shall be accompanied by all necessary information as listed on such form.
D. Permit Issuance:
1. Review: The application, plans, specifications and other data filed by the applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the zoning official. The plans
shall be distributed to and reviewed by other city departments and other applicable agencies to certify compliance with applicable ordinance
requirements enforced by other departments. If the zoning official determines that the work described in an application and the required plans,
specifications and other data comply with these regulations and other applicable rules, laws and ordinances, and that all fees have been paid, the
zoning official shall issue the permit to the applicant.
2. Endorsement: When the zoning official issues a permit where plans are required, the approved plans and specifications shall be endorsed or
stamped "approved". The approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the zoning official.
All work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.
3. Bond: All permitted work being accomplished on city right of way or easements shall be covered by a performance bond in the amount set by the
director of public works and shall be covered by insurance in the categories and amounts set by the director of public works.
4. Variance Or Special Use Permit: In all cases where the city council has allowed a variance or a special use permit as authorized by these
regulations, the building official may approve a building permit sufficient to allow such building or work to be done in accordance with the decision of
the city council; provided, that no permit shall be issued pursuant to any decision until time for rehearing or for appeal or application for rehearing
shall has run.
5. Business License Required: Permits may only be issued to properly licensed contractors holding valid city business licenses.
E. Review: The zoning official shall provide expedient review and then approve or disapprove the following types of permits:
Type Of
Permit
Purpose
Building Construction, reconstruction, expansion, remodeling, alteration or relocation of a structure.
Grading Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition, to create new grades.
Approved by public works.
Occupancy Allowing the use and occupancy of a building or structure after it has been determined that all requirements of applicable
ordinances have been met.
Encroachment
Obstruction or intrusion into a delineated right of way, floodway or adjacent land. Approved by public works.
F. Evidence Of Compliance: No permit shall be issued unless the zoning official or public works director has determined that the proposed activity will be in
conformance with these regulations. The zoning official or public works director may refer any application for an administrative permit to the staff review
committee for its determination of conformance. In case of such a referral, the zoning official shall give the applicant at least five (5) days' actual notice
of the staff review committee's meeting regarding the permit application. Evidence of compliance must be provided to the zoning official by the
applicant.
G. Validity Of Permit: The issuance of a permit and the approval of plans and specifications is not a permit for, or an approval of, any activity which would
constitute a violation of any provision of these regulations or of any other city ordinance. Issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other
data shall not prevent the city from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building or
other activities from being carried out thereunder when the activity is found to be in violation of these regulations or other applicable city ordinances. No
permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel any requirement or provisions of these regulations is valid.
H. Completion Of Building: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a
building permit has heretofore been issued and upon which actual construction has begun. Actual construction shall be deemed to be the actual
placing of construction materials in their permanent position fastened in a permanent manner, except that where a basement is being excavated such
excavating shall be deemed to be actual construction, or where demolishing or removal of an existing building or structure has begun preparatory to
rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, providing in all cases that actual construction work shall be diligently
carried on until the completion of the building or structure.
I. Expiration And Extension Of Permit:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 339/565
1. Work Commenced: An administrative permit shall be deemed to have expired if work authorized by the permit is not commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days of issuance of the permit, or thirty (30) days for projects impacting a public right of way. Extensions of up to one hundred eighty
(180) days may be granted by the zoning official for good cause. The extensions must be requested by the applicant before the permit expires.
2. Suspended Or Abandoned Work: An administrative permit expires if work authorized by the permit, once begun, is suspended or abandoned for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days. A single extension of up to one hundred eighty (180) days may be granted by the zoning official for good
cause. The extension must be requested by the applicant before the permit expires.
3. Expiration: After an administrative permit has expired, no work shall be recommenced until a new permit has been issued by the zoning official or
public works director.
J. Revocation: An administrative permit may be revoked by the zoning official or other responsible city official at any time prior to the completion of the use,
building or structure for which the same was issued, when it appears to such official that one or more of the following conditions is present:
1. Plan Departure: There is a departure from the plans, specifications or conditions as required under the terms of the permit;
2. False Representation: That the permit was procured by false representation;
3. Mistake: That the permit was issued by mistake; or
4. Violations: That any of the provisions of this title or other municipal code provisions or ordinances are being violated.
Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed in the building or
structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent location on the property. Where notice of revocation has been served or
posted, no further construction or use of the property shall proceed. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
9-5-8: BUILDING PERMITS:
Building Permit Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with building official.
Step 2 Building official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Building official acts on application.
A. Purpose And Requirement: Before commencing any work pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration or
addition to any building or structure within any district established by the provisions of these regulations, or as shown upon any sectional district map of
the city duly adopted and made part of these regulations, the owner or the owner's agent must obtain a building permit from the building official for
each separate building and/or structure. It is unlawful to commence work until and unless the building permit has been obtained.
1. Building Code: The provision of the building code relating to the application for, the form of, and the issuance of building permits pursuant to the
building code shall apply to and conform with all of the provisions of these regulations.
2. Excavation: No excavation shall be commenced, no wall, structure, premises or land shall be used, no building or part thereof shall be erected,
constructed or altered, nor shall any building be moved in or upon any property, nor shall any outdoor advertising sign or structure be erected, nor
shall major repairs be made, until an application has been made and the proper permit has been obtained pursuant to plans approved by the building
official in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and the building code.
B. Application:
1. Conference: Before any application is made for a building permit, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the building official to discuss, in
general, the procedures and requirements for a building permit request pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative of the property owner shall initiate a building permit request by filing an application with
the building official and paying the application fee.
3. Contents: A building permit application shall include:
a. A site plan pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this chapter;
b. If the property is not served by public water or sewer, the site plan must indicate the exact location of the proposed or existing well and the exact
location of the proposed or existing septic tank(s) system. These locations must be approved by the Clark County health department prior to the
issuance of a building permit;
c. Sufficient copies of the site plan shall be provided to allow a set to be filed as a permanent record with the health department.
C. Determination Of Completeness: Within ten (10) business days of submission, the building official shall review the building permit application and
determine if it is complete pursuant to subsection 9-4-1B of this title.
D. Issuance: Before any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered or moved on any property within the city, the building permit application
together with plans, drawings, sketches or description of same shall be submitted to the city council or its designated agent for approval or disapproval.
The city council shall designate the building official as its agent to receive, inspect, consider and approve or disapprove the plans on behalf of the city
council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 340/565
E. Variance Or Special Use Permit: In all cases where the city council has granted a variance or a special use permit as authorized by these regulations,
the building official may approve a building permit sufficient to allow such building or work to be done in accordance with the decision of the city council;
provided, that no permit shall be issued until the time for rehearing or for appeal or reapplication for rehearing has run.
F. Conflict With Regulations: The issuance of a building permit pursuant to the authority of this section shall not be deemed or construed to permit or
authorize any violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or amendments thereto, or any other municipal code, ordinance or law. Any permit
issued in conflict with these regulations shall be null and void.
G. Completion Of Building: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a
building permit has heretofore been issued and upon which actual construction has begun. Actual construction shall be deemed to be the actual
placing of construction materials in their permanent position fasted in a permanent manner, except that where a basement is being excavated such
excavating shall be deemed to be actual construction, or where demolishing or removal of an existing building or structure has begun preparatory to
rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, providing in all cases that actual construction work be diligently
carried on until the completion of the building or structure involved. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 338, 3-28-2006)
9-5-9: ARCHITECTURAL SUPERVISION:
Architectural Review Approval Process
Step 1
Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2
Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3
Zoning official reviews and acts on application. Projects within the downtown or MTCC shall be reviewed by the architectural review
committee.
Step 4
If authorized, building official issues building permit.
(Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
A. Procedure: Architectural supervision shall be required under the following circumstances:
1. Visibility From Public Right Of Way: When an application is made for a building permit for any building, structure or other improvement which will be
visible from any dedicated public right of way and which will be erected, constructed, altered or moved within any nonresidential district as
established by these regulations; unless, the building, structure or improvement substantially conforms to plans previously submitted and approved
for the site under the terms of a zone change, variance or special use permit; or
2. Adjacent To State Highway; City Collector: When an application is made for a building permit for any building, structure or other improvement which
will be erected, constructed, altered or moved within any district established by these regulations and such building, structure or improvement is
adjacent to any state highway, arterial, major or minor collector of the city as adopted by the city council; unless the building, structure or
improvement substantially conforms to plans previously submitted and approved for the site under the terms of a zone change, variance or special
use permit; or (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
3. Necessity: When the city council or the zoning official determines that architectural supervision is necessary in a particular instance in order to
promote the purposes of these regulations in accordance with section 9-1-3 of this title.
4. ARC Review: All building, remodeling or rehabilitation projects proposed within the downtown central business district and the Mesquite Technology
and Commerce Center (MTCC) shall be reviewed by the architectural review committee (ARC), prior to action by the zoning official, planning
commission or city council. (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
B. Substantial Conformance: In determining whether or not a final construction plan "substantially conforms" to previously approved plans, the following
guidelines shall apply:
1. Building Area: No plan shall be held to substantially conform if there is an increase of more than ten percent (10%) or one hundred (100) square feet,
whichever is greater, in total building area between the originally approved plans and the final construction plan;
2. Height: No plan shall be held to substantially conform if there is an increase in height of any building or structure of more than ten percent (10%) or
four feet (4'), whichever is greater, between the originally approved plans and final construction plans;
3. Building Use: No plan shall be held to substantially conform if final construction plans indicate an intention to utilize a building or structure for a
principal use different than the uses shown on the originally approved plans;
4. Setback Deviation: No plan shall be held to substantially conform if final construction plans show any deviation whatsoever from ordinance
requirements as to setbacks or building separations, unless such deviation has been previously approved pursuant to the issuance of a variance
permit. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
C. Grading Or Filling: Architectural supervision need not be required when the requested permit is for grading or filling only; provided, that the written
consent of the Clark County district health department and the department of public works is obtained approving such work.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 341/565
D. Application For Architectural Review:
1. Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official to discuss, in general, the procedures and
requirements for architectural review pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative shall initiate architectural review by filing an application with the zoning official and paying
the application fee. The architectural review application may be processed concurrently with a site plan review application.
3. Contents: An architectural review application shall include:
a. Site Plan: An approved site plan pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this chapter. Site plan, drawn to scale, shall include building dimensions of existing
and proposed structures; setback dimensions; yards and open space dimensions; locations of signs; location of landscaping; and such other
information as may be necessary;
b. Written Statement: If applicable, a written statement describing the project's conformance with the downtown central business district or MTCC
design standards;
c. Floor Plan: Floor plan, drawn to scale to indicate the size of buildings and total square footage of buildings;
d. Elevation: Architectural elevations of proposed structures and a detailed list of proposed building materials. Also a rendered elevation to indicate
the architectural appearance of proposed buildings;
e. Other: Other information as designated on the application form. (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
E. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
F. Approval:
1. Consideration: All development applications shall be submitted to the zoning official for a determination of completeness pursuant to subsection 9-4-
1B of this title.
2. Decision: The zoning official shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application.
3. Considerations: In considering whether to approve the application, the zoning official shall restrict the scope of its review to such regulations as the
city has formally adopted and to the following considerations: Buildings, structures and other improvements shall be designed and constructed so
that they will not become unsightly, undesirable or obnoxious in appearance: (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
a. To the extent that they will hinder the orderly and harmonious development of the city;
b. Impair the desirability of living conditions in the same area or adjacent agricultural or residential areas; or
c. Otherwise adversely affect the general prosperity or welfare.
4. Issuance: Upon permit approval, the building official shall issue such permit, provided all other provisions of the law have been complied with. Every
drawing, plan or sketch filed under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the permanent records of the building official. In the event
construction has not commenced within one year, the plans shall be considered void and a new application must be submitted. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
G. Appeal: Denied applications may be appealed to the city council in accordance with subsection 9-4-9B of this title. (Ord. 397, 3-11-2008, eff. 4-3-2008)
9-5-10: CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY:
Certificate Of Use And Occupancy Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with building official.
Step 2 Building official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Building official acts on application.
A. Purpose And Requirement: No vacant land in any district established under the provision of these regulations shall hereafter be occupied or used,
except for agricultural uses other than livestock farming, poultry or small animal raising or dairying, and no building hereafter erected, structurally
altered or moved in such district shall be occupied or used until a certificate of use or occupancy has been issued therefor.
B. Applicability: Certificates of use or occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
1. Occupancy And Use: Occupancy and use of a building or structure hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, converted, altered, structurally
altered or moved;
2. Changes: Change in an existing building to a use of a different classification;
3. Vacant Land: Occupancy and use of vacant land;
4. Nonconforming Use Change: Change in the use of a nonconforming use.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 342/565
C. Application: A certificate of use or occupancy for a building or structure shall be issued by the building official. A certificate of use or occupancy for
vacant land shall be issued by the zoning official pursuant to this section. Either request may be initiated by the filing of an application and the
appropriate fee with the zoning official.
D. Approval: An application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be reviewed by the following prior to issuance:
1. City sanitation department;
2. City fire department;
3. City public works department; (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
4. Where appropriate, southern Nevada health district. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
9-5-11: STREET NAME OR NUMBER CHANGES:
Street Name Or Numbering Change Approval Process
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Zoning official gives notice of public hearing.
Step 4 Zoning official reviews application and makes recommendation.
Step 5 City council reviews application and holds public hearing.
A. Purpose: For the purpose of maintaining a uniform street name and number system, the names of existing streets and/or the numbers of existing lots or
structures may be changed.
B. Applicability: This section applies to the renaming of existing streets or the renumbering of existing lots or structures.
C. System Authorized: The city council, either on its own motion or upon a petition presented to it, shall adopt a system of street naming or numbering and
house numbering, with guidelines for proposed changes. The street naming system shall be as nearly uniform as is possible and any street shall have
but one name. The street and house numbering system shall be as nearly uniform as possible and any one street shall have but one numbering
system.
D. Application For Street Name Or Numbering Change:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for a street name or numbering change pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or designated representative of a property owner may initiate a street name or numbering change by filing an
application with the zoning official on the form provided and paying the application fee.
3. Contents: A street name or numbering change application shall include:
a. A "site plan", as defined in section 9-5-4 of this chapter. Some requirements of site plan preparation may be waived by the zoning official if
circumstances render such items unnecessary;
b. A legal description of the street(s) to be renamed or the lot(s) or structure(s) renumbered;
c. The existing name and proposed name and/or the existing numbers and proposed numbers. Proposed names shall neither duplicate nor too
closely resemble the name of any existing street. A list of three (3) potential names ranked in order of preference is recommended;
d. A list of the property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the site, or at least thirty (30) parcels nearest to the portion of the boundary being
changed;
e. Other information as designated on the application form. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
E. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
F. Street Name Or Number Change Review And Recommendation: The zoning official shall review the request and make a recommendation to the city
council.
G. Street Name Or Numbering Change Approval:
1. City Council Hearing On System: Before adopting any system of street naming or numbering, or any recommendations concerning proposed
changes or amendments thereof, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published pursuant to
subsection 9-4-2A of this title.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 343/565
2. Decision: The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the street name or number change application at the public hearing.
H. Determining Application Of System: Upon the enactment of a system of street naming or numbering or house numbering, the city council and its agents
and employees shall determine the application thereof to all streets, avenues, thoroughfares or other trafficways or to the numbering of any premises
thereon and shall communicate the same to the owner of each parcel on such streets, avenues, thoroughfares or other trafficways.
I. Owners To Comply With Notice: The owner of each parcel on such streets, avenues, thoroughfares or other trafficways shall, within ten (10) days after
the receipt of the notice of a change in the name or numbering of any street, avenue, thoroughfare or other trafficway, make any necessary provision
for the new name or numbering of the street, avenue, thoroughfare or other trafficway. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 6
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
9-6-1: SUBDIVISION APPROVAL; GENERALLY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly review and approval of the division of land into lots, tracts, parcels or other subparts
for sale or development. This chapter includes provisions for major subdivisions, parcel maps and divisions of land into large parcels.
B. Prohibited Subdivisions: No person may subdivide land in the city except in accordance with all of the provisions of this chapter. Except as exempted in
this chapter, the following acts are prohibited:
1. Parcel Creation: Creation of parcels without subdividing, except those intended for agricultural use, which is larger than ten (10) acres, is prohibited.
2. Selling Land Prior To Approved Map: No owner or agent of the owner of any of land subject to these regulations shall offer for sale or transfer title to
any tract before a map has been approved in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and recorded with the county recorder and signed
off by city department heads.
3. Subdivision By Metes And Bounds: Subdivision by metes and bounds is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to subdivide any lot or any parcel of land by
the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with the intent of evading these regulations.
C. Exemptions: The following divisions of land shall be exempt from these subdivision requirements:
1. The public acquisition of land for the widening of existing streets or for constructing other public works;
2. Any lot, parcel or tract of land located within the area governed by these regulations which has been legally subdivided or resubdivided by map or
deed prior to the adoption of these regulations;
3. A division of property through inheritance, the probate of an estate or by order of a court of law;
4. A lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any other security instrument regulated under the laws of Nevada or any other interest in an investment entity;
5. Cemetery lots;
6. An interest in oil, gas, minerals or building materials, which is now or hereafter severed from the surface ownership of real property;
7. The creation of a leasehold for a space within a multi-occupant building or a commercial building site; provided, that the property is a part of an
approved subdivision or addition and regulated in accordance with the site plan requirements of the city;
8. The creation of a leasehold for agricultural use of the subject property; provided, that the use does not involve the construction of a building(s) to be
used as a residence or for any purpose not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
9-6-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURES; SKETCH MAP:
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official schedules application for review with staff review committee.
Step 3 Staff review committee meets with applicant to discuss application.
Step 4 Zoning official sends applicant written comment.
A. Purpose: The sketch map review procedure is designed to allow the applicant to present a concept level plan to the city staff for a discussion of
suggestions and concerns.
B. Applicability: Sketch map approval is not required prior to the submission of a tentative map; however, it is strongly encouraged.
C. Application:
1. Filing: The property owner or his/her representative shallinitiate a sketch map approval request by filing an application with the zoning official and
paying the filing fee established by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 344/565
2. Contents: A sketch map application shall include: (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
a. Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees;
b. A proposed phasing plan for the development of future sections;
c. Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the map.
D. Sketch Map Contents: In preparation for this meeting, the applicant shall prepare a sketch map. The following information will be required for a thorough
administrative review of the sketch map:
1. Name of the proposed subdivision;
2. Date, scale, north arrow;
3. Property owner's name and address;
4. Description of all existing covenants, liens and encumbrances;
5. Location of property lines;
6. Existing or platted easements, rights of way, streets or other public ways;
7. Location, sizes and elevations of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision and adjacent thereto;
8. Existing permanent buildings;
9. Utility poles and utility rights of way on or immediately adjacent to the property proposed to be subdivided;
10. Approximate topography based on USGS or NAVD datum at ten foot (10') contour intervals;
11. Approximate location and width of all proposed streets within and abutting the proposed subdivision;
12. Preliminary proposals for connections with existing water supply and sanitary sewerage systems, and preliminary proposals for collecting and
discharging surface water drainage;
13. Approximate location, dimensions and area of all proposed and existing lots;
14. Approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use;
15. Vicinity map showing all streets and the general development pattern and land uses of the surrounding area;
16. If the sketch map covers only a part of the applicant's contiguous holdings, the applicant shall show the extent of adjacent land holdings. (Ord. 172,
9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
E. Sketch Map Review:
1. The zoning official shall schedule the sketch map for review at the next meeting of the staff review committee. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
2. Prior to the staff review committee meeting, the zoning official shall forward copies of the sketch map to appropriate departments and agencies for
their review.
3. Sketch map review shall focus on applicable provisions of these regulations, physical features of the proposed development, the availability of public
facilities and services, the timing and placement of public improvements and any master plan requirements.
4. The staff review committee shall determine whether the proposed development will be classified as a "minor subdivision" or a "major subdivision", as
defined in this title.
5. Following the review meeting, the zoning official shall send the applicant written comments regarding the proposed subdivision to assist the applicant
in completing the subdivision process. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-6-3: CONCEPT PLAN:
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Zoning official gives notice of hearing.
Step 4 Planning commission holds public hearing and makes recommendation or staff review committee makes recommendations.
Step 5 City council holds public hearing (if no planning commission) and acts on application.
A. Purpose: The purpose of the concept plan is to demonstrate conformance with the master plan, compatibility of land use and coordination of
improvements within and among individually platted parcels, sections or phases of a development prior to approval of a tentative map.
B. Applicability: A concept plan shall be required when an applicant is applying for the subdivision of less than the entire, contiguous land area held in
common ownership. The concept plan shall illustrate future development of the entire area under common ownership. Where a concept plan is
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 345/565
required, no further development applications shall be approved until a concept plan has been submitted and approved.
C. Application:
1. Filing: The property owner or his/her designated representative shall initiate a concept plan approval request by filing an application with the zoning
official and paying the filing fee as established by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
2. Contents: A concept plan application shall include: (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
a. Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees;
b. A proposed phasing plan for the development of future sections;
c. Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the map;
d. A complete tentative map submittal if submitted for review and approval in conjunction with the concept plan.
3. Tentative Map Review: A concept plan may be submitted for review and approval simultaneously with a tentative map; provided, however, that the
map shall not be approved until the concept plan has been approved. If the concept plan and the tentative map are to be reviewed simultaneously,
the map and plan must be submitted to the zoning official simultaneously.
D. Contents:
1. Scale: A concept plan shall be printed on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") paper at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') (or larger) with all dimensions measured accurately to the nearest foot; provided,however, that a different scale may be used if approved
in writing by the zoning official prior to submittal.
2. Attachments: The concept plan shall contain or have attached thereto:
a. Names and addresses of the developer, record owner, land planner and engineer;
b. Proposed name of the subdivision, date prepared and/or revised, north indicator, scale;
c. Location map drawn at a scale of two thousand feet (2,000') per inch showing the area within a one mile radius of the proposed subdivision. Use
of the current city address map is recommended;
d. A layout of the entire proposed subdivision and its relationship to adjacent property, existing development and recorded maps;
e. Topographic contours based on datum at ten foot (10') intervals based on USGS or NAVD datum unless otherwise approved by the zoning official;
f. Proposed major categories of land use showing compatibility with the master plan;
g. Proposed number of dwelling units and gross density of each type of residence and proposed floor area ratio for all nonresidential land uses;
h. Proposed and existing arterial, collector and local streets (both public and private) to serve the general area;
i. Location of sites for parks, schools and other public uses, and all areas of common ownership;
j. Significant drainage features and structures, including any 100-year floodplains;
k. Significant manmade features such as railroads, buildings, utilities and drainage structures;
l. Approximate boundaries and timing of proposed phases of development;
m. Identification of known exceptional topographical, cultural, historical, archaeological, hydrological or any other physical conditions of the property
to be developed or within one hundred feet (100') on an adjacent parcel which will require the establishment of reasonable design standards in
excess of the established minimum standards or require a variance from minimum standards. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
E. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
F. Review And Recommendation:
1. Recommendation To City Council: Upon a determination of completeness, the zoning official shall forward copies of the concept plan application to
the planning commission. If no planning commission exists, the staff review committee shall review the application and make a recommendation to
the city council.
2. Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the concept plan application pursuant to section 9-4-7 of this title.
a. Notice of the public hearing shall be by publication pursuant to subsection 9-4-2A of this title.
b. Personal notice shall also be mailed in accordance with the provisions of subsection 9-4-2B of this title.
3. Criteria: The planning commission or staff review committee, as appropriate, shall consider the following criteria when making their recommendation
to the city council:
a. The character of the neighborhood;
b. The zoning and uses of property nearby;
c. The suitability of the proposed project for the site;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 346/565
d. Conformance of the proposed project with the comprehensive master plan and capital improvements program;
e. The availability and adequacy of required public and community facilities, utilities and services to serve the proposed project. These may include,
but are not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water, electrical services, police and fire protection, schools, parks and recreation facilities,
roads, libraries, solid waste collection and disposal and others, as applicable;
f. The extent to which the proposed project would adversely affect the capacity or safety of that portion of the street network influenced by the use, or
present parking problems in the vicinity of the property;
g. The extent to which the proposed project would contribute to sprawl and/or leapfrog development patterns;
h. The environmental impacts that the proposed project will generate, including, but not limited to, excessive storm water runoff, water pollution, air
pollution, noise pollution, excessive nighttime lighting or other environmental harm. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
4. Planning Commission Recommendation: Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall forward to the city council a summary
of all evidence taken at the hearing, together with its recommendation for action on the concept map application. The recommendation may be for
approval, disapproval or conditional approval. The reasons for the recommendation shall be included. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
G. Decision By City Council:
1. Consideration: Upon receipt of the planning commission or staff review committee recommendation, the city council shall consider the concept plan
application.
2. Public Hearing: If there is no planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of section 9-4-7 of this title
to review and consider the application.
a. Notice of the hearing shall be in accordance with subsection F2 of this section.
b. The city council shall consider the application in light of the criteria established in subsection F3 of this section.
3. Decision: The city council may approve, conditionally approve or deny the concept plan application.
a. Effect Of Approval: Approval of a concept plan constitutes acceptance of the type, density and intensity of land use indicated on the plan; the
classification and arrangement of streets indicated; the proposed phasing plan; and the nature of utility service proposed. The city council shall
notify the applicant of any design requirements in excess of the established minimum standards or of any deviations from those established
minimum standards set forth in these regulations. The approval of the concept plan shall not expire as long as the development proceeds in
accordance with the phasing plan. At such time as the development lags one year behind the approved phasing plan, the approval shall expire if
the applicant does not submit a written request for the extension and continuance of the concept plan as approved by the city prior to expiration.
Approval of any such extension request shall be automatic one time only for a period of twelve (12) months. Subsequent to this extension, the
concept plan shall be considered valid so long as the plan remains consistent with the master plan. Concept plan approval does not ensure
approval of a tentative map involving a substantially different concept or failing to meet specific requirements of these regulations, and approval
does not comprise any vesting of development rights or any assurance that permits of any kind will be issued.
b. Denial: If the city council denies a concept planapplication, it shall record the reasons for denial in the record and forward a written statement of
the reasons to the applicant pursuant to subsection 9-4-2E of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-6-4: TENTATIVE MAPS:
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Agency review of application.
Step 4 Zoning official gives notice of public hearing.
Step 5 Planning commission, if established, holds public hearing and makes recommendation.
Step 6 City council holds public hearing and acts on application.
Step 7 Letter of city council action sent to applicant.
A. Purpose: Tentative map approval allows the planning commission and city council to review all substantive aspects of a proposed subdivision and
impose such conditions as will be necessary to bring the subdivision into compliance with these regulations and other Mesquite planning documents.
B. Applicability: Applicants for major subdivision approval, consisting of five (5) or more units, are required to submit an application and tentative map.
C. Application:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and the staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for tentative map approval pursuant to these regulations.
2. Submittal: A property owner or his/her designated representative shall initiate a tentative map approval request by filing an application with the
zoning official and paying the filing fee as established by the city council.
3. Contents: A tentative map application shall include:
a. A completed and signed application form;
b. Current, completed, and fully signed property owner affidavit(s);
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 347/565
c. A reproducible original and a sufficient number of copies of the proposed tentative map as specified on the applicationor as otherwise requested
by the zoning official;
d. Copies of all other information required by this section as specified on the application;
e. The applicable map review fee as specified on the application; and
f. A digital, electronic copy of the tentative map.
D. Contents: Tentative maps for major subdivisions shall include the following:
1. Subdivision boundaries (traverse bearings and distances of the boundaries);
2. North arrow or indicator, date and scale on each page. The scale shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger unless specifically
waived by the zoning official;
3. Location by tract, or section, township, range, county and state, including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision;
4. Name of the proposed subdivision. This name shall neither duplicate nor too closely resemble the name of any existing subdivision;
5. A location map showing the tract in relation to the surrounding area at a scale of one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000');
6. Names and addresses of the applicant, developer(s), owner(s) of record, and the name, address and seal of the engineer, land surveyor, architect or
land planner responsible for subdivision layout;
7. The following information for land located within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed subdivision: topography based on USGS or NAVD datum at
five foot (5') contour intervals in areas where grades are gentle, the zoning official may require a lesser contour interval; names of adjacent
subdivisions; layout of streets (with names) and including an indication of road surface locations whether such streets are paved or unpaved;
dedicated rights of way with widths; connections with adjoining platted streets; widths and locations of alleys; easements, and public walkways
adjacent to or connecting with the proposed subdivision; location, size and right of way widths of all existing sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water
supply facilities; parks and other open spaces; and permanent buildings within ten feet (10') of site, and uses within the remaining area;
8. The location of watercourses, limits of floodplains, floodways, ravines, bridges, lakes, prominent landmarks, rock outcroppings, unique natural areas,
wooded areas, approximateacreage and such other existing features as may be pertinent to the subdivision shall be shown;
9. Location of proposed culverts and bridges;
10. Layout and width of right of way and cross sections showing surfacing of all existing and proposed streets and public ways proposed for the
subdivision, and access thereto, and the existing and proposed street names;
11. Lot layout, lot number, approximate dimensions, approximate lot areas, easements, setback requirements with dimensions, and the number or
letter of each block;
12. Location and size of any land to be dedicated or reserved for public use or for use in common by property owners in the subdivision and any
conditions of such dedication or reservation;
13. Preliminary plans showing the locations and sizes of all existing and proposed sanitary sewerage lines and facilities, the locations and sizes of all
existing and proposed water distribution system lines and facilities, the location of the closest existing water and sewer mains, and the location and
character of all other existing and proposed public utility lines, including existing gas and power lines. These plans shall be accompanied by a written
and signed statement explaining how the applicant proposes to provide sewage treatment facilities or other disposal of sanitary wastes. When the
applicant intends to use existing sewage treatment facilities, a letter from the proper authority accepting responsibility for treatment of sanitary
wastes from the proposed subdivision is required to be provided by the applicant;
14. Storm water management plan pursuant to section 9-9-5 of this title, proposed size, nature and location of all proposed storm drainage
improvements;
15. Identification, location and nature of all existing and proposed zoning districts and land uses to be included within the subdivision and the zoning
district and status of adjacent properties within two hundred feet (200') of the subdivision;
16. Existing on site building footprints and pavement boundaries;
17. Proposed use of lots;
18. Proposed phasing plans;
19. Calculations noted of the following:
a. Total area of the subdivision, in acres calculated to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, if the area is two (2)acres or more; or in square
feet if the area is less than two (2) acres.
b. Total area of all streets in the subdivision.
c. Total area of all common open space in the subdivision;
20. Letters of availability from the public utilities and service providers, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electrical power, solid waste disposal,
and telephone. (Ord. 356, 9-26-2006, eff. 10-19-2006)
E. Submission Date:
1. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 348/565
2. For purposes of these regulations, the date of the regular meeting of the planning commission at which time a complete tentative map is reviewed
shall constitute the official submittal date of the map. The forty five (45) day period for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval will commence
from the official submittal date of the tentative map.
3. If there is no planning commission, for purposes of these regulations, the date of the regular meeting of the city council at which time a complete
tentative map is reviewed shall constitute the official submittal date of the map. The forty five (45) day period for formal approval, conditional
approval, or disapproval of the map shall commence from the official submittal date.
F. Agency Review:
1. The zoning official shall distribute copies of the complete tentative map application to all state and local agencies and persons charged with
reviewing the proposed subdivision, including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Nevada department of conservation and natural resources divisions of water resources and environmental protection;
b. Nevada department of human resources health division;
c. For any subdivision that will provide water or services for the disposal of sewage and is subject to Nevada Revised Statutes 704.6672, a copy
shall be sent to the Nevada public utilities commission;
d. The Southern Nevada health district;
e. Clark County School District board of trustees;
f. The Clark County planning commission, if the proposed subdivision is within one mile of an unincorporated area of the county.
2. The agencies listed in subsections F1a and F1b of this section shall file a written recommendation with the planning commission or city council within
fifteen (15) days of receipt of the tentative map.
3. The Nevada public service commission shall acknowledge receipt of the tentative map within fifteen (15) days of receipt.
4. The school district board of trustees shall identify the need for a school site within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the map.
G. Action On Tentative Map; Public Hearing: Within forty five (45) days after the submission of a complete tentative map application for a major subdivision
to the planning commission, or city council if there is no planning commission, the planning commission or city council shall hold a hearing on the
application.
H. Guidelines For Planning Commission Or City Council Decision: The planning commission or city council shall consider the following criteria in making a
recommendation on the tentative map:
1. Environmental And Health Laws: The application conforms with environmental and health laws and regulations concerning water and air pollution,
the disposal of solid waste, facilities to supply water, community or public sewage disposal and, where applicable, individual systems for sewage
disposal;
2. Water Availability: The applicant has shown the availability of water which meets applicable health standards and is sufficient for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the subdivision;
3. Public Utilities: The site is served, or will be served at the time of development, with all necessary public utilities, including, but not limited to, water,
sewer, gas, electric and telephone service;
4. Location: The site is located in an area of the city that is appropriate for current development activity and which will not contribute to the need for
inefficient extensions and expansions of public facilities, utilities and services;
5. Public Services: The applicant has shown the availability and accessibility of public services such as schools, police and fire protection,
transportation, recreation and parks;
6. Development Pattern: The site represents an overall development pattern that is consistent with the goals and policies of the master plan, the official
map, the capital improvements program and any other applicable planningdocuments adopted by the city;
7. Conformance: The site and application conform to all applicable provisions of these regulations. If these regulations are inconsistent with the master
plan, these regulations shall take precedence; however, city staff shall be instructed to make such recommendations as will be necessary to bring
these regulations into compliance with the master plan;
8. Effect On Streets: The application considers the effect of the proposed subdivision on existing public streets and the need for new streets or
highways to serve the subdivision;
9. Street Design: The tentative map shows the location, spacing and design of proposed streets, curb cuts and intersections, all of which are consistent
with good traffic engineering design principles;
10. Access: Each lot in the map of a residential development has adequate and safe access to/from a local street. If lot access is to/from a collector or
arterial street, the planning commission, or city council if there is no planning commission, shall expressly find that such access is safe and that no
other lot access or subdivision configuration is feasible;
11. Site Layout: The site contains a parcel, lot and land subdivision layout that is consistent with good land planning and site engineering design
principles;
12. Development Sensitive To Environment: The site will be laid out and developed in a manner that is sensitive to environmental features and/or
characteristics of the tract or parcel, including, but not limited to, topography, slope, soils, geology, hydrology, floodplains, wetlands, vegetation and
trees;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 349/565
13. Dedications And Improvements: The applicant agrees to dedicate and improve land, right of way and easements, as may be determined to be
needed to effectuate the purposes of these regulations and the standards and requirements incorporated herein;
14. Other Recommendations And Comments: The recommendations and comments of those entities reviewing the tentative map pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 278;
15. Submission Requirements Satisfied: All relevant and applicable submission requirements have been satisfied in a timely manner.
I. Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning commission, or city council if there is no planning commission, at the hearing shall recommend
approval,disapproval or approval with conditions. If the planning commission has been authorized by the city council, it shall approve, disapprove or
conditionally approve the tentative map application. The planning commission, or city council if there is no planning commission, with the consent of the
applicant, may extend the forty five (45) day period. Notice of the planning commission's or city council's if there is no planning commission, decision
shall be forwarded to the applicant in writing pursuant to subsection 9-4-3B of this title. Failure of the planning commission, or city council if there is no
planning commission, to act within forty five (45) days shall result in a recommendation of approval.
J. City Council:
1. If there is a planning commission, following action by the planning commission, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days, review the application
and the recommendation of the planning commission and either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map.
2. If there is no planning commission, the city council shall, within forty five (45) days of the official submission date, review the application at a public
hearing pursuant to the guidelines established in section 9-4-7 of this title.
a. The zoning official shall give published notice of the hearing pursuant to subsection 9-4-2A of this title and shall also give personal notice to
surrounding landowners pursuant to subsection 9-4-2B of this title.
b. The city council shall, by a majority vote of the members present, make a final disposition on the tentative map. The time limit for acting on the
tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the city council and applicant.
c. Notice of the city council's decision shall be provided to the applicant pursuant to subsection 9-4-2E of this title. Disapproval or conditional
approval must be accompanied by a statement of the reason(s) for that action.
3. If the tentative map is approved or approved with conditions, the applicant shall meet or arrange to meet the conditions and then proceed with the
construction plan and final map approval processes.
4. Failure of the city council to act within the specified time periods shall result in tentative map approval without city council action. Should a tentative
map be deemed approved, the city clerk shall certify the map as approved.
5. Approval by the planning commission or city council of a tentative map imposes no obligation on the part of the planning commission or city council
to approve the final map or to accept any public dedication shown of the final map.
K. Effect Of Tentative Map Approval: If the subdivider fails to record a final map for any portion of the tentative map within the time required by Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 278, all proceedings are terminated and a new application is required. The city council may grant extensions as allowed by
Nevada Revised Statutes chapter 278. After approval of the tentative map, the applicant shall prepare and file construction drawings as required for all
public facilities and utilities to be provided. (Ord. 356, 9-26-2006, eff. 10-19-2006)
9-6-5: CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS; CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Construction Drawings1:
1. Preparation; Submittal: Following approval of the tentative map, the applicant shall have prepared by a professional engineer, registered in the state,
construction drawings consisting of complete construction plans and specifications of all easements, streets, traffic control devices, streetlights,
street signs, sanitary sewers, storm water facilities, water system facilities, sidewalks and the provision for all public utility sources to be provided to
each lot within the subdivision, together with other improvements required by these regulations. Construction drawings, together with plan check fees
and bond estimate(s) shall be submitted to the zoning official for review, processing and city approvals.
2. Improvements: All improvements required pursuant to these regulations shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards and plan
requirements of these regulations, the standards and specifications of the county, city and, where applicable, the requirements and authorization of
the appropriate state agency, utility company or local franchisee.
B. Construction Drawing Requirements:
1. General: The construction drawings shall be sealed by a professional engineer. Five (5) copies of the construction drawings shall be submitted to the
zoning official for review. The construction drawings shall be at any scale from one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10') through one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), so long as the scale is an increment of ten feet (10') and is sufficiently clear in reflecting details of the proposed
construction. Construction drawings shall be prepared on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") sheets. The plans shall include the following
information, shown on separate sheets:
a. A cover sheet including: owner, developer, engineer (with address and phone number), a vicinity map, all standard notes, signature block for utility
and city approvals, bench mark estimated quantities of off sites and earthwork;
b. The tentative map for the project drawn on the existing topographic survey of the property;
c. Roadway, sidewalk, bikeway and traffic control construction plans, profiles and detail sheets;
d. Sanitary sewer system construction plans, profiles and detail sheets (may be combined on roadway sheets);
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 350/565
e. Storm water management plan showing plan and profile of proposed storm sewer and drainage facilities, detail sheets, hydrological and hydraulic
calculations and other information as required by the public works director (may be combined on roadway sheets);
f. Proposed grading cross sections and final contours in critical drainage areas;
g. Water distribution system construction plans and details (may be shown on roadway sheets);
h. Locations of electric, telecommunications and other utility improvements;
i. A general schedule of the timing and sequence of construction for all required improvements (recommended for inclusion on the cover sheet);
j. Roadway construction detail sheets. All construction details pertaining to the roadway improvements (e.g., pavement details, pavement width,
curbing, sidewalk, unpaved areas, entrances, lighting, etc.) shall be shown on typical section, in plan and profile. Specific details shall be
referenced to appropriate city improvement standards and shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Pavement installation, widening or resurfacing improvements dimensioned and developed in accordance with city improvement standards;
(2) Pavement widening and resurfacing improvements in the right of way as measured from the centerline;
(3) Mathematical profile grade and elevations at twenty five foot (25') intervals on vertical curves and fifty foot (50') intervals on tangent sections for
all roadway construction;
(4) Resurfacing profile grade elevations on existing centerline and edges of pavement at twenty five foot (25') intervals and breaks in grade (i.e.,
irregularities inpavement);
(5) Jointing plan and details for Portland cement concrete pavement;
(6) Type and location of entrance construction;
(7) Propose traffic control devices and signs to be used during construction and upon completion of the project.
k. Sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water line plans and profile sheets. All construction details pertaining to the sanitary sewerage, storm
drainage and water distribution system improvements shall be prepared in accordance with all requirements of these regulations and other
pertinent city regulations and standards and shall be shown in plan and profile. With the approval of the zoning official, profiles may be omitted
from water distribution system drawings. Specific details shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Existing ground and finished grade shown and designated;
(2) Methods to be used in repairing open trenching of pavement;
(3) Limits of backfill and pavement replacement at all crossings of existing roadway surfaces not bored;
(4) Location of all utilities to be encountered in construction. Sufficient copies of plans must be submitted for utility providers;
(5) Proof of plan approval by any other political subdivisions having jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed development must be received
prior to construction drawing approval.
l. Grading plan and cross section sheets. A grading plan for the entire tract within the tentative map boundaries shall be provided. All grading details
pertaining to site development shall be shown in plan or on cross section sheets. Specific details shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Existing and proposed contours, normally at two foot (2') intervals, in critical drainage areas. Contour intervals for grading plans greater than
two feet (2') will require the public works director's approval (proposed contours may be omitted with the approval of the public works director,
provided sufficient spot elevations are shown);
(2) Site grading shall be compatible with ultimate roadway elevations;
(3) Where required by the public works director, cross sections showing existing ground and finished grades plottedat a scale approved by the
public works director, typically of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontal and one inch equals six feet (1" = 6') vertical;
(4) Erosion control plan, as applicable, showing compliance with state requirements;
(5) All grading will be maintained with a dust palliative or water until the project is complete and a certificate of occupancy is issued;
(6) Public utility plans as provided by the serving entity shall be included with the plan set.
m. An address map incorporating lot numbers per the final map and addresses in conformance with the city's adopted address grid. The address
map shall contain separate approval lines for the public works director and the zoning official.
C. Public Agency Reviews: Prior to approving the construction drawings, the applicant shall submit the construction drawings to all applicable local
reviewing agencies and public utility companies that will service the subdivision.
D. Approval: Following agency and utility approvals and posting of appropriate bond(s), the public works director shall approve, conditionally approve or
deny the construction drawings. Drawings that were denied may be amended and immediately resubmitted. Denial may also be appealed to the
planning commission and/or city council within thirty (30) days of notification.
E. Timing Of Improvements: Except upon the written approval of the public works director, no grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, land filling,
construction of improvements, or other material change, except for purposes of aiding in preparation of final engineering drawings or plans, shall
commence on the subject property until the applicant has:
1. Agreement: Entered into a subdivision improvement agreement with the city or otherwise arranged for completion of all required improvements;
2. Approval: Received approval of the construction drawings and all necessary permits from the public works director; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 351/565
3. Necessary Approvals And Permits: Obtained necessary approvals and permits from other affected municipal, county or state agencies.
F. Modification Of Construction Drawings: All installations of improvements and all construction shall conform to the approved construction drawings. If the
applicant chooses to make minor modifications in design and/or specifications during construction, such changes shall be made at theapplicant's own
risk, but only with the written approval of the public works director. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the public works director in
advance of any changes to be made from the approved drawings. In the event that actual construction work deviates from that shown on the approved
construction drawings and such deviation was not approved in advance by the public works director, the applicant may be required to correct the
installed improvements to conform to the approved construction drawings. In addition, the city may take such other actions as may be deemed
appropriate, including, but not limited to, revocation of map approval and/or permits already issued and/or withholding of future approvals and permits.
G. As Built Drawings:
1. Required: Prior to final inspection of the required improvements, the applicant shall submit to the public works director one reproducible copy and
two (2) prints of as built engineering drawings for each of the required improvements that have been completed. Each set of drawings shall be
recertified by the applicant's engineer indicating the date when the as built survey was made.
2. Sewer And Storm Drainage: As built drawings shall show the constructed vertical elevation, horizontal location and size of all sanitary and storm
sewers, manholes, inlets, junction boxes, detention basins and other appurtenances or elements of the sewerage and storm drainage systems
constructed to serve the subdivision.
3. Streets And Streetlights: Unless otherwise required by the public works director, as built drawings for roadways or street improvements shall be
limited to a survey of the street centerline, with final profile elevations recorded on the drawings at one hundred foot (100') intervals, plus the notation
of changes in horizontal alignment or intersection geometrics which may have been made during construction, and the location of streetlights. This
must be accompanied by a sealed or notarized statement that the cross section and drainage do not substantially deviate from the plan.
4. Water: As built drawings for water lines, valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances or elements of the water distribution system constructed to
serve the project shall be limited to horizontal location and size of water lines and location and description of valves with dimensional ties as may be
required by the director of public works.
5. Sidewalks: As built drawings shall show location with respect to the street right of way, width and vertical elevation.
6. Control Points: As built drawings shall show all control points and monumentation.
H. Inspection And Acceptance Of Improvements:
1. Inspection Required: All improvements required by these regulations shall be inspected by the public works director, except for improvements made
under the jurisdiction of other public agencies, in which case engineers or inspectors of such agency will make the necessary inspections. Where
inspections are made by other agencies, the applicant shall provide the city with written reports of each final inspection.
2. Inspection Schedule: It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the public works director of the commencement of construction of
improvements twenty four (24) hours prior thereto.
3. Compliance With Standards: The applicant and the bonded construction contractor shall bear full and final responsibility for the installation and
construction of all required improvements according to the provisions of these regulations and the standards and specifications of other public
agencies.
4. Acceptance:
a. Approval of the installation and construction of improvements by the public works director shall constitute acceptance by the city of the
improvement for dedication purposes.
b. The city shall not have any responsibility with respect to any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same by the public,
unless the street or other improvements shall have been accepted by the public works director.
c. When improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements and conditions of these regulations and the specifications of the
city, and the applicant has submitted as built reproducibles to the public works director, the public works director shall accept the improvements for
maintenance by the city, except that this shall not apply to improvements maintained by another entity.
d. The developer shall maintain a one year warranty with surety posted to ensure that any failures occurring within the warranty period shall be
properly repaired.
5. Site Cleanup: The applicant shall be responsible for removal of all equipment, material and general construction debris from the subdivision and from
any lot, street, public way or property therein or adjacent thereto. Dumping of such debris into sewers, onto adjacent property or onto other land in
the city is prohibited.
I. Failure To Complete Improvements: If no subdivisionimprovement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, the failure to
complete all required public improvements within the period specified by the city shall result in expiration of tentative map approval. If a subdivision
improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements are not installed pursuant to the terms of
the agreement, the city may:
1. Default: Declare the subdivision improvement agreement to be in default and require that all public improvements be installed regardless of the
extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default;
2. Map Suspension: Suspend final map approval until the public improvements are completed and record a document to that effect with the county
recorder's office for the purpose of public notice;
3. Surety Funds: Obtain funds pursuant to the surety and complete the public improvements by itself or through a third party;
4. Assign Right To Receive Funds: Assign its right to receive funds pursuant to the surety in whole or in part to any third party, including a subsequent
owner of the subdivision or addition for whom the public improvements were not constructed, in exchange for the subsequent owner's agreement to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 352/565
complete the required public improvements; and/or
5. Other Available Rights: Exercise any other rights available under the law. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-6-6: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS; IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS:
Step 1 Applicant meets with zoning official and creates improvement agreement.
Step 2 City attorney reviews and approves/modifies agreement.
Step 3 Improvement agreement submitted to city council with final map application for acceptance.
A. Completion Of Improvements:
1. Required: Except as provided below, before the map is signed as final by the city engineer, all applicants shall be required to complete, to the
satisfaction of the public works director, all street, utility, public utility or association maintained improvements. Additionally, all applicants must
complete lot improvements on the individual residential lots of the subdivision or addition as required by theseregulations to the satisfaction of the
zoning official. The required improvements shall be those specified in the approved tentative or final map.
2. Deed In Escrow: As a condition of final map approval, the city council may require the applicant to deposit in escrow a deed describing by metes and
bounds and conveying to the city all street rights of way, easements and public land required by these regulations, pending acceptance of
improvements by the city and recordation of the final map. In the event the applicant is unable to complete the required improvements, and such
improvements are deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety, the city may compel the delivery of the deed in order to
complete the improvements as required.
B. Improvement Agreement; Guarantee Of Completion Of Public Improvements:
1. Subdivision Improvement Agreement: The city engineer may waive the requirement for the completion of required improvements if the applicant
enters into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the applicant covenants and agrees to commence work upon the required improvements
within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the final map is signed by the city engineer and to complete all required improvements no later than
one year following the date upon which the final map is signed by the city engineer. The public works director, city engineer or zoning official may
require the applicant to complete and dedicate some required public improvements prior to approval of the final map and to enter into a subdivision
improvement agreement for completion of the remainder of the required improvements during such one year period. The city attorney shall approve
any subdivision improvement agreement as to form.
2. Covenants To Run With Land: The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained therein shall run with the land
and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the applicant. The subdivision improvement agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder's
office. All existing lienholders shall be required to subordinate their liens to the covenants contained in the subdivision improvement agreement.
3. Performance Security:
a. Whenever the city engineer permits an applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement, the applicant shall be required to provide
sufficient security to ensure completion of the required public and public utility or association maintained improvements. The amount of the surety
bond may be reduced to exclude public utility improvements upon the presentation of an executed contract with each public utility agreeing and
obligating to provide such improvements. The security shall be in the form of a cash escrow or a suretybond or other surety as approved by the
city attorney.
b. The cash in lieu or surety bond shall be in an amount estimated by the city engineer as reflecting one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the
improvements in the approved construction plan, together with a five percent (5%) contingency and shall be sufficient to cover all promises and
conditions contained in the subdivision improvement agreement.
c. In addition to all other security, when the city participates in the cost of an improvement, the applicant shall provide a performance bond from the
contractor, with the city as a co-obligee.
d. All performance bonds or other surety bonds or other surety shall be with agencies, firms or insurers rated at least an A or A- per "AM Best"
ratings.
e. Existing sureties which are with firms, agencies or insurers rates less than A or A- per "AM Best" rating must be replaced within ninety (90) days of
enactment of the ordinance codified herein.
4. Escrow Agent: If security is provided in the form of a cash escrow, the applicant shall deposit the security with a bank or credit union, a cash amount
or certified check endorsed to the escrow agent for a face value in an amount not less than the amount specified by the zoning official.
5. Accrual: The surety bond or cash escrow account shall accrue to the applicant.
6. Reimbursement: Where oversized facilities are required by the city, the city and applicant shall specify a reimbursement procedure in the subdivision
improvement agreement.
C. Maintenance Bond:
1. Type: The applicant shall guarantee the improvements against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of one year from the date of city
acceptance of such improvements. The maintenance guarantee shall be secured by a surety bond or cash escrow in an amount reflecting ten
percent (10%) of the cost of the completed improvements.
2. Agreement: If the applicant has entered into a subdivision improvement agreement for the completion of required improvements, an appropriate
percentage of the performance bond or cash escrow may be retained by the city in lieu of a maintenance bond.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 353/565
3. No Agreement: If the applicant has not entered into a subdivision improvement agreement, the applicant shall guarantee of the improvements as
required by this subsection. A surety bond or cash escrow totaling ten percent (10%) of thecosts of the completed improvements shall be provided by
the applicant.
D. Temporary Improvements: The applicant shall construct and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the city and shall maintain said
temporary improvements for the period specified.
E. Governmental Units: Governmental units to which these improvement and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the agreement and security, a
certified resolution or ordinance by the officers or directors authorized to act on their behalf, agreeing to comply fully with all applicable provisions of
these regulations.
F. Cost Of Inspection And Testing:
1. Deposit Required: The applicant shall, in addition to the above surety, provide a deposit as shown on the bond estimate for the estimated cost of the
public, public utility or association maintained improvements to provide for the inspection and materials testing during the construction of said public
improvements. This deposit shall be utilized by the city to pay the costs of these services and the city may add a reasonable surcharge (10 percent
or more) to the costs of any such services provided by other than city employees (outside services) to cover the administrative costs of hiring and
coordinating the outside services. If the deposit proves insufficient to cover said costs, the applicant shall be billed for added costs and no
occupancies shall be issued until all such fees are paid in full.
2. Contract: In lieu of the inspection services deposit, the applicant may provide the city with an executed contract providing for the inspection and
testing services by a Nevada registered civil engineer. In such cases, a final report, including daily logs, test results and certification of completeness,
must be provided. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 242, 7-11-2000, eff. 8-3-2000)
9-6-7: FINAL MAP:
Step 1 Applicant files and pays deposit fee for technical review with the zoning official, on behalf of the city engineer.
Step 2 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 3 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 4 Zoning official determines compliance with tentative map.
Step 5 City engineer/zoning official signs final map Mylar.
Step 6 Applicant, or any aggrieved party may appeal decision of zoning official to city council.
Step 7 The approved final map is filed with the county recorder.
A. Purpose: Final map approval is required at the completion of the major subdivision process so that the subdivision map can be recorded, dedications
can be made and building construction can begin.
B. Applicability:
1. Application Required: A final map application must be filed and the final map recorded, prior to the expiration of the tentative map.
2. Approval And Recordation Necessary: Final map approval and recordation are necessary prerequisites to the transfer of any lots on the subject
property or the issuance of any building permits for the development.
C. Application:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for final map approval pursuant to these regulations.
2. Technical Review: Prior to or concurrent with the filing of any final map application with the zoning official, the subdivider shall submit the proposed
final map for technical engineering review, accompanied by the map checking fee.
a. The city engineer shall review the plans, specifications and bond estimates for the subdivision improvements for conformance with the tentative
map conditions and city standards. The subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to the city engineer.
3. Application: A property owner or his/her designated representative shall initiate a final map approval request by filing an application with the zoning
official and paying the final map application fee as determined by the city council.
4. Contents: A final map application shall include:
a. A completed and signed application form;
b. Current, completed, and fully signed property owner affidavits;
c. A sufficient number of copies of the proposed final map as specified on the application;
d. Copies of the additional information required pursuant to subsection D of this section and as specified on the application;
e. The applicable deposit fees for filing and reviewing the map; and
f. An off site agreement in writing on a form provided by the city attorney that the developer will install all of the improvements required herein.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 354/565
A final map shall not be accepted for review after the expiration of the tentative map.
D. Contents: The final map shall be prepared on twenty four inch by thirty two inch (24" x 32") tracing cloth, Mylar or similar quality material at a scale of
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger, unless specifically waived by the zoning official. Each map shall have a one inch (1") margin
along the top, bottom and right edges with a two inch (2") margin along the left edge. The final map shall show or have attached the following
information:
1. Subdivision Name: Name of the subdivision which shall neither duplicate nor too closely resemble the name of any existing subdivision unless this is
the continuation of an existing subdivision;
2. Scale: Date, scale and north arrow on each page. The scale shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') unless specifically waived by the
zoning official, and shall be shown graphically and in feet per inch. Each sheet of the map shall indicate its page number in relation to the total
number of sheets;
3. Acreage: Total acreage of the proposed subdivision to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre if the area is two (2) acres or more; or in square feet if
the area is less than two (2) acres;
4. Boundary Location: The location of the boundary in reference to existing official monuments or the nearest established street lines, including the
angles and distances to such reference points or monuments shall be furnished. The map shall show all monumentation, which shall be installed as
required by the city engineer in a manner that meets or exceeds current minimum standards for property boundary surveys;
5. Location; Bearings; Distances: The location by section, tract, township, range, city, county and state, including descriptive boundaries of the
subdivision based on an accurate traverse giving angular and linear dimensions which shall mathematically close and which shall be tied to the
Virgin Valley geodetic control network grid system. Bearings anddistances of all exterior boundary lines and along the centerlines of streets shall be
furnished;
6. Legal Description: The legal description of the entire parcel to be subdivided;
7. Street Descriptions: The names, lines and right of way widths of all proposed streets;
8. Common Areas And Dedications: Each lot or parcel shall be numbered and each block may be numbered or lettered. Each street shall be named or
otherwise designated. Private streets shall be designated by a street name and the letter (P) in parentheses. For example: Shadow Creek Drive (P).
All lots, parcels, or streets to be held in common ownership shall be designated as lettered lots, and shall have their acreage designated on the plat.
All lots or parcels offered to be dedicated to the city or other public entity for public use shall be designated as lettered lots, and shall have their
acreage designated on the plat. The final map shall conform to the city's street naming and addressing policy;
9. Adjoining Land Boundary Lines: The boundary lines of all adjoining lands for a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') and showing (with dotted
lines) the right of way lines and adjacent streets and alleys with their widths and names;
10. Easements: Easements for rights of way provided for public use, services or utilities, including aviation easements, with figures showing their
dimensions and listing uses that are being provided; all general public utility easements shall be at least ten feet (10') wide along front and back
property lines, and five feet (5') along side property lines, except in PUDs where other easement dimensions may be approved by the city council;
11. Dimensions And Bearings: All dimensions and bearings, both linear and angular, radii and arcs, necessary for locating the boundaries of the
subdivision, blocks, lots, streets, easements, and other areas to be dedicated for public or private use. The linear dimensions are to be expressed in
feet and decimals of a foot;
12. Area In Square Feet: Area in square feet for each lot or parcel under two (2) acres, or in acres to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre if the area is
two (2) acres or more, which shall equal or exceed applicable zoning ordinance requirements;
13. Subdivision Drawing: An accurate drawing of the proposed subdivision with the lots clearly numbered in sequence. If the blocks are to be
numbered or lettered, these should be shown clearly in the center of the block;
14. Construction Drawings: Approved construction drawingsconforming with the requirements of these regulations, for all roadway, grading, sanitary
sewerage system, storm drainage facilities, water distribution system and other pertinent site improvements. Three (3) sets of such construction
drawings shall be submitted and approved prior to recordation of final map;
15. Dedicated Area Boundary Lines: Boundary lines and description of the boundary lines of any areas other than streets and alleys which are to be
dedicated or reserved for public use;
16. Draft Deed Restrictions; Covenants: Two (2) copies of all deed restrictions and/or protective covenants and, if applicable, articles of incorporation
and bylaws of a homeowners' association for the proposed subdivision;
17. Dedication Statement: A statement dedicating all easements, streets, alleys and other public areas not previously dedicated;
18. Other Pertinent Information: Other information pertaining to the proposed development as may be determined to be necessary from time to time by
the planning commission or city council to facilitate review of the final map.
E. Certificates Required: Language shall be provided on the final map that satisfies the intent of the following certificates:
1. Certificate Of Owner Of Land: A signed and acknowledged certificate:
a. Consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map;
b. Offering for dedication that part of the land which the person wishes to dedicate for public use, subject to any reservation contained therein;
c. Reserving any parcel from dedication;
d. Granting any permanent easement for utility installation or access, as designated on the final map, together with a statement approving such
easement, signed by the public utility or person in whose favor the easement is created or whose services are required.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 355/565
2. Certificate Of Title Company: For all common interest communities and for other subdivisions where required by the zoning official, a signed and
acknowledged certificate:
a. Certifying that each person signing the final map owns of record an interest in the land and that all of the owners of record of the land have signed
the final map; and
b. Listing any lien or mortgage holders of record. For a common interest community, the certificate must show that there are no liens against the
common interest community or any part thereof for delinquent state, county, municipal, federal or local taxes or assessments collected as taxes or
special assessments.
c. For the purposes of this section, neither a lien for taxes or special assessment nor a trust interest criteria bond indenture shall be deemed to be an
interest in land.
3. Certificate Of Professional Land Surveyor: A signed and acknowledged certificate in the following form:
SURVEYORS CERTIFICATE
I, (Name of Surveyor), a Professional Land Surveyor licensed in the State of Nevada, certify that:
1. This plat represents the results of a survey conducted under my direct supervision at the instance of (Owner, Trustee, Etc.)
2. The lands surveyed lie within (Section(s), Township, Range, Meridian and, if required by the governing body, a description by metes and bounds
for any subdivision which is divided into lots containing 5 acres in area or less) and the survey was completed on (date).
3. This plat complies with the applicable State statutes and any local ordinances in effect on the date that the governing body or authorized person
gave its final approval.
4. The monuments depicted on the plat are of the character shown, occupy the positions indicated and are of sufficient number and durability.
OR
4. The monuments depicted on the plat will be of the character shown and occupy the positions indicated by (a day certain) and an appropriate
financial guarantee will be posted with the governing body or authorized person before recordation to ensure the installation of the monuments.
Date Name Of Surveyor
License Number And Stamp
4. City Engineer: A signed and acknowledged certificate stating that the city engineer (a licensed professional land surveyor or civil engineer):
a. Has examined the final map;
b. The map is technically correct;
c. If monuments have not been set, that a proper performance bond has been deposited guaranteeing their setting on or before a specified date; and
d. Accepted or rejected on behalf of the public any parcel of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of
dedication.
5. Certificate Of Health Division Of Department Of Human Resources: A signed and acknowledged certificate indicating that the final map is approved
concerning sewage disposal, water pollution, water quality and water supply facilities. This certificate may be issued by the local agency acting
pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 278.335.
6. Water Quantity Certificate:
a. A signed and acknowledged certificate from the Nevada department of conservation and natural resources, division of water resources shall be
included showing that the final map is approved concerning water quantity.
b. A copy of this certificate shall be provided to each purchaser of land before any sale is completed.
c. This statement is not a warranty or representation in favor of any person as to the safety or quantity of such water.
7. Zoning Official Certificate:
a. A signed and acknowledged certificate from the zoning official shall be included showing that the final map is approved, that it substantially
complies with the tentative map and that all conditions have been met. (Ord. 356, 9-26-2006, eff. 10-19-2006)
F. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
G. Substantial Compliance With Tentative Map: The zoning official shall review the map for substantial compliance with the approved or conditionally
approved tentative map. If the final map for a subdivision is found to deviate from the approved tentative map, the applicant will be required tosubmit a
new final map if the deviations are eliminated, or a new tentative map if the deviations are retained. If a new tentative map is required, the applicant
must comply with other applicable land development regulations at the time of resubmittal. Substantial deviations shall include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following:
1. Street Location Or Design: A change in the location or design of a public street;
2. Layout: A change in the layout of lots or blocks;
3. Lot Access: A change in access to lots;
4. Reserved Areas: A change in areas, streets or rights of way to be reserved or dedicated;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 356/565
5. Buffering: A change in the extent of buffering between the proposed subdivision and adjacent areas and/or land uses.
H. Final Map Approval:
1. Guidelines For Decision: The zoning official shall consider the following criteria in making a decision on the final map:
a. The final map substantially conforms to the approved tentative map and any conditions and exceptions granted pursuant thereto;
b. The final map conforms to all applicable requirements of these regulations, the zoning ordinance and other applicable land development
regulations, including Nevada Revised Statutes 278.010 to 278.630 inclusive;
c. All submission requirements of these regulations have been satisfied.
2. Approval: If the proposed final map is approved:
a. The city engineer shall sign and acknowledge a certificate that the city has approved the map and accepted or rejected on behalf of the public any
parcel of land offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication;
b. The zoning official shall certify on the final map that it substantially complies with the tentative map and all conditions have been met;
c. The city engineer shall accept or reject any or all offers of dedication and may, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or
easements, require that the applicant improve or agree to improve the streets or easements. Such agreement, at the determination of the city
engineer may be secured by a good and sufficient bond or othersecurity in an amount determined by the city engineer.
3. Denial: If the final map is denied, the applicant shall be notified pursuant to subsection 9-4-2E of this title. If the time frame for the tentative map has
not expired, the applicant may submit a new final map within the remaining time frame. If the tentative map approval is about to expire, the applicant
may request an extension pursuant to section 9-4-10 of this title and submit a new final map within that time. If the tentative map has expired, the
applicant must submit a new tentative map.
4. Time Extensions: If the subdivider fails to record a final map for any portion of the tentative map within the time required by Nevada Revised Statutes
chapter 278, all proceedings are terminated and a new application is required. The city council may grant extensions as allowed by Nevada Revised
Statutes 278.360.
5. Appeal: Any requirement imposed by the planning commission or zoning official, or other authorized person or agency pursuant to this section may
be appealed to the governing body in accordance with the procedures established in subsections 9-4-9B, "Appeals", and 9-4-9C, "Judicial Appeals",
of this title and Nevada Revised Statutes 278.3195. If such an appeal is filed, the limit on time to record the final map is extended until ten (10) days
after:
a. The decision of the governing body on the appeal; or
b. The decision of the district court, if the decision of the governing body is appealed to the district court.
I. Effect Of Final Map Approval:
1. Right Of Applicant: Final map approval and subsequent recordation shall confer upon the applicant the right to apply for building permits and to
develop the subject tract or parcel pursuant to the terms and conditions pursuant to which the final map approval was granted by the city engineer.
2. Lot Sales: No lot in the subdivision may be sold until the final map has been officially recorded.
3. Title: Title to property dedicated or accepted for streets and easements passes when the final map is recorded. If at the time the final map is
approved any streets are rejected, the offer of dedication shall be deemed to remain open and the governing body or planning commission may by
resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets for public use. Such an
acceptance must be recorded in the office of the city recorder and be so noted by the recorder on the subdivision plot, if the county recorder does not
maintain a cumulative index for such plots and amendments. If such anindex is maintained, the county recorder shall direct an appropriate entry for
the amendment.
J. Filing And Recordation:
1. The developer is responsible for final map recordation by county recorder.
a. The final map shall be recorded within thirty (30) days of the date of signature by the city engineer or the public works director.
2. The county recorder shall not record any final map unless the map:
a. Contains all of the certificates of approval, conveyance and consent required by the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.374
through 278.378 and incorporated in subsection D of this section; and
b. Is accompanied by a written statement signed by the county treasurer of the county in which the land to be divided is located indicating that all
property taxes on the land for the fiscal year have been paid; and
c. The date of signature by the city engineer is not over thirty (30) days old.
3. The responsible professional land surveyor shall furnish to the city engineer a conformed copy of the recorded map or plat within fifteen (15) days
after the date of recording.
4. No city employee or official shall recognize the effect of any map or plat recorded in violation of this code.
K. Improvements To Precede Building Permits: Building permits shall not be issued for any structure within the boundaries of the subdivision until all of the
required improvements have been constructed, are available to each lot in the subdivision, and have been inspected and approved by the public works
director, unless said improvements are subject to a subdivision improvement agreement or bond, or specifically authorized by the city engineer in
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 357/565
conjunction with final map approval. If bonded, no occupancy permit shall be issued until all improvements are complete. (Ord. 356, 9-26-2006, eff. 10-
19-2006)
9-6-8: PARCEL MAPS:
Step 1 Applicant files application or request for waiver with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 Zoning official and director of public works review and act on application or request for waiver.
Step 4 Approved parcel maps filed with county recorder.
A. Purpose: The provision of adequate data concerning land use, utility requirements, traffic impact, streets, easements and dedications is vital to ensure
the continued health, safety and welfare of the city's residents. Recognizing that the significance of this data is reduced for the small scale projects that
are most heavily impacted by cost of producing this data, the city allows alternate procedures for simple resubdivisions, lot splits and the platting of
existing development where only four (4) or fewer lots will be created.
B. Exemptions:
1. Any division of land that is exempt from major subdivision regulation pursuant to subsection 9-6-1C of this chapter shall also be exempt from parcel
mapping.
2. The following shall also be exempt from parcel map requirements:
a. The creation of realignment of a public right of way by a public agency;
b. The creation or realignment of an easement;
c. An adjustment of the boundary line between two (2) abutting parcels or the transfer of land between two (2) owners of abutting parcels which does
not result in the creation of any additional parcels;
d. The lease, transfer or development of space within an apartment building or an industrial or commercial building;
e. Carrying out an order of any court or dividing land as a result of an operation of law;
f. The creation of a lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any other security instrument;
g. The creation of a security or unit of interest in any investment trust regulated under the laws of this state or any other interest in an investment
entity;
h. Conveying an interest in oil, gas, minerals or building materials, which are severed from the surface ownership of real property;
i. Conveying an interest in land acquired by the department of transportation pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 408;
j. Filing a certificate of amendment pursuant to NevadaRevised Statutes section 278.473, section 9-6-10 of this chapter.
C. Application:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for parcel map approval pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or his/her designated representative shall initiate a parcel map request by filing an application with the zoning official
and paying the parcel map request fee as determined by the city council.
3. Contents: A parcel map application shall include the following:
a. A sufficient number of copies of the proposed parcel map as specified on the application;
b. Copies of the additional information required pursuant to subsection D of this section; and
c. A completed application form and paid application fee.
4. Unusual Circumstances: Where unusual circumstances exist, the zoning official may waive the requirement for a parcel map or survey and require in
lieu thereof an unsurveyed parcel map. Before waiving these requirements, the city engineer shall determine that a survey is not required.
D. Contents:
1. Drawing; Scale: The parcel map must be legibly drawn in black waterproof India ink on tracing cloth or produced by the use of other materials of a
permanent nature generally used for that purpose in the engineering profession. The size of each sheet must be twenty four inches by thirty two
inches (24" x 32"). A margin line must be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1") at the top, bottom
and right edges, and of two inches (2") at the left edge along the twenty four inch (24") dimension.
2. Adjoining Landowners: A parcel map must indicate the owner of any adjoining land, or any right of way if owned by the person dividing the land.
3. Area: A parcel map must show the area of each parcel or lot and the total area of the land to be divided in the following manner:
a. In acres, calculated to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre, if the area is two (2) acres or more; or
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 358/565
b. In square feet if the area is less than two (2) acres.
c. All monuments found, set, reset, replaced or removed, describing their kind, size and location and giving other data relating thereto;
d. Bearing or witness monuments, the basis of bearings, bearing and length of lines and the scale of the map;
e. The name and legal designation of the tract or grant in which the survey is located and any ties to adjoining tracts;
f. A memorandum of oaths;
g. The signature of the surveyor;
h. The date of the survey;
i. The signature of the owner or owners of the land to be divided;
j. Any easements granted or dedications made; and
k. Any other data necessary for the intelligent interpretation of the various items and locations of the points, lines and area shown.
l. By appropriate reference to the existing information on which it is based, the tract to be divided and the resulting lots;
m. The means of access to the several lots;
n. The signature of the owner or owners of the land to be divided;
o. Any easements granted or dedications made; and
p. Any other data necessary for an intelligent interpretation of the division and the access.
4. Preparation; Certificate: If a survey is not required for the preparation of a parcel map, the map must be prepared by a professional land surveyor,
but his certificate upon the map may include substantially the following:
This map was prepared from existing information (identifying it and stating where filed or recorded), and the undersigned assumes no
responsibility for the existence of monuments or correctness of other information shown on or copied from any such prior document.
5. Parcel Number; Recording Data: Reference to the parcel number and recording data of a recorded parcel map is acomplete legal description of the
land contained in the parcel.
6. Surveyor Statement: If a record of survey contains two (2) or more lots or parcels, the surveyor or a person for whom the record of survey is made
shall place upon the map thereof a statement of the facts which will clearly show that such record of survey is not in conflict with the requirements of
Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through 278.630, inclusive, and the regulations of transactions pertaining thereto shall be complied with.
E. Application Contents If Parcel Map Waived: If the zoning official determines that the circumstances are unusual enough to warrant waiver of the parcel
map, the applicant shall submit the following information:
1. Legal Description: A legal description of all parts based on a system of rectangular surveys.
2. Dedication Provision: A provision for the dedication or reservation of any road right of way or easement; and
3. Approval Authority: The approval of the authority which granted the waiver.
4. Preparation: If a description by metes and bounds is necessary in describing the parcel division, it must be prepared by a professional land surveyor
and bear his signature and stamp.
5. Statement Of Responsibility: The person preparing the document may include the following statement:
This document was prepared from existing information (identifying it and stating where filed and recorded) and the undersigned assumes no
responsibility for the existence of monuments or correctness of other information shown on or copied from any such prior documents.
6. Taxes Paid: A document recorded pursuant to this section must be accompanied by a written statement signed by the treasurer of the county in
which the land to be divided is located indicating that all property taxes on the land for the fiscal year have been paid. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-
31-1996)
F. Reserved.
G. Action On Parcel Map:
1. Decision: The zoning official and director of public works shall review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprovethe application. (Ord. 382, 8-
28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
2. Conditions: The zoning official and director of public works may impose the following conditions on the application as reasonably necessary:
a. Street grading;
b. Drainage provision;
c. Lot design;
d. Provision for the supply and quality of water and sewage consistent with the existing use of any land zoned for similar use within six hundred sixty
feet (660') of the proposed parcel;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 359/565
e. Off site access;
f. Street alignment, surfacing and width;
g. Such additional improvements as may be reasonably necessary and consistent with the use of the land if it is developed as proposed.
3. Certificate Of Approval: Approval of the parcel map shall be noted by a certificate signed and acknowledged by the zoning official and director of
public works and attached to the parcel map.
4. File With County Recorder: The applicant shall file the approved parcel map with the county recorder.
H. Request For Waiver: The zoning official shall act on a request for waiver within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
I. Appeal: An applicant aggrieved by the zoning official's/director of public works' decision may appeal to the city council within fifteen (15) days pursuant to
subsection 9-4-9B of this title. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
9-6-9: DIVISION OF LAND INTO LARGE PARCELS2:
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 3 City council or planning commission acts on tentative map application.
Step 4 Applicant files final map application.
Step 5 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
Step 6 City council or planning commission acts on final map application.
Step 7 Approved map filed with county recorder.
A. Purpose: The division of land into large parcels allows for the division of large parcels into smaller lots of a specified minimum size.
B. Applicability: A map of division into large parcels will be required where each proposed lot of a subdivision is either:
1. One sixty-fourth (1/64) of a section as described by a government land office survey; or
2. Ten (10) acres in area.
3. The proposed division of land into lots or parcels of at least one section or six hundred forty (640) acres in size shall not be subject to these
provisions.
C. Application:
1. Staff Conference: Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning official and staff review committee to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for the division of land into large parcels pursuant to these regulations.
2. Application: A property owner or his/her designated representative shall initiate a large parcel division request by filing an application with the zoning
official and paying the filing fee as determined by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
3. Contents: A division of land into large parcels application shall include: (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
a. Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees;
b. A sufficient number of copies of the proposed map as determined on the application;
c. Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the map, as provided in subsection D of this section.
4. Tentative Map: The city council may require the filing of the tentative map for a large project. Applicants may requesta waiver on a form filed with the
zoning official.
D. Contents: A tentative map of division into large parcels shall be so titled, shall be prepared and certified by a professional land surveyor and shall
contain the following information:
1. The approximate, calculated or actual acreage of each lot and the total acreage of the land to be divided;
2. All roads or easements of access which exist, are proposed in the applicable master plan or are proposed by the person who intends to divide the
land;
3. Each lot must be accessible by road or easement traversable by vehicles suited to the area, unless this requirement is waived by the governing
body;
4. Any easements for public utilities which exist or which are proposed;
5. Any existing easements for irrigation or drainage, and any normally continuously flowing watercourses;
6. An indication of any existing road or easement which the owner does not intend to dedicate;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 360/565
7. The name and address of the owner of the land. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
E. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
F. Tentative Map Approval:
1. Consideration: The city council or the planning commission, if authorized, shall consider the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
Within sixty (60) days of that meeting, the city council shall designate the location and width of any easements for roads and public utilities as shown
on the master plan, or, if there is no master plan, designate the location and width of any easements for roads and public utilities which may be
reasonably necessary to serve the area to be divided. The city council's opportunity to designate easements expires and is considered waived at the
end of the sixty (60) day period.
2. Final Map: Following city council approval or waiver, the applicant may file a final map with the city council. Approval or waiver shall be good for one
year, after which time a new application must be submitted. Maps that are deemed approved after the sixty (60) days for city council action has
passed shall expire one year after they were first scheduled to be reviewed by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
G. Application For Land In Large Parcels: The applicant shall submit the following information to the zoning official: (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
1. Forms; Fees: Completed application forms and the payment of all application fees;
2. Documents Needed: Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the map.
H. Content Of Land In Large Parcels:
1. A map of division into large parcels shall be:
a. Titled "map of division into large parcels";
b. Filed with the city council or planning commission not later than one year after the date that the tentative map was first filed with the planning
commission or governing body or that the requirement of its filing was waived;
c. Prepared by a professional land surveyor;
d. Based upon an actual survey by the preparer, show the date of the survey or based upon the most recent government survey, and show the date
of approval of the government survey and contain a certificate by the preparer that the parcels contain the number of acres shown for each parcel;
e. Clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof India ink upon good tracing cloth or produced by the use of other materials of a permanent nature
generally used for this purpose in the engineering profession, but affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments must be legibly stamped or printed
upon the map with opaque ink;
f. Twenty four inches by thirty two inches (24" x 32") in size with a marginal line drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank
margin of one inch (1") at the top, bottom and right edges, and of two inches (2") at the left edge along the twenty four inch (24") dimension;
g. Of scale large enough to show clearly all details.
2. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map must be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each
adjoining sheet must be clearly shown.
3. This map must show and define:
a. All subdivision lots by the number and actual acreage of each lot;
b. All roads or easements of access which exist and which theowner intends to offer for dedication, all roads or easements of access which are
shown on the applicable master plan and all roads or easements of access which are specially required by the planning commission or city
council;
c. Any easements for public utilities which exist or are proposed;
d. Any existing easements for irrigation or drainage, and any normally continuously flowing watercourses.
4. The map must be accompanied by a written statement signed by the Clark County treasurer indicating that all property taxes on the land for the
fiscal year have been paid. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
I. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
J. Approval:
1. The city council or planning commission, if authorized, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the final map within forty five (45) days of
submission of a complete application to the city council.
2. If the city council fails to act on the final map within forty five (45) days, it shall be deemed approved unconditionally.
3. If the final map is disapproved, the city council shall return the map to the applicant with:
a. A statement of the reason(s) for its action; and
b. A statement of what changes would be necessary to render the map acceptable.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 361/565
K. Filing:
1. Upon approval, the applicant shall file the map with the county recorder. Filing with the county recorder operates as a continuing:
a. Offer to dedicate for public roads the areas shown as proposed roads or easements of access, which the city council may accept in whole or in
part at any time or from time to time;
b. Offer to grant the easements shown for public utilities, which any public utility may similarly accept without excluding any other public utility whose
presence is physically compatible.
2. The map filed with the county recorder must include:
a. A certificate signed and acknowledged by the owner of land consenting to the dedication of the roads and granting of the easements;
b. A certificate signed by the city clerk that the map was approved, or the affidavit of the person presenting the map for filing that the time limited for
action by the city council has expired;
c. A written statement signed by the Clark County treasurer indicating that all property taxes on the land for the fiscal year have been paid.
3. After a map has been filed with the county recorder, any lot shown thereon may be conveyed by reference to the map, without further description.
L. Recordation Requirements:
1. Maps shall be reviewed by the building official and public works director and recorded in the office of the Clark County recorder within thirty (30) days
of the date of signature by the public works director or the building official.
2. The building official shall convey a copy of the resolution codified herein to the Clark County recorder with a request that no document be recorded
wherein the approval is over thirty (30) days old.
3. The responsible professional land surveyor shall furnish to the building official a conformed copy of the recorded map or plat within fifteen (15) days
after the date of recording. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-6-10: AMENDMENT OF PLATS, SURVEYS AND MAPS:
Step 1 If no change to surveyor's monument or property line, city council instructs surveyor to prepare certificate of amendment.
Step 2 If change to surveyor's monument or property line, city council causes amended plat survey or map be filed.
A. No Change To Surveyor's Monument Or Property Line:
1. If an error or omission is found in any subdivision plat, record of survey, parcel map, map of division into large parcels or reversionary map and the
correction does not change or purport to change the physical location of any survey monument, property line or boundary line, the city engineer or
the city council may cause a certificate of amendment to be filed and recorded. The surveyor who made the survey shall prepare and record the
certificate within ninety (90) daysafter notification by the city engineer or city council. If the surveyor is no longer professionally active in the county,
the county surveyor or a professional land surveyor appointed by the city council or, if authorized by ordinance, the planning commission, shall
prepare the certificate.
2. The certificate of amendment must:
a. Be in the form of a letter addressed to the city engineer or city surveyor;
b. Specify the title and recording date of the document being amended;
c. Concisely state the data being amended and the correction or omission;
d. Be dated, signed and sealed by the surveyor preparing the certificate; and
e. Contain the following statement, dated and signed by the city engineer or surveyor or a professional land surveyor appointed by the city council or,
if authorized by ordinance, the planning commission:
I hereby certify that I have examined the certificate of amendment and that the changes to the original document specified therein are provided
for in applicable sections of Nevada Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through 278.630, inclusive, 625.340 through 625.380, inclusive, and local
ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, and I am satisfied that this certificate of amendment so amends the document as to make it technically
correct.
3. If land affected by the certificate of amendment is located within the boundaries of an incorporated city, a copy of the certificate of amendment must
be delivered to the city surveyor or city engineer.
4. Upon the recording of a certificate of amendment, the county recorder shall cause a proper notation to be entered upon all recorded sheets of the
original document being amended, if the county recorder does not maintain a cumulative index for such amendments. If such an index is maintained,
the county recorder shall direct an appropriate entry for the amendment.
B. Change To Location Of Surveyor's Monument Or Property Line:
1. Authority: If an error or omission is found in any recorded subdivision plat, record of survey, parcel map, map of division in large parcels or
reversionary map, and the correction changes or purports to change the physical locationof any survey monument, property line or boundary line, the
county surveyor or the city council may cause an amended plat, survey or map to be filed and recorded.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 362/565
2. Submission Of Amended Map, Plat Or Survey: Any amendment of a recorded subdivision plat, parcel map, map of division into large parcels or
record of survey which changes or purports to change the physical location of any survey monument, property line or boundary line is subject to the
following requirements:
a. If the proposed amendment is to a parcel map, map of division into large parcels or record of survey, the same procedures and requirements apply
as in the original filing;
b. If the proposed amendment is to a subdivision plat, only those procedures for the approval and filing of a final map and the requirements of
subsection B3 of this section.
3. Requirements: Any amended plat, map or survey must:
a. Be identical in size and scale to the document being amended, drawn in the manner and on the material provided by law;
b. Have the words "amended plat of" prominently displayed on each sheet above the title of the document amended;
c. Have a blank margin for the county recorder's index information;
d. Have a three inch (3") square adjacent to and on the left side of the existing square for the county recorder's information and stamp;
e. Contain the certificates required by Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.374 (subsections 9-6-7E1 and 9-6-7E2 of this chapter) or an order of the
district court of the county in which the land is located that the amendment may be approved without all the necessary signatures if the order is
based upon a finding that a bona fide effort was made to communicate with the necessary persons, that all persons who responded have
consented thereto and that the amendment does not adversely affect the persons who did not respond;
f. Contain a certificate of the professional land surveyor who prepared the amendment stating that it complies with all pertinent sections of Nevada
Revised Statutes sections 278.010 through 278.630, inclusive, and 625.340 through 625,380, inclusive, and with these regulations; and
g. Contain a certificate executed by the appropriate county surveyor, county engineer, city surveyor or city engineer, if he is registered as a
professional land surveyor or civil engineer, stating that he is registered as a professional landsurveyor or civil engineer and stating that he has
examined the document and that it is technically correct.
4. Recording Of Amended Document: Upon recording the amended document, the county recorder shall cause a proper notation to be entered upon all
recorded sheets of the document being amended, if the county recorder does not maintain a cumulative index for such maps and amendments. If
such an index is maintained, the county recorder shall direct an appropriate entry for the amendment. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-6-11: ABANDONMENT OF MAPS:
Step 1 Applicant files application and fee with zoning official.
Step 2 Zoning official determines completeness of application.
A. Purpose: This section provides for the reversion or abandonment of recorded maps of land division.
B. Applicability: Any owner seeking to revert or abandon any of the following land divisions shall submit an application pursuant to this section:
1. Subdivision map;
2. Parcel map;
3. Map of division into large parcels; or
4. Any part thereof. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
C. Application: The applicant shall file the following with the zoning official: (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
1. A sufficient number of copies of the proposed reversion map as specified on the application;
2. Copies of all other information required by this section as specified on the application; and
3. The applicable map review fee as determined by the city council;
4. If any public streets or easements are to be abandoned, the applicant must first comply with the provisions of section 9-5-6 of this title.
D. Contents: The map of the proposed abandonment or reversion shall:
1. Contain the same survey dimensions as the recorded map;
2. Contain the certificates required by subsection 9-6-7E of this chapter;
3. Be prepared by a professional land surveyor registeredpursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 625. The professional land surveyor shall state in his
certificate that the map has been prepared from information on a recorded map that is being abandoned or reverted. The professional land surveyor
may state in his certificate that he assumes no responsibility for the existence of the monuments or for correctness of other information shown on or
copied from the document. The professional land surveyor shall include in his certificate, recording information which is sufficient to identify clearly
the recorded map being reverted or abandoned;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 363/565
4. Be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof India ink upon good tracing cloth or produced by the use of other materials of a permanent nature
generally used for such a purpose in the engineering profession, but affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments must be legibly stamped or printed
upon the map with opaque ink;
5. The size of each sheet of the map must be twenty four inches by thirty two inches (24" x 32"). A marginal line must be drawn completely around
each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1") at the top, bottom and right edges, and of two inches (2") at the left edge along the
twenty four inch (24") dimension;
6. The scale of the map must be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets must be used to accomplish this end;
7. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map must be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each
adjoining sheet must be clearly shown. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
E. Reserved. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
F. Approval: The city council, or the planning commission if authorized by ordinance, shall review and approve, conditionally approve or deny the
reversion/abandonment map.
1. If the city council denies the application, it shall return the map to the applicant along with:
a. A statement of the reason(s) for denial; and
b. An explanation of the changes necessary to bring the map into compliance.
2. If the city council approves the map, the city clerk shall file the map with the county recorder. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 7
ZONING DISTRICTS
9-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
In order to classify and segregate the uses of land and buildings, the following districts are hereby established (see also table 9-7:1 of this chapter):
LR Land reserve
A Agriculture
RE-1 Rural ranch
RE-2 Rural estates
RE-3 Rural residential
SF Single-family residential
MF-1 Attached housing
MF-2 Multi-family low density
MF-3 Multi-family medium density
MF-4 Multi-family high density
RV RV/motor home
MH Manufactured housing
CR-1 Commercial-neighborhood
CR-2 Commercial-general
PB Professional/business office
IR-1 Industrial-light
IR-2 Industrial-heavy
HT Hotel-tourist
PF Public facility
PROS Parks, recreation and open space
PUD Planned unit development
M-H Mobile home special district
CR-3 Commercial-central business district
CR-4 Commercial-auto mall
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 364/565
CR-H Commercial-hospital services
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7-2: MASTER PLAN LAND USE AND ZONING MAP:
A. Incorporated: The boundaries of all zoning districts shall be shown on the official master plan land use and zoning map of Mesquite, Nevada ("land use
and zoning map"). The land use and zoning map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, district boundaries and other information
thereon, is incorporated by reference into this section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Original Record: The land use and zoning map and a record of all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning official and shall
constitute the original record, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of all property within the city.
C. Changes; Amendments: Changes in the boundaries of any zoning district, in accordance with the provisions of the UDO shall be reflected on the land
use and zoning map promptly upon approval of the amendment by the city council. All amendments to the zoning map shall be signed and attested to
by the zoning official.
D. Preparation: The land use and zoning map may be prepared in sections as may be required to adequately portray the boundaries of all zoning districts.
The land use and zoning map may include supplemental land use and zoning maps to portray street classifications, boundaries of areas subject to
specific limitations or exceptions or such other information as may be required by the UDO.
E. Adoption Of New Map: In the event that the land use and zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret by reason of the nature
or number of changes and additions, the city council may, by ordinance, adopt a new land use and zoning map, which shall supersede the prior land
use and zoning map; provided however, that the new land use and zoning map shall reflect the prior zoning district boundaries unless changed
pursuant to law. (Ord. 434, 2-23-2010)
9-7-3: ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
A. Divided Site: Wherever a site is divided by a district boundary, the zoning regulations applicable within each district shall apply to each portion of the site
situated in a separate district.
B. Determination Of Boundaries: The following rules shall apply in the determination of the boundaries of any district shown on the zoning map:
1. Where boundaries approximate street and alley lines or other identifiable property or boundary lines, such lines shall be construed to be the district
boundary. Where such boundaries are shown as being within street and alley lines or within identifiable rights of way or creeks, the centerline thereof
shall be construed to be the district boundary;
2. Where a district boundary divides an unsubdivided parcel, the location of the district boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on the zoning map, unless indicated by dimensions;
3. Map codes or symbols indicating the classification of property on the zoning map apply to the entire area within the district boundaries;
4. Where a street, alley or right of way is officially vacated or abandoned, the zoning regulations applicable to the abutting property shall apply to the
centerline of the vacated or abandoned street, alley or right of way; and
5. Should any uncertainty remain as to the location or meaning of a boundary indicated on the zoning map, said uncertainty shall be resolved by the
zoning official, whose decision may be appealed to the BZA.
C. Classification Defined: When these regulations refer to the "classification" of property, the term "classification" means the zone or district applicable to
the property. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7-4: USES NOT PROVIDED FOR IN ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
A. Zoning Official; Decision: Table 9-7:2 summarizes the uses authorized within each zoning district. The table should be used for reference purposes only;
uses other than those specifically authorized in the district regulations as uses permitted as of right, uses permitted by conditional use permit,
accessory uses or planned uses in each district may be allowed only if the zoning official finds that such uses are:
1. Similar in character to an authorized use; and
2. Will have no greater adverse effect on adjacent properties or the surrounding area than the authorized uses.
B. Appeal: Such decisions may be appealed to the city council by the applicant or adjacent property owners.
C. Introduction To City Council: All interpretations made by the zoning official pursuant to this section shall be appended to the udo and introduced before
the city council as amendments to the UDO annually. If, after introduction, the city council fails to adopt an interpretation of the zoning official's as an
amendment to the UDO, that interpretation shall be null, void and of no legal effect. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7-5: PROHIBITED CONVERSIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 365/565
Unless expressly provided for in these zoning regulations, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for, or converted to, any use other than
those authorized for the district in which the use is located. No building or portion thereof designed and constructed as a residential building shall be
changed to an office, retail or business use of any type, except as provided herein. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-7-6: TABLES:
Table 9-7:1
Mesquite Zoning Districts
Plan Category Zoning District Lot Size Existing District
Zone District Name
Abbreviation
Acres
Square
Footage
DU/
Gross
Acre
Land reserve Land reserve (LR)
Agriculture Agriculture (A) 10
Rural estates Rural ranch
Rural estates
Rural residential
(RE-1)
(RE-2)
(RE-3)
5.0
1.5
0.5 21,780
0.2
0.67
2.0
Residential agricultural/residential agricultural
special
Rural estates residential
Single-family
residential
Single-family (SF) 0.3 7,000 3.3
Multi-family
residential
Attached housing
Multi-family low density
Multi-family medium density
Multi-family high density
(MF-1)
(MF-2)
(MF-3)
(MF-4)
0.16
0.125
0.8
0.055
7,000
5,445
3,630
2,420
6.2
8
12
18 Multiple-family
Planned development
Planned development (PUD) Planned development
RV/motor home RV/motor home (RV) 3 20 RVP recreational vehicle park
Mobile home Manufactured housing (MH) 5 6,500 5 M-H mobile home
Commercial and retail
Commercial-neighborhood
Commercial-general
(CR-1)
(CR-2)
2 (dst)
C-C shopping center
C-1 general commercial
Professional/
business office
Professional/
business office
(PB)
Industrial/
research
Industrial-light
Industrial-heavy
(IR-1)
(IR-2) 5 (dst)
M-D designed manufacturing/and M-1 light
manufacturing
Hotel and tourist Hotel (HT) 2 acres
H limited resort and apartment
Public facilities Public facilities (PF) PF public facilities
Parks/recreation Parks, recreation and open
space
(PROS)
Recreation
Open space Parks, recreation and open
space
(PROS) Open space
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
Table 9-7:2
Use Matrix
Proposed
Districts
LR
A
PR
OS
RE-
1
RE-
2
RE-
3
SF MF-
1
MF-
2
MF-
3
MF-
4
CR-
1
CR-
2
PB
IR-
1
IR-
2
HT
MH
RV
PF
CR-
3
CR-
4
CR
H
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 366/565
Uses
Accessory
buildings
A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Accessory
dwellings
A A A A
Accessory
structure
A A A A A A
Accessory
uses
A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Accounting and
bookkeeping
P
Active and
passive open
spaces
P
Adult uses C
Advertising
agency
P
Agricultural
uses
P
C A A
Aircraft and
motor vehicle
assembly
P
Aircraft
maintenance,
storage
C
Aircraft related
products, sales
or storage
C
Airline
company office
P
Airplane broker
P
Airports and
heliports
C
Alcoholic
beverage
sales
(accessory
to restaurant)
C
Amphitheater C
Amusement
arcade
C
Amusement
devices, sales
and service
C
Animal
byproducts
plant
P
Animal hospital
(large animal)
C C
Antique
restoration
P A
Antique shop P P P
Apartment C P P P
Apiaries A
A A A
Appliance
sales, rental,
repair
P C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 367/565
Art galleries P P P P
Art needlework
shop
P P
Art shop and
artists' supplies
P P P
Art studio or
school
P
Assembly P
Athletic,
sporting goods
store
P P
Attached
housing
P P P
Automobile
accessory
store
P P
Automobile
sales, rental,
and service
facilities
C C P
Automobile/
tourist court
C
Automobile
wrecking
and/or bailing
C C
Automotive
service station
C C C
Aviaries A
A A A C
Baby formula
service
Bakery, retail P P P
Bakery,
wholesale
C P
Banks, savings
and loans,
credit unions
P P P
Bar, lounge,
tavern
C C C
Barbershop P P P
Beauty shop or
parlor
P P P
Bed and
breakfast inns
C C C C C P
Beer and/or
wine sales
C
Bible and
church supplies
P
Bicycle/
pedestrian
trails
P
Bicycle sales,
repair
P P P
Billing service P
Birthing center
P
Blacksmith
shop
P
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 368/565
Blast furnace C
Blueprinting P C
Boarding/
rooming
houses
C C C C P
Boat building or
repair
P
Boat sales,
service
C P
Body apparel
shop (new)
P
Boiler works C
Bookbinding P P
Books, new
(used
accessory)
P
Bottling plant P
Brewery C C
Broadcast
studios
C
Brokerage
house
P
Building
materials
storage or
sales yard
C P
Business
offices for
healthcare,
health services
and support
organizations
P
Business
school
C
Cabinet shop
or furniture
manufacture
P P
Cafe or
cafeteria
P
Cameras and
film, retail
(photo finishing
accessory)
P
Campgrounds
P C
C
Candy
manufacturing
P P
Candy store P P
Canning and
preserving
facilities
P
Car wash C C
Carbonated
water sales
P
Caretaker and
security guard
quarters
A A A A
Carpet and rug,
retail (cleaning
accessory)
C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 369/565
Casino C
Catering
service
P P C C
Cemeteries C
C C C C C C C C
Ceramic
products, retail
P
Ceramics
manufacture
C C
Check cashing/
deferred
deposit
services
C C
Chemical
laboratories
P
Chemical
manufacturing
plant
P
Chemicals,
agriculturalwholesale
C
Childcare
facilities
C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Childcare
facilities (as
part of an
employee
benefit
program)
P
China, silver
and glass sales
Christmas tree
sales
P
Cigar store P
Cleaning and
dyeing plant
P P
Clock, retail
(repair
accessory)
P
Clothing,
accessory
store
P
Clothing sale
(used)
C
Clothing sale,
retail (new)
P
Coffee shop
(breakfast,
lunch)
P
Coin/stamp
shop
(new/used)
C
Collection
agency
P P P
Communication
service
facilities
P
Community
residence -
family
P
P P P P P P P P P
Community C C C C C P P P P C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 370/565
residence -
transitional
Compost
facilities
P
Computer
sales, repair
C P P
Condominium
hotel
C
Condominiums
P P P
Confectionery P
Consumer
credit offices
Convenience
market
P C
Copying,
reproduction
Cosmetic
manufacture or
packaging
P
Costume rental
(sales,
accessory)
P P P
Creamery P P
Credit bureau P
Crop farming P P
A A A
Dairy farming C
C C C
Dairy
production,
packaging or
bottling
P
Dancing school
P
Data
processing
center
P
Decks,
gazebos,
gardens
A
A A A A A A A A A A A A
Delicatessen C P P
Dental clinics P P P P
Department
store
P P
Detached
garage
A
Detective or
police agency
P
Diagnostic
imaging
P
Discount store P
Dog grooming P P
Dog pound P
Drapery and
curtain store
P P P
Draying,
freighting or
P
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 371/565
trucking yard or
terminal
Dress or
dressmaking
shop
P P
Drive-in
restaurants
C P
Drivethrough
restaurants
C P
Drugstore P
Dry cleaning C
Dry cleaning
collection office
P P C
Dry goods
store
P P
Duplex P P P P
Duplication P P
Dwellings,
multi-family
P P P P
Dwellings,
single-family
detached
P
P P P P C C C C
Eating and
drinking places
C P C C P
Eating and
drinking
places
(nonalcoholic)
P P C P P P
Education and
scientific
research
P
Education
(healthcare
related
programs)
P
Electric or neon
signs or
billboard
manufacture
P
Electric plating
P P
Electrical
appliances,
retail (new)
P
Electrical repair
service
P
Electronic
equipment
sales
P P P
Embroidery
store
P P P
Employee
housing
C
C C
Employment
agency
P
Engineering
office
P
Equipment
rental (within a
C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 372/565
building)
Existing
residential
dwellings
P P
Express office P
Fabric and
sewing
materials shop
P P
Facility for
intermediate
care
C C C C
Facility for
skilled nursing
C C C C
Factory outlet
stores, retail
C
Fairgrounds C
Farmers'
market
C
Feed and fuel
yards and
asphaltic oil
storage
P
Feed, cereal or
flour mill
P
Filing
equipment and
office supplies,
retail (new)
C
Filling station
(no repair,
convenience
market
accessory)
C
Finance
company
P
Firing ranges,
gun clubs
C
Flea markets,
swap meets
C
Floor covering,
retail
C
Flower or florist
shop
P P P P
Flower or seed
processing and
sale
P
Food products
manufacture or
processing
P
Fortune telling C
Foundries P
Fountain
equipment and
supply
P P
Fraternal
association,
nonalcoholic
P
Freight
terminals
P
Fruit and P P
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 373/565
vegetable store
Fruit or fruit
juice bar
P P
Fur sales and
storage
Furniture sales,
repair
P C
Furrier, retail
(new)
P
Furrier, retail
(used)
C
Gaming
(limited)
C
Gaming
(unlimited)
C
Garage, public
(parking)
C A
Garden
supplies
C P C
Garment
manufacture
P
Gasoline sales
C C
Gift shop P P C P P
Golf courses C
C C C C C C C
Grazing uses C P
C P P C
Grease or oil
compounding
C
Greenhouse,
incidental to
retail sale of
flowers, etc.
C
Greenhouses
P
P
Grocery store P P
Guest cottages
A
C C C
Guest ranches
A
C C C
Guesthouses/
casitas
A
Guns, retail C
Gunsmith C C
Handyman
shop
C
Hardware
stores, retail
P P C
Hat shop P P
Hazardous
materials
facility
C
Health food
products, retail
P
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 374/565
Heating and air
conditioning
sales, supply
and repairs
P P
Hemstitching
and pleating
shop
Herbs, retail P
Hobby store P
Hog farms C
Home
occupations
C
C C C C C C C C
Homes of more
than 2 stories
C
Horse ranches
P
P P P C C C C
Horse trails C P
P P P P C C C C
Hospice P
Hospital,
including acute
or specialty
care
P
Hospital or
medical
supplies
P P
Hotels, motels C P C
House cleaning
and repair
P
Household
merchandise
and furnishings
sales
P
Ice and cold
storage
P
Ice cream
parlor, malt
shop
P P P
Imports goods,
retail
P
Indian goods,
retail
P
Inns P
Insurance
office
P P
Interior
decorating
studio
P P P P
Janitor and
building
cleaning
service
C
Jewelry sales,
repair
P
Jukebox
(rental, sales,
service,
accessory)
C
Kennels C
C P
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 375/565
Key and lock
service
P P
Knit shop, retail
(classes,
accessory)
P
Laboratories,
experimental
P P
Laboratory
(medical,
dental and
veterinarian)
C C
Launderette C C C C C C
Laundry,
professional
P
Library, public
or private
P P P
Linen shop P
Liquor store
(retail, A273
package)
C C
Livestock feed
yard
C
C
Livestock sales
yard
C
C
Locksmith P
Lodges C
Lodging
houses
C
Lumberyard P P
Lunchroom P
Machine shop P P
Magazine sales
P
Mail order
house
C
Mail services,
parcel post,
post boxes
P
Managers'
apartments
A A
Manufactured
homes
P
P P P P
Manufacturing P
Market (fruit
and vegetable),
retail
P
Market (meat
and fish), retail
C P
Medical/
pathological
laboratories
P
Medical spas P P P P P
Messenger
service
P
Microbrewery
Millinery
Mixing plant for C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 376/565
cement, mortar,
plaster or
paving
materials
Mobile home
dealers
C
Mobile home
estates
C
Mobile home
parks
C
Monument
sales
P
Mortgage
company
P P P P
Motion picture
production
P
Motor homes P
Museums P
C C C C C C P P P
Music store,
studio or
school
P
News dealers
or stands
P P
Notary P
Notion store P
Nursing home P
Office,
business or
professional
P P P P
Office,
educational
P P P P
Office, medical
or dental
P P P P P
Oil and water
well surveying
and servicing
P
Optician P
Paint store,
retail
C
Palmistry
establishments
C
Parking lot
(commercial)
C P A
Parks and
recreation
areas and
facilities
P P
P P P P P P P P P C C C C C P P C
Pawnshop C
Perfume, retail
P
Pet grooming C
Pet shop P P C
Pharmacy P P P
Photographic
studio
P P P P
Photographic
supplies
P P
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 377/565
Picture framing
C
Plant nursery P
P P P P
Playgrounds P
P P P P P P P P P
Plumbing yard
and shop
P
Pottery shop
and ceramics
P P
Poultry raising C
Precast
concrete fence
manufacture
C
Pressing,
alteration
P P
Printing,
lithography and
publishers
C P
Private
nonprofit
societies
C
Psychiatric or
substance
abuse facility
P
Public parks/
open space
P
Public, quasipublic
and
institutional
facilities and
uses
C C
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P C C
Quick copy
establishments
P P P
Radio service
or repair
C
Radio, stereo
store
P
Radio studio
(no antennas)
C
Real estate
office
C C C C C C C P
Recreational
areas
C
Recreational
vehicle park
C P
Rehabilitation
facility
P
Religious
assembly
P
P P P P P P P P C P C C P P C P P C
Research
laboratories
P
Residential
dwelling
P
Resort hotels P C
Resource
extraction
C
Restaurant C P C P C C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 378/565
Retail shops P P P C
Riding
academies and
boarding
stables
P
C C C C
Rubber and
metal stamp,
retail (shop
accessory)
P
Rubber
fabrication
P
Salvage and
yard bailing
C
Sandwich shop
P C
Schools P
P P P P P P P P
Security sales,
stock
brokerages and
similar uses
P P P P
Sewing
machine store
P
Sheet metal
shop
P P
Shoe
manufacture
C C
Shoe sales,
repair
P P
Shoeshine
stand
P
Soda fountains
P
Souvenir store
Spa C
Sporting
goods, retail
P P
Sports courts A C P
Stables,
commercial
and private
C
C
Stained glass,
retail (studio
accessory)
P
Stationery
store and
bookstore
P P
Stoneworks P
Storage or
service yard
P
Storage space
for contractor's
equipment,
transit and
transportation
equipment
C
Storage
warehouse/
ministorage
P
Street vendors C
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 379/565
Supper club C C C
Surgery center
P
TV repair shop
C
TV store, retail
(new)
P
Tailor (new
sales;
alteration,
accessory)
P P
Tattoo
establishments
C C
Tax return
preparation
office
P P
Taxi stand C C C C
Taxicab office C
Taxidermist P
Tea room or
shop
P P
Telegraph
office
P
Telephone
company office
P
Telephone
exchange
Telephone
sales
P P P
Tennis club C P
Textile mills P
Theaters,
drive-in
C P
Theaters,
indoor
P
Timesharing
apartments
C C C C C
Tire rebuilding,
recapping or
retreading
C P
Townhomes P P P P
Toy store P P
Transient
lodging
establishment
C C P P
Travel bureau P P C P
Triplex P P P
Truck stop P
Union hall C P
Upholstery
shop
P P P
Urgent care P
Utility office
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 380/565
Vacation home
rental
P/C1
P/C1
P/C1
P/C1
P/C1
P/C1
P/C1
P/C1
Vacation plan
sales
C
Variety store P
Veterinarian P C
Veterinary
clinics (small
animal)
C P
Vocational
school
C
Wallpaper store
Warehouses
and
warehouse
complexes
P P
Wastepaper or
rag collection
and bailing
P P
Watch and
clock sales and
repair shop
P
Wedding
chapel
C
Wholesale fuel
sale
P
Wholesale
sales
C
Wildlife
preserves
P P
P P C C C C C C
Zero lot line
development/
attached
homes
C P
Note:
1. This use shall only be permitted in subdivisions/projects whose covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CCRs) and/or bylaws, or design standards
handbook expressly permit vacation home rentals, otherwise this use shall only be permitted with the issuance of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. per correspondence dated 12-5-2007; per correspondence dated 5-15-2008; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-
2008; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 466, 9-25-2012, eff. 10-16-2012; Ord. 455, 10-23-2012)
TABLE 9-7:3
BULK AND OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS SUMMARY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Minimum
Development
Standards LR A RE-1 RE-2 RE-3 SF MF-1 MF-2 MF-3 MF-4
Minimum lot size 10 acres
10
acres
5 acres
1.5
acres
0.5 acre
7,000 sq.
ft.
4,600
sq. ft./du
7,000 sq.
ft.
7,000 sq.
ft.
7,000 sq.
ft.
Maximum height 2
stories/
35 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
2 stories/
35 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
2 stories/
35 feet
2 stories/
35 feet
2 stories/
35 feet
Maximum density 0
du/acre
1 du/
10
acres
1 du/
5 acres
1 du/
1.5
acres
2
du/acre
3 du/acre 8
attached
du/acre
8 du/acre 8 du/acre,
12 with
CUP
8 du/acre,
18 with
CUP
Minimum setbacks1
Front
Side
50 feet
30 feet
50 feet
30 feet
40
feet2
40 feet2
20 feet
40 feet2
20 feet
20 feet2
10 feet
25 feet
5 feet
20 feet3
5 feet
20 feet3
5 feet
20 feet
5 feet
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 381/565
Rear
Street side
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
20 feet
40 feet
40 feet
40 feet
40 feet
40 feet
40 feet
20 feet
25 feet
20 feet
15 feet
20 feet
15 feet
20 feet
15 feet
20 feet
15 feet
Minimum width 250 feet
250 feet
250
feet
250 feet
100 feet
70 feet 80 feet 70 feet 70 feet 70 feet
Minimum depth 200 feet
300 feet
300
feet
300 feet
140 feet
100 feet 115 feet
100 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Maximum roofed area 15,000
sq. ft.
15% 20% 20% 30% 50% 50% 40% 40% 40%
Minimum percentage open
space/lot
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 20% 20% 20% 20%
Notes:
1. See also table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements in the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3 and MF-4 districts.
2. Single-family setback is 35 feet from collector street right of way; 50 feet from arterial street right of way.
3. Front setback is 25 feet from arterial street right of way.
Table 9-7:3
Bulk And Open Space Regulations Summary
Nonresidential Districts
Minimum
Development
Standards
RV/Motor
Home MH CR-1 CR-2 CR-3 CR-4 CR-H PB IR-1 IR-2 HT PF
Minimum district size 3 acres 5 acres
2
acres
n/a n/a 20 acres;
5 dealerships
n/a n/a n/a 5
acres
2
acres
n/a
Minimum lot size n/a 6,500
sq. ft.
n/a n/a 6,000
sq. ft.
200,000
sq. ft./
dealership
n/a n/a n/a 20,000
sq. ft.
2
acres
n/a
Maximum height n/a 1 story/
16 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
4
stories/
70 feet
2 stories/
35 feet
3
stories/
50 feet
2
stories/
35 feet
1
story/
25
feet
2
stories/
35 feet
3
stories;
9 with
CUP to
100
feet
3 stories/
50 feet;
additional
stories
with
CUP
minimum
setbacks
Minimum setbacks1
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
see district 20 feet
5 feet
14 feet
15 feet
20 feet
0 feet
0 feet
0 feet
10 feet
0 feet
0 feet
0 feet
10 feet
0 feet
0 feet
0 feet
10 feet
5 feet
5 feet
15 feet
20 feet
15 feet
25 feet
15 feet
20 feet
0 feet
0 feet
15 feet
10
feet
5
feet
5
feet
5
feet
20 feet
10 feet
10 feet
20 feet
20 feet
5 feet
20 feet
15 feet
20 feet
10 feet
10 feet
25 feet
Maximum roofed area n/a 50% 25% 60% 60% 60% 50% 80% 60%
60% 60% 30%
Maximum density 20 du/acre 5
du/acre
n/a n/a -- n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Minimum building
setback next to
residential zone
20 feet 20 feet
40 feet
40 feet
40 feet
40 feet 40 feet
30 feet
50
feet
50 feet
40 feet
40 feet
Minimum percentage
open space/lot
20% 20% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15% 15%
15% 15% --
Note:
1. See also table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
ARTICLE A. LAND RESERVE (LR)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 382/565
9-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The land reserve district is intended as a designation for large parcels of land acquired by the city through land trade, purchase or annexation upon which
adequate public services and facilities are unavailable, or for which a determination of the most appropriate zoning district is precluded by a lack of
economic, demographic, geographic or other data customarily utilized in establishment of permanent district classifications. This district is appropriate only
in the land reserve plan category and only those uses which are of an unquestionably interim nature, or will not prematurely commit the land to a particular
use pattern or intensity of development are allowable within the LR district. Upon submission of a development application for any use not specified herein,
property designated as land reserve must also be rezoned to an appropriate classification. The land reserve district corresponds to and implements the
land reserve master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Campgrounds.
Communication service facilities.
Crop farming.
Open space.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Recreation.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Grazing uses (sheep, horse, cattle).
Horse trails.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Resource extraction. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
9-7A-4: ACCESSORY USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7A-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7A-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the LR district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:4 of this section, in addition to the standards established in other sections
of these regulations.
Table 9-7:4
Minimum lot size 10 acres
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building setbacks:
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
50 feet
30 feet
50 feet
50 feet
Minimum lot width 250 feet
Minimum lot depth 300 feet
Maximum roofed area 15,000 square feet
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 187, 6-10-1997)
9-7A-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 383/565
All buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7A-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7A-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses authorized in this district. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
ARTICLE B. AGRICULTURE (A)
9-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The agriculture district (A) is intended to help retain large tracts of land for agriculture purposes and to minimize conflicts between agricultural uses and
adjacent development. The principal purpose of this district is to provide for large tracts of open land (10 acres or more) devoted to active agricultural and
open space uses, including crop farming, animal raising, pasture and grazing, with related residential and farm structures and equipment. The agricultural
district corresponds to and implements the agriculture master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-
2000)
9-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Agriculture use.
Community residence - family.
Crop farming.
Dwellings, single-family detached.
Grazing uses.
Greenhouses.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Manufactured homes1.
Museums.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Plant nursery.
Playgrounds.
Religious assembly.
Riding academies and boarding stables.
Schools.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 443, 1-25-
2011, eff. 2-17-2011)
9-7B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Campgrounds.
Cemeteries.
Community residence - transitional.
Dairy farming.
Employee housing.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 384/565
Golf courses.
Hog farms.
Home occupations2.
Kennels.
Livestock feedyard.
Livestock sales yard.
Poultry raising, commercial.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Stables, commercial and private. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011)
9-7B-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Apiaries.
Aviaries.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Guest cottages.
Guest ranches.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7B-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7B-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the A district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:5 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations. Unless otherwise approved by city council, all lots will be a minimum of two hundred fifty feet by three hundred feet
(250' x 300') and at least ten (10) acres in size.
Table 9-7:5
Minimum lot size 10 acres
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet*
Minimum building setbacks:
Front 50 feet
Side 30 feet
Rear 50 feet
Street side 50 feet
Minimum lot width 250 feet
Minimum lot depth 300 feet
Maximum roofed area 15 percent
*Silos and other agricultural structures may be constructed to a height of up to fifty five feet (55'); provided, that they are located a distance equal to or
greater than their height from all property lines. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 187, 6-10-1997; Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7B-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces. All other buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section
9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7B-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 385/565
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-
2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7B-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited, excepting farming machinery, farm products and temporary storage of road materials.
C. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Fencing: Fencing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
E. Fencing Height: Fencing height shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
F. Building On Unplatted Land: Prior to issuance of a building permit for any nonagricultural use (e.g., residential structure) in the agriculture district, a site
plan shall be prepared and submitted for review and approval by the zoning official, pursuant to the regulations of section 9-5-4 of this title. The site
plan shall show the lot for which the building permit application is requested and the proposed structures and existing streets adjoining the tract.
Although a subdivision plan is not required, a metes and bounds description of the tract relative to the section or quarter section shall be required.
G. Sanitary Sewers; On Site Sewage Disposal Systems: Sanitary sewers and on site sewage disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of
section 9-8-7 of this title.
H. Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996;
amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
ARTICLE C. RURAL RANCH (RE-1)
9-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The rural ranch district is intended to provide low density uses with a minimum lot size of five (5) acres. Residents of this district will be allowed to maintain
a limited number of large animals and accessory buildings in a quiet, rural setting without maintaining a large agricultural operation. This district is
appropriate as a transition between agriculture and higher density single-family uses, where urban public facilities and services will not be provided for an
extended period of time. The rural ranch district corresponds to and implements the rural estates master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Dwellings, single-family detached.
Grazing uses.
Greenhouses.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Manufactured homes1.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Plant nursery.
Playgrounds.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Vacation home rental2.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 443, 1-25-
2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 455, 10-23-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 386/565
9-7C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Campgrounds.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Community residence - transitional.
Dairy farm.
Employee housing.
Guest cottages.
Guest ranches.
Home occupations3.
Livestock feedyard.
Livestock sales yard.
Museums.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Riding academies and boarding stables.
Vacation home rental4. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 455, 10-
23-2012)
9-7C-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Apiaries.
Aviaries.
Crop farming.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7C-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7C-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the RE-1 district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:6 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations. Unless otherwise approved by city council, all lots will be a minimum of two hundred fifty feet by three hundred feet
(250' x 300') and a minimum of five (5) acres.
Table 9-7:6
Minimum lot size 5 acres
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building setbacks:
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
40 feet
20 feet
40 feet
40 feet
Minimum lot width 250 feet
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 387/565
Minimum lot depth 300 feet
Maximum roofed area 20 percent
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 187, 6-10-1997; Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7C-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces. All other buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section
9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7C-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-
2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7C-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited, excepting farming machinery, farm products and temporary storage of road materials.
C. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Fencing: Fencing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
E. Fencing Height: Fencing height shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
F. Sanitary Sewers; On Site Sewage Disposal Systems: Sanitary sewers and on site sewage disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of
section 9-8-7 of this title.
G. Farming Use: Farming uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
H. Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996;
amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
ARTICLE D. RURAL ESTATES (RE-2)
9-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The rural estates district is intended to provide low density uses with a minimum lot size of one and one-half (11/2) acres. Residents of this district will be
allowed to maintain a limited number of large animals and accessory buildings in a quiet, rural setting without maintaining a large agricultural operation.
This district is appropriate as a transition between agriculture and higher density single-family uses, where urban public facilities and services will not be
provided for an extended period of time. The rural estates district corresponds to and implements the rural estates master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Dwellings, single-family detached.
Grazing uses.
Greenhouses.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Manufactured homes1.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 388/565
Plant nursery.
Playgrounds.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Vacation home rental2. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 443, 1-
25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 455, 10-23-2012)
9-7D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Community residence - transitional.
Dairy farm.
Employee housing.
Guest cottages.
Guest ranches.
Home occupations3.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Riding academies and boarding stables.
Vacation home rental4.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 455, 10-23-
2012)
9-7D-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Agricultural uses, noncommercial.
Apiaries.
Aviaries.
Crop farming.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7D-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7D-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the RE-2 district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:7 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations.
Table 9-7:7
Minimum lot size 1.5 acres
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 389/565
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building setbacks:
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
40 feet
20 feet
40 feet
40 feet
Minimum lot width 250 feet
Minimum lot depth 300 feet
Maximum roofed area 20 percent
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7D-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces. All other buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section
9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7D-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-
2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7D-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited, excepting farming machinery, farm products and temporary storage of road materials.
C. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Fencing: Fencing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
E. Fencing Height: Fencing height shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
F. Sanitary Sewers; On Site Sewage Disposal Systems: Sanitary sewers and on site sewage disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of
section 9-8-7 of this title.
G. Farming Use: Farming uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
H. Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996;
amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
ARTICLE E. RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RE-3)
9-7E-1: PURPOSE:
The rural residential district is intended to provide low density uses with a minimum lot size of one-half (1/2) acre or larger. This district is appropriate where
moderate density rural development is desired and where public facilities exist or could reasonably be extended to the development. The rural residential
district corresponds to and implements the rural estates master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-
2000)
9-7E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Dwellings, single-family detached.
Horse ranches.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 390/565
Horse trails.
Manufactured homes1.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Playgrounds.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Vacation home rental2. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 443, 1-
25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 455, 10-23-2012)
9-7E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Community residence - transitional.
Dairy farm.
Golf courses.
Grazing uses.
Guest cottages.
Guest ranches.
Home occupations3.
Museums.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Riding academies and boarding stables.
Vacation home rental4.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011; Ord. 455, 10-23-
2012)
9-7E-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Agricultural uses, noncommercial.
Apiaries.
Aviaries.
Crop farming.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7E-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7E-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 391/565
Development in the RE-3 district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:8 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations.
Table 9-7:8
Minimum lot size 21,700 square feet (0.5 acre)
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building setbacks:
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
40 feet
20 feet
40 feet
40 feet
Minimum lot width 124 feet
Minimum lot depth 175 feet
Maximum roofed area 20 percent
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 187, 6-10-1997; Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7E-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces. All other buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section
9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7E-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-
2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7E-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited, excepting farming machinery, farm products and temporary storage of road materials.
C. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Fencing: Fencing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
E. Fencing Height: Fencing height shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
F. Sanitary Sewers; On Site Sewage Disposal Systems: Sanitary sewers and on site sewage disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of
section 9-8-7 of this title.
G. Farming Use: Farming uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
H. Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996;
amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
ARTICLE F. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SF)
9-7F-1: PURPOSE:
The Single-Family Residential (SF) District is intended as an area for moderate density residential uses in a suburban environment. The principal land
uses are single-family detached homes, interspersed with parks, trails, open space and limited public facilities. Large lot subdivision development is
discouraged. This district is appropriate for locations where suburban characteristics are desired and full public services are available. (Ord. 295, 2-10-
2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 559 - VACATION HOME RENTAL. Go to new ordinance.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 392/565
9-7F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Manufactured home1.
Parks or recreation areas and facilities.
Playgrounds and trails.
Religious assembly.
School.
Single-family detached home.
Subdivision sales office/model home (temporary).
Vacation home rentals where permitted by a common interest community or homeowners' association by way of express permission through the entity's
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs), bylaws, or Design Standards Handbook. (Ord. 536, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 559 - VACATION HOME RENTAL. Go to new ordinance.
9-7F-3: CONDITIONAL USES2:
Aviaries.
Childcare facilities.
Community residence - transitional.
Golf courses.
Home occupations3.
Homes of more than two (2) stories.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Vacation home rentals in all areas where not a permitted use under section 9-7F-2 of this article, unless expressly prohibited by a common interest
community or homeowner's association through its declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs).
Zero lot line development/attached homes. (Ord. 536, 4-10-2018, eff. 5-1-2018)
9-7F-4: ACCESSORY USES4:
Accessory buildings.
Decks, gazebos, patios.
Detached garages.
Gardens.
Guesthouse/casita.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 295, 2-10-2004)
9-7F-5: PLANNED USES:
Single-family detached homes. (Ord. 295, 2-20-2004)
9-7F-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the SF district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:9 of this section, in addition to the standards established in
the other sections of these regulations. Unless otherwise approved by city council, all lots will be a minimum of seven thousand (7,000) square feet in
area, and must be at least sixty five feet (65') wide and have a depth of at least ninety five feet (95').
B. Setbacks: Front setbacks, and side setbacks on corner lots, shall be measured from the back of the sidewalk, or the back of the curb if there is no
sidewalk. See also section 9-8-2, "Area And Bulk Regulations", and section 9-9-7, "Lots", of this title for supplemental setback standards. For the
purposes of this section, street classifications (arterial, collector or local street) shall be as determined by the city engineer and the master plan for
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 393/565
streets and highways.
Table 9-7:9
Minimum lot size 7,000 square feet
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building setbacks:
Front (local street)
Front (collector street)
Side
Rear
Rear (abutting collector/arterial street)
Street side (local street)
Street side (collector street)
Street side (arterial street)
20 feet
35 feet
6 feet
25 feet
30 feet
15 feet
20 feet
30 feet
Minimum lot width 65 feet
Minimum corner lot width:
Local or collector street on side
Arterial street on side
75 feet
80 feet
Minimum lot depth 95 feet
Minimum lot depth on collector streets 110 feet
Maximum roofed area 50 percent
(Lots created prior to March 1, 2004, may be built with a five foot (5') side setback; provided, that a building permit is issued on the residence prior to
March 1, 2005.)
C. Supplemental Dimensions:
1. Width:
a. Lots located on the curve of a knuckle or cul-de-sac must have a minimum width street frontage of thirty nine feet (39').
b. Lots located on a curve must have a minimum street frontage of fifty six feet (56').
2. Depth:
a. Lots facing on local streets must have a minimum depth of ninety five feet (95'), except any lot fronting on a turnaround section of a cul-de-sac or
knuckle must have a minimum depth of ninety feet (90'). See table 9-7:9 of this section for additional standards.
b. Lots facing on arterial streets are strongly discouraged. However, where circumstances require a single-family lot to face an arterial street, the
parcel must have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125'), a front yard setback of fifty feet (50'), and a driveway that allows an
automobile to turn around before entering traffic. (Ord. 295, 2-10-2004)
D. Walls And Fences:
1. A wall or fence of solid or opaque construction in the front yard of a single-family lot must not exceed thirty inches (30") in height. See also
subsection 9-8-2C6, "Driveway Sight Zones", of this title.
2. A wall or fence in the rear or side yard of a single-family lot must not exceed seventy two inches (72") in height. Zone boundary walls, as described
in section 9-8-4, "Buffers And Landscaping", of this title, may exceed seventy two inches (72").
a. The wall or fence may be as high as eighty inches (80") in height so long as the top one foot (1') or more is of open construction and a letter from
the adjacent property owner is provided stating he/she has no opposition to the height. Open construction on a fence or wall allows both light and
air to pass freely through it.
b. Stanchions in the fence or wall may exceed the height limit by no more than eight inches (8").
3. On corner lots where the rear yard is abutting the side yard of another lot, the standards for a front yard described above shall apply to any wall or
fence constructed within ten feet (10') of the sidewalk, or within ten feet (10') of the curb if there is no sidewalk. See exhibit 9-7:Fa, "Corner Lot Walls
And Fences", of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 394/565
(Ord. 295, 2-10-2004; amd. Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
9-7F-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every dwelling unit must have a minimum of two (2) off street parking places. All other buildings/uses must comply with the requirements of section 9-8-
5 of this title.
B. Commercial vehicles over one and one-half (11/2) tons are prohibited from parking anywhere in the single-family zone.
C. Parking of vehicles (as defined in section 9-2-2 of this code) in the front yard of a single-family residence is prohibited unless on a paved driveway of
concrete, brick, asphalt, or similar nonpervious surface.
1. No more than half of the width of the front yard may be used as a driveway, except on lots located on a curve, cul-de-sac or knuckle lot.
2. For lots developed with a "circle" or "hammerhead" driveway, no more than two-thirds (2/3) of the area of the required front yard may be used as a
driveway.
3. Corner and cul-de-sac lots and other odd shaped lots must have driveways that are not significantly wider or out of character in comparison to
neighboring and nearby homes. (Ord. 475, 11-26-2013, eff. 12-18-2013)
9-7F-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-
2000, eff. 2-7-2000)
9-7F-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage, junk vehicle storage, and outdoor storage, as defined in this code, are prohibited. The storage of personal
property, including, but not limited to, boxes, canisters, compost, clothing, rags, indoor furniture, indoor appliances, building materials, etc., is prohibited
in front yards or porches. (Ord. 295, 2-10-2004)
C. Animals:
1. The type and number of animals is limited to those that are permitted in this code5.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 395/565
2. Enclosures are limited to those for domestic pets only.
D. Compliance With Codes, Covenants And Restrictions (CC&Rs): The proposed dwelling unit must not be in violation of the CC&Rs for the property
unless the CC&Rs are less restrictive than this code, in which case this code will prevail.
E. Requirement For Similar Siding, Roofing, Materials And Features As Other Dwelling Units In Immediate Vicinity: The dwelling unit will have similar
siding and roofing material and features as other single-family residential dwellings in the immediate vicinity.
F. Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996;
amd. Ord. 232, 1-11-2000, eff. 2-7-2000; Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
ARTICLE G. ATTACHED HOUSING (MF-1)
9-7G-1: PURPOSE:
The Attached Housing District is intended to allow for the development of conventional attached dwellings, commonly known as duplexes. Due to the
potential for reducing development costs, the MF-1 District also promotes affordable housing in a low density environment. The MF-1 District implements
the multi-family residential master plan category. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Community residence - transitional.
Duplexes.
Dwellings, single family detached.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Playground.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Townhomes.
Vacation home rental1.
Zero lot line development/attached homes. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Apartments.
Boarding houses.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Facility for intermediate care.
Facility for skilled nursing.
Golf courses.
Home occupations2.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Launderette.
Lodges.
Lodging houses.
Museums.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 396/565
Private nonprofit societies.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Riding academies and boarding stables.
Timesharing apartments.
Vacation home rental3.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory dwellings.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Sports courts.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-5: PLANNED USES:
Mixed use development.
Planned unit development (townhouses, cluster units, condominiums, garden apartments).
Sports courts.
Stables, commercial and private.
Tennis club. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the MF-1 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:10 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:10
MF-1 ATTACHED HOUSING MULTI FAMILY DISTRICT
Single family dwelling 7,000 sq. ft. 70' 6 dwelling units per acre 35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 10'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone: 5'
Two-family dwelling 4,000 sq. ft. 60' 10 dwelling units per acre 35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 10'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone: 5'
Townhouse cluster 4,000 sq. ft. 60' 10 dwelling units per acre w/CUP 35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone: 15'
Other permitted uses None None None 35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 10'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone: 15'
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Open
Space
Minimum
Building
Setbacks1,2
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 397/565
Notes:
1. See also section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
2. Any attached or detached carport or garage shall maintain a 20 foot front setback.
(Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 556, 11-27-2018, eff. 12-18-2018)
9-7G-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7G-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures are limited to those for domestic pets only.
D. Other Uses; Additional Standards: For uses other than single-family detached dwellings, the following additional standards shall apply:
1. Duplex lots in the MF-1 District shall be platted in pairs, such that a duplex may be placed on each pair of lots for the purpose of encouraging
individual ownership of each side or unit. The subdivision plat shall designate the pairs of lots and which lot lines are to be outside lot lines of each
pair. There shall be only one dwelling unit per lot and no dwelling unit shall cross a designated outside lot line. No single-family detached dwelling
may be constructed on one of the designated pair of lots;
2. All utilities shall be provided separately to each duplex in an MF-1 District, such that each unit is individually metered;
3. Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from
vehicles along public and private streets and drives within any parking area. Paved walkways shall be provided from all dwellings to trash and
service areas;
4. Housing located on sloping sites shall be placed on the lot so as to take advantage of changes of grade, scenic views and adjacent open space.
Where possible, dwelling units shall be placed so as to avoid facing the rear yard toward a street. If such orientation is necessary, a sixty foot (60')
rear yard setback will be required;
5. A two (2) hour fire rated wall shall be constructed so as to totally separate one family dwelling from another. All such fire walls shall be continuous
and unbroken from the foundation slab to the underside of the roof deck. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE H. MULTI-FAMILY LOW DENSITY (MF-2)
9-7H-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to fulfill the need for low density multi-family residential development. The property development standards are designed to allow
maximum flexibility while maintaining an environment compatible with single-family neighborhoods. This district will generally serve as an integral part of
the neighborhood, allowing for a variety of housing types and serving generally as a buffer between higher density multi-family districts and single-family
districts. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-2: PERMITTED USES:
Apartment houses.
Attached housing.
Community residence - family.
Community residence - transitional.
Condominiums.
Duplexes.
Dwellings, multi-family.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 398/565
Dwellings, single-family detached.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Playground.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Townhomes.
Triplexes.
Vacation home rental1. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Boarding houses.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Facility for intermediate care.
Facility for skilled nursing.
Golf courses.
Home occupations2.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Launderette.
Museums.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Timesharing apartments.
Vacation home rental3.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory dwellings.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-5: PLANNED USES:
Mixed use development.
Planned unit development (townhouses, cluster units, condominiums, garden apartments).
Sports club.
Stables, commercial and private.
Tennis club. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 399/565
A. Standards: Development in the MF-2 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:11 of this subsection A, in addition to the standards
established in the other sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:11
MF-2 LOW DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT
Single family dwelling 6,000 sq. ft.
60' 7 dwelling units per acre
35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 10'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
5'
Two-family dwelling 4,000 sq. ft.
60' 10 dwelling units per
acre
35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 10'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
5'
Three-family, four-family, and multiple-family
dwellings
4,000 sq. ft.
60' 10 dwelling units per
acre
35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
15'
Townhouse cluster 4,000 sq. ft.
60' 10 dwelling units per
acre
35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
15'
Other permitted uses None1 None1 None 35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 10'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
15'
Notes:
1. The minimum lot area and lot width are determined by the ability to meet building area, parking, landscaping, setback, and other applicable
standards.
2. Any attached or detached carport or garage shall maintain a 20 foot front setback.
B. Supplemental Lot Dimensions:
1. Height: Permitted building height, in addition to the above requirement, shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
2. Width:
a. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75').
b. Lots located on a knuckle or cul-de-sac shall have a minimum street frontage of thirty nine feet (39').
c. Lots located on a curve shall have a minimum street frontage of fifty six feet (56').
3. Depth:
a. Lots facing on local streets (or frontage streets) shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'), except any lot fronting on a turnaround
section of a cul-de-sac or knuckle shall have a minimum depth of ninety feet (90').
b. Lots facing on collector streets shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifteen feet (115').
c. Lots facing on major streets or highways shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 556, 11-27-2018, eff. 12-18-2018)
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Open
Space
Minimum
Building
Setbacks2
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 400/565
9-7H-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7H-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage: Open storage shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
C. Animals And Enclosures: Animals and enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Special Provisions For Multi-Family Dwelling Groups: Special provisions for multi-family dwelling groups shall comply with the requirements of section
9-8-7 of this title.
E. Open Space Requirements: Open space shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
F. Commercial Business Uses: Commercial business uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
1. There shall be no entrance to such business use, except from inside the multi-family building in which the use is located;
2. The business use shall be restricted to the ground floor or basement;
3. The floor area of such business use shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the multi-family building in which the
business use is located; and
4. There shall be no outside advertising signs for the business use. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE I. MULTI-FAMILY MEDIUM DENSITY (MF-3)
9-7I-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to accommodate moderate to high density multi-family uses while ensuring livability, open spaces, and a high level of landscaping
and buffering. This district is appropriate for multi-family areas located near supporting transportation and commercial facilities where full urban services
are available. The MF-3 District implements the multi-family residential master plan category. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7I-2: PERMITTED USES:
Apartment houses.
Attached housing.
Community residence - family.
Community residence - transitional.
Condominiums.
Duplexes.
Dwellings, multi-family.
Dwellings, single family detached.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Playground.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Townhomes.
Triplexes.
Vacation home rental1. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 401/565
9-7I-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Boarding houses.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Facility for intermediate care.
Facility for skilled nursing.
Golf courses.
Home occupations2.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Launderette.
Museums.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Timesharing apartments.
Vacation home rental3.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7I-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory dwellings.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7I-5: PLANNED USES:
Mixed use development.
Planned unit development (townhouses, cluster units, condominiums, garden apartments).
Sports courts.
Stables, commercial and private.
Tennis club. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7I-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the MF-3 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:12 of this section, in addition to the standards established in other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:12
MF-3 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height1
Minimum
Open
Space
Minimum
Building
Setbacks2,3
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 402/565
Single family dwelling 6,000 sq.
ft.
60' 6 dwelling units per acre 35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side:
10'
Rear: 15'
From SF
Zone: 5'
Two-family dwelling 3,500 sq.
ft.
60' 12 dwelling units per acre 35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side:
10'
Rear: 15'
From SF
Zone: 5'
Three-family, four-family, and multiple-family
dwellings
2,178 sq.
ft.
60' 20 dwelling units per acre
w/CUP
40' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side:
15'
Rear: 15'
From SF
Zone: 15'
Townhouse cluster 2,178 sq.
ft.
60' 20 dwelling units per acre
w/CUP
35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side:
15'
Rear: 15'
From SF
Zone: 15'
Other permitted uses None None None 35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 10'
Street side:
15'
Rear: 15'
From SF
Zone: 15'
Notes:
1. See development performance standards for additional height requirements.
2. See also section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
3. Any attached or detached carport or garage shall maintain a 20 foot front setback.
(Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7I-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 556, 11-27-2018, eff. 12-18-2018)
9-7I-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7I-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Height: Permitted building height, in addition to the above requirement, shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
C. Open Storage: Open storage shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Animals And Enclosures: Animals and enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
E. Additions To Existing Structures: Additions to existing structures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height1
Minimum
Open
Space
Minimum
Building
Setbacks2,3
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 403/565
F. Special Provisions For Multi-Family Dwelling Groups: Special provisions for multi-family dwelling groups shall comply with the requirements of section 9-
8-7 of this title.
G. Open Space Requirements: Open space shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
H. Timesharing Apartments: Timesharing apartments shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
I. Commercial Business Uses: Commercial business uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
1. There shall be no entrance to such business use, except from inside the multi-family building in which the use is located;
2. The business use shall be restricted to the ground floor or basement;
3. The floor area of such business use shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the multi-family building in which the
business use is located; and
4. There shall be no outside advertising signs for the business use. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE J. MULTI-FAMILY HIGH DENSITY (MF-4)
9-7J-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to fulfill the need for high density multi-family residential development. It is appropriate in close proximity to shopping, schools and
employment where full urban services and facilities are available. The MF-4 District implements the multi-family residential master plan category. (Ord.
544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-2: PERMITTED USES:
Apartment houses.
Attached housing.
Community residence - family.
Community residence - transitional.
Condominiums.
Duplexes.
Dwellings, multi-family.
Dwellings, single-family detached.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Playgrounds.
Religious assembly.
Schools.
Townhouses.
Triplexes.
Vacation home rental1. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Boarding houses.
Cemeteries.
Childcare facilities.
Facility for intermediate care.
Facility for skilled nursing.
Golf courses.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 404/565
Home occupations2.
Horse ranches.
Horse trails.
Launderette.
Museums.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Real estate office.
Timesharing apartments.
Vacation home rental3.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory dwellings.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-5: PLANNED USES:
Mixed use development.
Planned unit development (townhouses, cluster units, condominiums, garden apartments).
Sports courts.
Stables, commercial and private.
Tennis club. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the MF-4 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:13 of this section, in addition to the standards established in other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:13
MF-4 HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT
Single family dwelling 5,000 sq. ft.
50' 7 dwelling units per acre
35' Front: 15'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone: 5'
Two-family dwellings 3,000 sq. ft.
50' 14 dwelling units per
acre
35' Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 20'
From SF Zone: 15'
Three-family, four-family, and multiple-family
dwellings
1,742 sq. ft.
50' 25 dwelling units per
acre
40' Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 20'
From SF Zone: Building
height
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height1
Minimum
Building
Setbacks2,3
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 405/565
Townhouse cluster 1,742 sq. ft.
50' 25 dwelling units per
acre
35' Front: 15'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 20'
From SF Zone: 15'
Other permitted uses None None None 35' Front: 20'
Side: 10'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone: 15'
Notes:
1. See development performance standards for additional height requirements.
2. See also section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
3. Any attached or detached carport or garage shall maintain a 20 foot front setback.
(Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 556, 11-27-2018, eff. 12-18-2018)
9-7J-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7J-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Height: Permitted building height, in addition to the above requirement, shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
C. Open Storage: Open storage shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
D. Animals And Enclosures: Animals and enclosures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
E. Additions To Existing Structures: Additions to existing structures shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
F. Special Provisions For Multi-Family Dwelling Groups: Special provisions for multi-family dwelling groups shall comply with the requirements of section 9-
8-7 of this title.
G. Timesharing Apartments: Timesharing apartments shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
H. Commercial Business Uses: Commercial business uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title.
1. There shall be no entrance to such business use, except from inside the multi-family building in which the use is located;
2. The business use shall be restricted to the ground floor or basement;
3. The floor area of such business use shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the multi-family building in which the
business use is located;
4. There shall be no outside advertising signs for the business use.
I. Open Space: Open space shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-7 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE K. RV/MOTOR HOME (RV)
9-7K-1: PURPOSE:
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height1
Minimum
Building
Setbacks2,3
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 406/565
The RV/motor home district is intended to provide for RV/motor home parks where such development is appropriate, given the surrounding land uses and
the neighborhood. The RV/motor home district is intended to promote affordable housing consistent with the provisions of the master plan and
corresponds to and implements the RV/motor home master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7K-2: PERMITTED USES:
Motor homes.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Recreational vehicles. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7K-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Public and quasi-public and institutional buildings and uses.
Religious assembly. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008)
9-7K-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7K-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7K-6: AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the RV district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:14 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:14
Minimum building site area 3 acres/park
Maximum density 20 units/acre1
Minimum site/space dimensions:
Drive-through spaces (other than pickup coaches/campers)
Back in spaces for pickup coaches/campers
Back in spaces, other
20 feet(w) x 60 feet(d)
20 feet(w) x 50 feet(d)
35 feet(w) x 60 feet(d)
Minimum separation between vehicles (including all attachments) 10 feet
Minimum setbacks2:
Between vehicle and lot line of space and/or driveway (internal street)
Between vehicle and public street
5 feet
25 feet
Minimum open space of park 20 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 20 feet
Notes:
1.See development performance standards for additional density requirements.
2.See also table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
9-7K-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be provided a paved, centrally located parking area for guest vehicle parking and boat parking. Guest parking shall be provided at a ratio of
one parking space for each five (5) recreational vehicle sites. Boat parking shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space per six (6) recreational vehicle
sites. One parking space per recreational vehicle site for occupant parking shall be provided adjacent to the recreational vehicle site. Other parking shall
be provided as required by section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 407/565
9-7K-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7K-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Density: Any use at a density of greater than eight (8) du/acre must be approved by the city council through a conditional use permit, unless such
density is proposed as part of a planned unit development.
C. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
D. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall be limited to those for domestic pets only.
E. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures taller than three feet (3') above natural grade shall comply with building setback lines.
F. Surfacing: All recreational vehicle sites shall be provided with a paved surface of binominous mix or cement approved by the department of public
works. The paved surface within the site shall be wide enough to sustain the wheels of the vehicles. The area between the wheels may be of all
weather surface, such as compacted stone or chat. The paved surface within the space shall be wide enough to assure occupants firm footing when
stepping from or into their recreational vehicle.
G. Driveways (Internal Streets): Every recreational vehicle park shall comply with the following:
1. For every recreational vehicle park there shall be at least one access to a public street either by abutting directly on such street or by means of a
driveway developed in accordance with the standards as set forth herein;
2. Surfaced driveways shall have a minimum width of forty one feet (41') with thirty six feet (36') of paving and a two and one-half foot (21/2') roll curb
and gutter at each end; and
3. All driveways (internal streets) shall be surfaced to grade with asphaltic concrete (hot mix), paving or approved equal of a minimum thickness as
specified by the department of public works.
H. Screening; Landscaping: Every recreational vehicle park shall be enclosed by a minimum of a six foot (6') high block wall along the exterior boundary
lines, except for the permitted access driveway. Along any exterior boundary line which is a street frontage, the wall shall be set back a minimum of ten
feet (10') in order to provide a landscaped area. Additionally, landscaping shall be provided at office and recreational building areas and at each
recreational vehicle site. Landscaping plans shall be required pursuant to subsection 9-8-4D of this title.
I. Private Areas And Public Open Space: Each recreational vehicle site shall have a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet for private areas,
and the areas shall be landscaped. The following amount of land shall be set aside and developed for recreational purposes within the recreational
vehicle park:
1. Two hundred (200) square feet per lot for the first one hundred (100) lots; and
2. One hundred fifty (150) square feet per lot for each lot in excess of one hundred (100) lots.
J. Accessory Facilities: All recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the following requirements for accessory facilities:
1. Service Building: There shall be provided on every recreational vehicle park a centrally located service building and recreational area containing the
following: management offices, storage areas, sanitary facilities, laundry facilities (2 washer/dryer combinations per 50 lots), and recreational
facilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, applicable building code and fire
regulations of the city;
2. Sanitary Facilities: The following minimum number of sanitary facilities shall be provided for each sex:
Number Of Recreational
Vehicle Sites Toilets Showers Lavatories
Less than 50 2 2 2
51 through 100 4 4 4
There shall be one additional toilet, one additional shower and one additional lavatory for each sex for each fifty (50) additional recreational vehicle sites or
fraction thereof in excess of one hundred (100). Complete sanitary facilities shall be located no more than three hundred feet (300') from each recreational
vehicle site.
3. Refuse Areas: Every recreational vehicle park shall contain an adequate number of airtight, watertight and covered trash receptacles located within
centralized trash area(s). The trash areas shall be screened from public view by a minimum of a six foot (6') high block wall enclosure and shall be
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 408/565
dispersed throughout the park for ease of accessibility.
4. Wash Racks: Washing of automobiles or recreational vehicles within a recreational vehicle park shall be allowed only within an approved wash rack
constructed in accordance with all applicable building code requirements and requirements of these regulations.
K. Supervision: Every recreational vehicle park shall comply with the following standards for supervision:
1. Person In Charge: The owner or operator of every recreational vehicle park, before allowing any recreational vehicle therein, shall file with the
license department the name of the person who will be in continuous, responsible charge of the park and who is authorized to act for him. Any
change in such person in charge will be immediately reported to the license department;
2. Office Park Register: In every recreational vehicle park there shall be an office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of
the park. The park register shall at all times be kept in said office;
3. Duties Of Operator: It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or person in charge of any recreational vehicle park to:
a. Keep at all times a register of all persons staying in the park, which register shall at all times be open to the officers and officials of the city. The
register shall record the names and home addresses of all persons staying in the recreational vehicle park, the date of their arrival, date of their
departure, the number of and state in which the driver's licenses of such persons were issued, the license number of all recreational vehicles in the
park, the name of the state and county if appropriate in which they are registered, the make and model of vehicle and the recreational vehicle site
on which each is located;
b. Maintain the park in a clean, orderly, litter free and sanitary condition at all times;
c. Allow no more than one recreational vehicle and one tow vehicle on any one recreational vehicle site at any one time;
d. Require that all such recreational vehicles and automobiles are located on their recreational vehicle sites as required by the terms of these
regulations;
e. Require every plumbing fixture in any recreational vehicle in the park to be connected to the park sewer during its entire stay in the park or provide
a dumping station which shall be approved by the Clark County health department;
f. See that all required lights are kept lighted as provided for in these regulations;
g. See that all garbage and trash is properly disposed of in the trash receptacles as required by these regulations. Maintain the trash areas in a neat
and sanitary condition at all times and see that all such receptacles are collected and cleaned regularly;
h. Maintain or be in charge of the continuing maintenance of all landscaped areas;
i. Allow domestic animals to be kept in the park only as provided by these regulations and in compliance with all other city ordinances;
j. Report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of the law;
k. Post in a waterproof holder in a conspicuous place in each recreational vehicle site a copy of this section;
l. See that no inoperable vehicles, machinery, equipment or parts thereof are kept or stored;
m. See that the accessory uses and buildings as permitted herein are operated in accordance with the restrictions as set forth in these regulations;
n. Ensure that no recreation vehicles are stored within any special flood hazard area, identified as zones A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE or A99, unless they
are: 1) not on the site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and 2) are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is considered ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
L. Utilities And Fire Protection: Every recreational vehicle park shall provide utilities and fire protection in conformity with the following:
1. Utilities: In order to promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of all recreational vehicle park inhabitants and to improve the
aesthetic appearance of the development, all electric, gas and communication distribution lines, including television service facilities, wires, cables,
pipe and service extensions, shall be installed underground. The following also apply:
a. Electric Work: All electric work shall conform to the current adopted city electrical code;
b. Lighting: Every recreational vehicle park shall have an adequate lighting system for proper illumination of the driveways, service building(s) and
parking areas. The lighting system shall be developed in accordance with applicable ordinances of the city;
c. Plumbing Work: All plumbing work, water and sewer connections shall conform to the current adopted city plumbing code;
d. Water And Sewer: All water and sewer lines shall conform to the standards of the city. The size, type and location shall be further subject to the
approval of the Virgin Valley water district and Mesquite sanitation department.
2. Fire Protection: Every recreational vehicle park shall provide adequate fire protection as required by the fire protection regulations of the city.
M. Prohibited Activities: The following restrictions apply to all recreational vehicle parks or recreational vehicles, as appropriate:
1. Enclosures Prohibited: No attachment, lean-to or other enclosure shall be allowed on any recreational vehicle site which is not portable in nature or
approved for accessory use by the building official. Any permitted accessory structure, awning, shade or other attachment shall comply with the
minimum setbacks set forth in section 9-8-1 of this title;
2. Removal Of Wheels Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person owning, operating or occupying for living quarters any recreational vehicle within the
incorporated limits of the city to remove, or cause to be removed, the wheels or any similar transporting device, excepting in the storage of a pickup
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 409/565
coach (camper) from the recreational vehicle, or to otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal of
the recreational vehicle;
3. Rental Of Recreational Vehicles Outside Licensed Area Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to rent or lease, or caused to be rented or leased,
any recreational vehicle to any person to be used as living quarters within the incorporated limits of Mesquite, except within a licensed recreational
vehicle park;
4. Animals Running At Large Prohibited: Dogs or other animals at no time shall be permitted to run at large in any recreational vehicle park. All animals
shall be on a leash and the owners of the animals shall keep the recreational vehicle site sanitary at all times;
5. Recreational Vehicles On Private Property Outside Of Recreational Vehicle Parks Prohibited: It is unlawful to place, keep or maintain any
recreational vehicle on any land within the incorporated limits of the city without the express permission of the owner of such land and no person
shall allow, suffer or permit any recreational vehicle to be placed, kept or maintained on any land owned or controlled by him, except in a recreational
vehicle park for which a permit to construct and establish has been issued by the department of building and safety and a license to operate has
been issued by the city business license department. This shall not preclude the storage of a recreational vehicle if the owner shall obtain from the
Clark County health department an affidavit to that effect. It is unlawful for the owner, occupant or other person having charge or control of any lot or
tract of land in the incorporated limits of the city, other than a "recreational vehicle park" as herein defined, to permit any person to occupy for living,
sleeping or business purposes any recreational vehicle parked thereon.
6. Flood Hazard Area: Recreational vehicles may only be stored in a flood hazard area, provided they are: 1) not stored in a flood hazard area for no
more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and 2) are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is considered
ready for highway use if it is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions. For the purpose of this regulation, flood hazard areas are identified as zones, A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE or A99.
7. Permanent Structure: Recreational vehicles are not permitted as a permanent structure under any circumstances.
N. Recreational Vehicle As Temporary Residence: A recreational vehicle may be used as a temporary residence up to twelve (12) months on property
zoned for single-family residential uses only during construction of a permanent residence under a valid building permit and under the following
conditions:
1. Installation Permit: The installation permit identifies the methods and inspections required for the installation of the mobile home on the property. The
permit shall not be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit for a permanent residence on the property. The installation permit is valid for
twelve (12) months from the date of issue. No renewals or extensions will be authorized except by approval of a variance in accordance with section
9-5-5 of this title;
2. Utility Connections: Any utility connection to the recreational vehicle shall be made in accordance with applicable manufacturer's standards or code
standards as approved and permitted by the building department. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 273, 9-17-2003)
ARTICLE L. MANUFACTURED HOUSING (MH)
9-7L-1: PURPOSE:
The manufactured housing district is intended to provide for manufacturing housing parks and estates where such development is appropriate given the
surrounding land uses and the neighborhood. The manufactured housing district is intended to promote affordable housing consistent with the provisions
of the master plan and corresponds to and implements the mobile home master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7L-2: PERMITTED USES:
Community residence - family.
Manufactured homes.
Park and recreation areas and facilities.
Religious assembly.
Schools. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011)
9-7L-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Cemeteries.
Community residence - transitional.
Mobile homes.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011)
9-7L-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 410/565
9-7L-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7L-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the MH district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:15 of this section, in addition to the standards established
in the other sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:15
Minimum district size 5 acres
Minimum lot size 6,500 square feet
Maximum dwelling unit density 5 du/acre
Maximum building height 1 story/16 feet
Minimum building setbacks1:
Front 20 feet
Side 5 feet
Rear 14 feet
Street side 15 feet
Minimum lot width 65 feet2
Minimum lot depth 100 feet2
Maximum roofed area 50 percent
Minimum open space of lot 20 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 20 feet
Notes:
1.See also table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
2.See subsection B of this section for further requirements.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
B. Supplemental Lot Dimensions:
1. Width:
a. Corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75').
b. Lots located on a knuckle or cul-de-sac shall have a minimum street frontage of thirty nine feet (39').
c. Lots located on a curve shall have a minimum street frontage of fifty six feet (56').
2. Depth:
a. Lots facing on local streets (or frontage streets) shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'), except any lot fronting on a turnaround
section of a cul-de-sac or knuckle shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifteen feet (115').
b. Lots facing on collector streets shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125').
c. Lots facing on major streets or highways shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
9-7L-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings/uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7L-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7L-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 411/565
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall be limited to those for domestic pets only.
D. Foundations: Manufactured housing foundations shall comply with the manufacturer's recommended guidelines for installation.
E. Anchor: All manufactured homes installed within the park shall be anchored to the ground by means of anchors attached both to the frame and with
straps extending over the top and completely surrounding the sides and roof, consistent with uniform building code guidelines. Anchor design shall be
approved by the zoning official prior to installation and shall comply with all requirements of the state. In addition, test data giving certified results of pull
tests in soils representative of the area in which the anchors are to be used shall be submitted to the zoning official. Minimum load in direct pull shall be
five thousand four hundred (5,400) pounds. Anchors shall be marked so that after installation, the identification is in plain view for inspection.
F. Streets: All streets within the park shall meet city standards.
G. Location To Property Line: Each manufactured home shall be located so that no part of one home structure, including canopies, awnings, carports and
other protrusions, is closer to the property line than the required setbacks.
H. Trees: Each manufactured home subdivision shall have not less than two (2) trees of two and one-half (21/2) caliper per space, located on the space or
within a required yard. Xeriscaped equivalents may be substituted upon zoning official approval.
I. Park And Playground Space: Park and playground space shall be provided for occupants of the manufactured home subdivision on the basis of three
hundred (300) square feet for each space in the park. Such playground space shall be separate and in addition to the open space required for each
manufactured home space, and shall be equipped and maintained for the use of the residents of the park. All park and playground space shall comply
with the city's adopted building safety codes. Streets, sidewalks, parking areas and accessory buildings are not to be included as recreation space in
computing the necessary area. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the recreational facilities shall be constructed prior to the development of one-half
(1/2) of the project, and all recreational facilities shall be constructed by the time the project is seventy five percent (75%) developed.
J. Waste: All nonhazardous liquid wastes shall be disposed of through a sanitary sewer system and treatment facility, the plans of which shall be approved
by the building official prior to construction. All solid waste shall be disposed of by accumulation in closed containers, and removed at regular intervals.
K. Power And Telephone Lines: All power and telephone lines shall be underground and shall be in compliance with standards of the utility corporation
involved.
L. Grading And Drainage: All parks shall have an approved grading and drainage plan.
M. Outdoor Laundry Space: On site outdoor laundry space of adequate area and suitable location, shall be provided if the park is not furnished with indoor
dryers. Where outdoor drying space is required or desired, individual clothes drying facilities on each site of the collapsible umbrella type of hanging
apparatus shall be allowed, with park management providing a concrete imbedded socket at each site.
N. Storage Structures: Each manufactured home subdivision shall include similarly designed enclosed storage structure or structures suitable for storage
of goods and the usual effects of the inhabitants of such park. Such storage space should not be less than one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet for each
manufactured home site or in common structure with individual lockers.
O. Roof Pitch: The roof shall be double pitched and have a minimum vertical rise of three feet (3') for each twelve feet (12') of horizontal run, and shall be
covered with roofing material that is residential in appearance, including, but not limited to: approved wood, asphalt composition shingles or fiberglass,
but excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass or metal roofs.
P. Roof Projection: All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less than nine inches (9"), which shall include a gutter.
Q. Entrances And Exits From Home: Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be
installed and constructed according to the standards set out by the uniform building code and shall be attached firmly to the primary structure and
anchored securely to the ground.
R. Fuel Supply Systems: All fuel supply systems shall be constructed and installed within the foundation wall or underground in compliance with all
applicable building and safety codes, except that any bottled gas tanks may be located aboveground and outside the foundation wall, provided they are
fenced so as not to be clearly visible from the street or abutting properties.
S. Removal Of Apparatus: The moving hitch, transporting lights, and wheels and axles shall be removed.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 412/565
T. Placement On Lot: The manufactured home shall be oriented on the lot so that its long axis is parallel with the street. A perpendicular or diagonal
placement may be permitted if the narrow dimension of the unit, as it appears from the street, is no less than fifty percent (50%) of the unit's long
dimension.
U. Landscaping: The lot shall be landscaped to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. The lot shall be seeded, sodded, planted or covered with
other appropriate ground cover as set forth in the development guidelines.
V. Length: The manufactured home shall have a length not exceeding four (4) times its width, with length measured along the longest axis and width
measured at the narrowest part of the other axis.
W. Garage: A garage or carport, constructed in accordance with the requirements of the uniform building code shall be provided. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996)
ARTICLE M. COMMERCIAL-NEIGHBORHOOD (CR-1)
9-7M-1: PURPOSE:
The CR-1 District is intended to provide for the development of convenience retail shopping, services and professional offices principally serving
neighborhood needs compatible in scale, character and intensity with adjacent residential development. This district is intended to be located at
intersections of streets designated as collector or larger. The CR-1 District should also be used as a buffer between residential and more intense
retail/commercial uses. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7M-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted in the PB District1.
Antique shop.
Art galleries and artists' studios.
Art needlework shop.
Automobile accessory store.
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions.
Barbershop.
Beauty shop or parlor.
Bicycle sales/repair.
Candy store.
Catering service.
Collection agency.
Costume rental.
Dog grooming.
Drapery store.
Dress or dressmaking shop.
Dry cleaning collection office.
Duplication.
Eating places (nonalcoholic).
Electronic equipment sales and services.
Embroidery store.
Existing residential dwellings.
Fabric and sewing materials.
Florist shop.
Fruit and fruit juice bar.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 413/565
Fruit and vegetable store.
Gift shop.
Grocery store.
Hardware store.
Hat shop.
Ice cream parlor, malt shop.
Library, public or rental.
Lock and key service.
Massage therapy.
Museum.
Pet store.
Pharmacy.
Plant nursery, no bulk items.
Pottery shop and ceramics.
Pressing and alteration.
Quick copy establishments.
Retail bakery.
Retail shops and stores.
Tax return preparation office.
Travel bureau.
Watch and clock sales and repair shop. (Ord. 528, 10-24-2017)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-7M-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Automotive service stations.
Bed and breakfast inns.
Car wash.
Catering service.
Check cashing service/deferred deposit service. The purpose of regulating check cashing and deferred deposit services is to ensure compatibility with
surrounding uses and properties to avoid an unchecked proliferation of check cashing and deferred deposit services that may result in the displacement of
other necessary commercial and financial services:
A conditional use permit is required subject to, but not limited to, the following regulations:
A. The building or portion thereof that is dedicated to the check cashing and/or deferred deposit service use shall have a minimum size of one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of building floor area.
B. The following distance requirements shall be applied to all check cashing and/or deferred deposit services:
1. No check cashing and/or deferred deposit service may be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any other check cashing and/or
deferred deposit service, or school site as measured by the shortest line between the occupied spaces of the existing or proposed check
cashing and/or deferred deposit services facilities.
2. No check cashing and/or deferred deposit service may be located closer than five hundred feet (500') from any parcel with a residential land
use category as designated by the City of Mesquite Master Plan. This five hundred foot (500') separation requirement is measured by the
shortest line between the space to be occupied by the proposed check cashing and/or deferred deposit services facility and the property line of
the nearest parcel with a residential land use category as designated in the City of Mesquite Master Plan. For the purposes of this section, if a
check cashing and/or deferred deposit service is located at a counter or space within another business (i.e., convenience store, grocery store,
executive offices, etc.), the term "facility" shall mean the entire space of the businesses combined.
3. The foregoing distance requirements may be waived through the use permit only if it can be shown by clear and convincing evidence by the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 414/565
applicant that a waiver of such distance requirements will not compromise the aforestated purpose and the general intent of this code to protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Mesquite.
Childcare facility.
Computer sales/repair.
Convenience market.
Delicatessen.
Drive-in restaurants.
Fire stations and EMS facilities.
Garden supplies.
Gasoline sales.
Launderette.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Police stations.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Religious assembly.
Restaurant.
Sports courts.
Taxi stand.
Transient lodging establishment.
Veterinary clinics (small animal). (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000; Ord. 363, 1-23-2007, eff. 2-16-2007; Ord.
386, 9-25-2007; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 455, 10-23-2012)
9-7M-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Car wash.
Decks, gazebos, gardens. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7M-5: PLANNED USES:
None at this time. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7M-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the CR-1 district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:16 of this section, in addition to the standards established in other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:16
Minimum district size 2 acres
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building/parking lot setbacks1:
Front
Adjoining CR-2 district
Adjoining residential district
20 feet; 25 feet from arterial streets
10 feet
20 feet2
Maximum roofed area 25 percent net site area
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 40 feet
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 415/565
Notes:
1.See also section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
2.Not less than 15 feet of which must be landscaped to form a permanent screen.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
9-7M-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7M-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-
2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7M-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Display Of Goods: All display, storage and sale of goods shall be provided within the primary structure.
D. Vehicle Or Equipment Storage: No vehicle or equipment, other than a passenger vehicle, may be stored or parked in front of a building for more than
forty eight (48) consecutive hours.
E. Lighting: Lighting sources shall be designed and located so that the direct source of the light is shielded from view at all property lines abutting
residential development, or from street rights of way.
F. Drive-Through Uses: Drive-through uses are prohibited, except as part of a conditional use permit or planned development. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
ARTICLE N. COMMERCIAL-GENERAL (CR-2)
9-7N-1: PURPOSE:
The CR-2 District is designed to provide the broadest scope of compatible services for both the general and traveling public. This category allows retail,
service, wholesale, office and other general business uses of an intense character. This district should be located away from low and medium density
residential development and may be used as a buffer between retail and industrial uses. The CR-2 District is also appropriate along commercial corridors.
The Commercial-General District corresponds to and implements in part the commercial and retail master plan category. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-
2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-7N-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted in the CR-1, PB, and residential uses of the MF-3 District.
Appliance sales/rental/repair.
Athletic/sporting goods store.
Banquet facility.
Blueprinting.
Bookbinding.
Carbonated water sales.
Clothing/accessory store.
Computer sales/repairs.
Data processing center.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 416/565
Department store.
Diaper service.
Discount store.
Drive-through restaurants.
Drugstore.
Dry goods store.
Duplexes.
Dwellings, multi-family.
Dwellings, single family detached.
Electrical repair service.
Employment agency.
Express office.
Food sales.
Furniture sales/repair.
Garden supplies.
Gift shop.
Health club; gymnasium.
Heating and air conditioning sales, supply and repairs.
House cleaning and repair.
Household merchandise and furnishing sales.
Insurance office.
Linen shop.
Lunchroom.
Massage therapy.
Medical supplies.
Monument sales.
News dealers or stands.
Notion store.
Paint, glass, and wallpaper store.
Photographic studio.
Photographic supplies.
Pressing, alterations.
Radio and television sales/repair.
Real estate office.
Religious assembly.
Restaurant.
Sandwich shop.
Shoe sales/repair.
Soda fountains.
Sports courts.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 417/565
Stationery store and bookstore.
Tailor shop.
Tea room or shop.
Telephone sales.
Tennis club.
Theaters, indoor.
Townhomes.
Toy store.
Upholstery shop.
Variety store.
Veterinary clinics (small animal).
Watch and clock sales and repair. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Animal hospital (large animal).
Automobile sales/rental/service.
Automobile service station.
Bakery, wholesale.
Bar, lounge, tavern.
Bed and breakfast inns.
Beer and/or wine sales.
Boat sales/service.
Building materials storage or sales yard.
Car wash.
Check cashing service/deferred deposit service, see section 9-7M-3 of this chapter for distancing requirements.
Chemicals, agricultural-wholesale.
Childcare facility.
Convenience market.
Dry cleaning.
Firing ranges, gun clubs.
Flea market/swap meets.
Gasoline sales.
Gunsmith.
Hotel/motel.
Kennels.
Launderette.
Liquor store (package).
Meat market.
Medical and dental labs.
Mobile home dealers.
Park and recreation areas and facilities.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 418/565
Parking lot (commercial).
Pawnshop. No pawnshop may be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any other pawnshop, as measured by the shortest line between the
occupied spaces of the existing or proposed pawnshop. No pawnshop may be located closer than two hundred feet (200') from any parcel with a
residential land use category as designated by the comprehensive master plan. This two hundred foot (200') separation requirement is measured by the
shortest line between the space to be occupied by the proposed pawnshop and the property line of the nearest parcel with a residential land use category
as designated by the comprehensive master plan. The foregoing distance requirements may be waived through the conditional use permit only if it can be
shown by clear and convincing evidence by the applicant that a waiver of such distance requirements will not compromise the general intent of this Code
to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
Printing, lithography and publishers.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Recreational areas.
Supper club.
Taxi stand.
Taxicab office.
Theaters, indoor/drive-in.
Transient lodging establishment.
Union hall.
Wholesale sales. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Caretaker and security guard quarters.
Decks, gazebos, gardens. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-5: PLANNED USES:
None at this time. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Commercial development in the CR-2 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:17 of this subsection A, in addition to the
standards established in the other sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:17
Maximum building height 2 stories/35'
Minimum building/parking lot setbacks:
Front 10'; 25' from arterial streets1
Side 0'2
Rear 0'2
Street side 0'2
Maximum roofed area 60%
Minimum open space of lot 15%
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 20'
Notes:
1. For all buildings, walls and fences more than 30 inches in height.
2. Lots abutting residential zones must meet the requirements of subsection C of this section.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 419/565
B. Housing Standards: Residential development in the CR-2 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:18 of this subsection B, in addition to
the standards established in the other sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:18
HOUSING STANDARDS IN THE CR-2 ZONE
Single family dwelling 6,000 sq.
ft.
50' 6 dwelling units per
acre
35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 10'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
5'
Two-family dwelling 3,500 sq.
ft.
60' 12 dwelling units per
acre
35' n/a Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 10'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
5'
Three-family, four-family, and multiple-family
dwellings
2,178 sq.
ft.
60' 20 dwelling units per
acre
3 stories;
40'
20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
15'
Townhouse cluster, 3 or more dwellings 2,178 sq.
ft.
60' 20 dwelling units per
acre
35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 5'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
15'
Other permitted uses None1 None1 None 35' 20% Front: 20'
Side: 10'
Street side: 15'
Rear: 15'
From SF Zone:
15'
Notes:
1. The minimum lot area and lot width are determined by the ability to meet building area, parking, landscaping, setback, and other applicable
standards.
2. Any attached or detached carport or garage shall maintain a 20 foot front setback.
C. Supplemental Dimensions: Properties abutting a residential zone shall meet the minimum buffer yard requirements found in section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of
this title.
1. On corner lots, if a building is adjacent to a zone boundary line, the side yard facing the zone boundary shall have the same setback as the front
yard of the more restrictive zone.
2. Two (2) additional stories, for a total of four (4) stories, may be permitted pursuant to an approved conditional use permit. Applicable bulk regulations
will be determined as part of the CUP requirements. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
9-7N-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
Per Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Density
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Open
Space
Minimum
Building
Setbacks2
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 420/565
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Display Of Goods: All display, storage, production and sale of goods shall be provided within the primary structure, except the display of operable
vehicles for sale, which may be displayed in any area located outside of required parking or landscaped areas.
D. Lighting: Lighting sources shall be designed and located so that the direct source of light is shielded from view at all property lines abutting residential
development, or from street rights-of-way.
E. Objectionable Uses: All uses shall be free from objections because of odor, dust, noise, vibration or other causes.
F. Signs: All signs shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE O. PROFESSIONAL/BUSINESS OFFICE (PB)
9-7O-1: PURPOSE:
The PB District is intended to allow for office uses in an area which is predominantly residential but because of traffic and other factors is no longer
suitable for the continuation of low density residential uses. This district is designed to be a transitional zone to allow low intensity administrative and
professional offices. These uses are characterized by a low volume of direct daily client and customer contact. To decrease the impact to the adjacent
residential uses, single-family structures should be retained or new development in the PB District should be constructed to maintain a residential
character. The PB District is consistent with the category in the Comprehensive Master Plan. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-
2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7O-2: PERMITTED USES:
Art gallery or artists' studios.
Interior decorating.
Massage therapy.
Medical spas.
Mortgage company.
Office, business or professional.
Office, educational.
Office, medical or dental.
Photography studio.
Security sales, stock brokerages and similar uses. (Ord. 528, 10-24-2017)
9-7O-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Catering service.
Childcare facilities.
Eating and drinking (nonalcoholic) places.
Gift shop.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Religious assembly.
Restaurant.
Sandwich shop. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000; Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008)
9-7O-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any permitted use when located on the same premises and subject to the design
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 421/565
standards for the accessory use as set forth in this title.
Managers' apartments.
Pharmacy, accessory to and on the same premises as medical or dental offices or clinics. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000,
eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7O-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7O-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the PB district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:18 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:18
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet1
Minimum building setbacks:
Front
Street side
Rear
20 feet; 25 feet from arterial streets2
15 feet3
0 feet3
Maximum roofed area 80 percent
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 30 feet
Notes:
1.See development performance standards for additional height requirements.
2.For all buildings, walls and fences more than 30 inches in height.
3.See also table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
9-7O-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7O-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-
2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
ARTICLE P. INDUSTRIAL-LIGHT (IR-1)
9-7P-1: PURPOSE:
The industrial-light district is intended to provide for light manufacturing uses in locations which are suitable based upon adjacent land uses, access to
transportation and the availability of public services and facilities. The industrial-light district corresponds to and implements the industrial/research master
plan category. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-7P-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted in the PB, CR-1, and CR-2 districts.
Animal hospital (large animal).
Antique restoration.
Bakery, wholesale.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 422/565
Blacksmith shop.
Boat building or repair.
Boat sales/service.
Bottling plant.
Broadcast studios.
Building materials storage or sales yard.
Cabinet shop or furniture manufacture.
Candy manufacture.
Cleaning or dyeing plant.
Creamery.
Dog pound.
Education and scientific research.
Electric or neon signs or billboard manufacture.
Electric plating.
Electronic equipment sales.
Flowers or seed processing and sale.
Fountain equipment and supply.
Freight terminals.
Garment manufacture.
Heating/air conditioning; sales, supply, and repair.
Ice and cold storage.
Kennels.
Laboratories, experimental.
Laundry, professional.
Lumberyard.
Machine shop.
Manufacturing.
Motion picture production.
Moving, storage and transportation facilities.
Oil and water well surveying and servicing.
Parking lot (commercial).
Printing, lithography and publishers.
Research laboratories.
Rubber fabrication.
Sheet metal shops.
Storage warehouse/ministorage.
Taxidermist.
Telephone sales.
Truck stop.
Union hall.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 423/565
Upholstery shop.
Warehouses and warehouse complexes.
Wastepaper or rag collection and baling.
Wholesale fuel sale. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7P-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Adult uses.
Automobile wrecking and/or baling.
Blast furnace.
Boiler works.
Brewery.
Grease or oil compounding.
Medical and non-medical marijuana establishments.
Mixing plant for cement, mortar, plaster or paving materials.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Religious assembly.
Shoe manufacture.
Storage space for contractor's equipment, transit and transportation equipment.
Tattoo establishments.
Tire rebuilding, recapping or retreading. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000; amd. Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-
2017)
9-7P-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Caretaker and security guard quarters. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7P-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7P-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the IR-1 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:19 of this section, in addition to the standards established in the other
sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:19
Maximum building height 2-story/35 feet1
Minimum building setbacks2:
Front 10 feet
Side 5 feet
Rear 5 feet
Street side 5 feet
Maximum roofed area 60 percent
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 424/565
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 50 feet
Notes:
1.See development performance standards for additional height requirements.
2.See section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006; amd. Ord. 388, 11-13-2007, eff. 12-6-2007)
9-7P-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7P-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7P-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
B. Height: Two (2) additional stories, for a total of four (4), may be permitted pursuant to an approved conditional use permit. Applicable bulk regulations
will be determined as part of the CUP requirements. (Ord. 388, 11-13-2007, eff. 12-6-2007)
C. Activities Within Enclosed Building: All manufacturing and repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
D. Industrial Performance Standards: All uses shall comply with the industrial performance standards listed in subsection 9-8-7C of this title. (Ord. 246, 11-
28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
E. Screening: The area between the setback and property line shall be sodded, planted and shrubbed in such a manner as to form a permanent evergreen
screen. The perimeter landscape buffer areas required per subsection 9-8-4B of this title may be relocated to perform in a more suitable location on
site, except those required landscape buffers adjacent to street rights-of-way or residential zones. The required percentage and amount of landscaping
shall not be reduced. Such deviations shall be noted on the plans, with a justification as to why the deviation is requested. (Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-
15-2006)
ARTICLE Q. INDUSTRIAL-HEAVY (IR-2)
9-7Q-1: PURPOSE:
The industrial-heavy district is intended to provide for heavy manufacturing uses in locations which are suitable based upon adjacent land uses, access to
transportation and the availability of public services and facilities. The industrial-heavy district corresponds to and implements the industrial/research
master plan category. The further intent of this district is to:
A. Encourage the construction of buildings and continued use of land for commercial and industrial development;
B. Discourage any use which, because of its character and size, would interfere with the use of land in the district as a manufacturing and commercial area
which contributes to the soundness of the economic base;
C. Prohibit residential and trailer court use of the land, and prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation
of the commercial or manufacturing structure in the area;
D. Prohibit any use which would by reason of its contribution of gas, odors, dust, smoke, fumes or noise substantially interfere with the development or
continuation of the development of other districts in the vicinity. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7Q-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted in the IR-1, CR-2, CR-1, and PB districts.
Aircraft and motor vehicle assembly.
Animal byproducts plant.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 425/565
Assembly.
Canning and preserving facilities.
Ceramics manufacture.
Chemical laboratories.
Chemical manufacturing plant.
Compost facilities.
Cosmetic manufacturing or packaging (no animal testing).
Dairy production, packaging or bottling (no animals on site).
Draying, freighting or trucking yard or terminal.
Feed and fuel yards and asphaltic oil storage.
Feed, cereal or flour mill.
Food products manufacture or processing.
Foundries.
Plumbing shop and yard.
Stone works.
Storage or service yard.
Textile mills.
Tire rebuilding, recapping or retreading. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7Q-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Automobile wrecking and/or baling.
Hazardous materials facility.
Medical and non-medical marijuana establishments.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Precast concrete fence manufacture.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Salvage yard and baling.
Shoe manufacture. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000; amd. Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-7Q-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Caretaker and security guard quarters. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7Q-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7Q-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the IR-2 District shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:20 of this section, in addition to the standards established
in the other sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:20
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 426/565
Minimum district size 5 acres
Minimum lot size 20,000 square feet1
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum building setbacks2:
Front 20 feet
Side 10 feet1
Rear 10 feet1
Street side 20 feet1
Minimum district width 100 feet3
Minimum district depth 150 feet
Maximum roofed area 60 percent
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 50 feet
Notes:
1. See subsection B of this section for further requirements.
2. See section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this title for perimeter buffer yard requirements.
3. Measured at a distance of 25 feet from the street and/or future width line.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
B. Supplemental Regulations:
1. Party Wall; Common Roof: Any building having one or more party walls and a common roof with one or more similar buildings, individually owned,
may be on a lot of any size so long as all other provisions of these regulations, including off street parking and loading, are fully complied with.
2. Height: Two (2) additional stories, for a total of four (4), may be permitted pursuant to an approved conditional use permit. Applicable bulk regulations
will be determined as part of the CUP requirements.
3. Divided Street: For the purpose of calculating the minimum area, lot width, lot dimension, floor area ratio, percentage of lot covered by building and
yard requirements established by these regulations, a single IR-2 cannot lie on two (2) sides of a public street or alley. Any area designated as
having been zoned IR-2 and lying on both sides of a public street or alley shall be deemed to be two (2) IR-2 districts, and all minimum requirements
shall be met by buildings on each side of the public street or alley as separate districts.
4. Building Coverage; Floor Area Ratio: The floor area of the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of
the total area of the lot for a single-story building, nor shall it exceed fifty five percent (55%) of the total area for buildings of more than one story. The
ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of the total area of the lot. (Ord. 246, 11-28-
2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
5. Sign; Parking Lot: An advertising sign or parking lot may be located at a distance of no less than twenty feet (20') from the street and/or future street
width line, if in accordance with site plans as required herein. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
9-7Q-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7Q-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-7Q-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
B. Perimeter Landscape Buffer: The perimeter landscape buffer areas required per subsection 9-8-4B of this title may be relocated to perform in a more
suitable location on site, except those required landscape buffers adjacent to street rights-of-way or residential zones. The required percentage and
amount of landscaping shall not be reduced. Such deviations shall be noted on the plans, with a justification as to why the deviation is requested. (Ord.
339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
ARTICLE R. HOTEL-TOURIST (HT)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 427/565
9-7R-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the HT District is to provide for the development of high quality hotels and resorts and associated uses, providing a wide range of activities
for the residents and guests of the City. The HT District corresponds to and implements the hotel and tourist master plan category. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7R-1-1: PERMITTED USES:
Banquet facility.
Hotels.
Inns.
Massage therapy.
Motels.
Religious assembly.
Resort hotels.
Restaurants (no liquor).
Retail stores and shops.
Transient lodging establishment. (Ord. 528, 10-24-2017)
9-7R-2: CONDITIONAL USES:
Automobile/tourist courts.
Bars and taverns.
Casinos.
Condominium hotel.
Gaming.
Service stations.
Spa.
Supper club.
Timeshare units.
Vacation plan sales. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7R-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory structures.
Accessory uses.
Swimming pools. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7R-4: PLANNED USES:
Golf courses.
Sports courts.
Stables, private and commercial. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7R-5: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the HT district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:21 of this section, in addition to the standards established in
other sections of these regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 428/565
TABLE 9-7:21
Minimum lot size 2 acres
Maximum building height 3 stories1,2
Minimum building setbacks3,4:
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
20 feet
5 feet
20 feet
15 feet
Maximum roofed area 60 percent
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent; 25 percent resort hotel
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 40 feet
Notes:
1.May be limited based upon topography, site design and location.
2.Up to 9 stories/100 feet may be permitted with a conditional use permit.
3.Additional setback requirements may be established based upon allowed building height.
4.See table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter buffer yard requirements when adjoining residential districts, arterial streets, etc.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
B. Supplemental Yard Regulations:
1. Front: The minimum depth of the front yard for all walls or fences more than two feet (2') in height shall be ten feet (10').
2. Rear: The rear yard required on lots abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'). If the building or structure exceeds forty feet
(40'), then one foot (1') of additional rear yard shall be provided for each story in height over forty feet (40'). (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996;
amd. Ord. 187, 6-10-1997; Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7R-6: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings/uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-
2000)
9-7R-7: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-
2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7R-8: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Condominium Hotel Or Motel: Upon the premises of a hotel, resort hotel, inn or motel containing at least two hundred (200) guestrooms, a
condominium hotel or motel may be established and maintained as a separate freestanding structure subject to a conditional use permit.
D. Timeshare Programs: In any hotel, resort hotel, inn or motel having at least fifty (50) guestrooms, timeshare program projects may be established and
maintained in all or any number of guestrooms within such facility.
E. Incidental Business: In any hotel, resort hotel, inn or motel containing at least one hundred (100) guestrooms, there may be conducted business
incidental thereto and for the convenience of the occupants and guests thereof.
1. Access: Such incidental businesses shall be accessed only from inside the building in which the same are located;
2. Floor Area: The floor area used for such incidental business purposes shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of such
building; and
3. Signs: Incidental business shall not have outside signage except restaurants, bars, retail sales, and health spas. Outside signage for restaurants,
bars, retail sales and health spas must be integrated as part of a permitted sign that principally advertises the use of the hotel, resort hotel, inn or
motel.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 429/565
F. Financial Ability Of Developer: The developer must satisfy the city council of his/her financial ability to carry out a proposed plan and shall prepare and
submit a schedule of construction, which construction shall begin within a period of six (6) months. Failure to carry out construction as scheduled shall
void the plan as approved unless an extension of time is approved by the city council.
G. Signage: It is understood that various businesses may operate on a resort property in addition to the gaming and hotel functions. All signage shall
comply with requirements of section 9-10-1 of this title, and shall not have more than one sign larger than twenty five feet (25') in height per resort
property no matter how many businesses operate on the resort property. Other businesses operating on a hotel resort property are not eligible for a
sign over twenty five feet (25') in height under any circumstances.
H. Weddings: Weddings are a permitted use for a resort hotel and casino. Hotel parcels that are not a resort hotel and casino must receive a conditional
use permit.
I. Special Events: All special events must receive approval of a special event permit prior to the event and comply with the special events chapter of this
code.
J. Lighting: Lighting sources shall be designed and located so that the direct source of light is shielded from view at all property lines abutting residential
development or from street rights of way. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
ARTICLE S. PUBLIC FACILITY (PF)
9-7S-1: PURPOSE:
The public facility district is established to provide for the location and development of sites suitable for the location and development of necessary public
buildings, structures and uses, and reasonable appurtenant private buildings, structures and accessory uses. The review of the location of the planning for
public facilities is intended to facilitate the coordination of urban services while minimizing the potential disruption of the uses of nearby properties. The
public facility district corresponds to and implements the public facilities and quasi-public facilities master plan categories. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
9-7S-2: PERMITTED USES:
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Religious assembly. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008)
9-7S-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Aircraft maintenance.
Aircraft related products, sales and/or storage.
Airports and heliports, including accessory commercial uses.
Automobile rental.
Childcare facility.
Retail sales.
Slot and pinball machines.
Travel bureau. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008; Ord. 432, 12-8-2009, eff. 12-31-2009)
9-7S-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7S-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7S-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
Development in the PF district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:22 of this section, in addition to the standards established in other sections
of these regulations.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 430/565
TABLE 9-7:22
Maximum building height 3 stories/50 feet1
Minimum building setbacks:
Front 25 feet
Side 10 feet
Rear 10 feet
Street side 25 feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot depth 150 feet
Maximum roofed area 30 percent
Note:
1.Additional stories may be permitted with a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 187, 6-10-1997)
9-7S-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7S-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7S-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
ARTICLE T. PARKS, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE (PROS)
9-7T-1: PURPOSE:
The parks, recreation and open space district is intended to provide for temporary and permanent open spaces in the community, to prevent irreversible
environmental damage to sensitive areas and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people by limiting development in areas where police and
fire protection, protection against flooding by storm water or other services cannot be provided without excessive cost to the community. The parks,
recreation and open space district corresponds to and implements the parks/recreation and open space master plan categories. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996)
9-7T-2: PERMITTED USES:
Active and passive open spaces.
Bicycle/pedestrian/horse trails.
Parks and recreational areas and facilities.
Playgrounds.
Scenic drives and access roads.
Wildlife preserves. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 431/565
9-7T-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Agricultural uses.
Amphitheater.
Cattle grazing uses.
Fairgrounds.
Golf course.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Stables, commercial.
Tennis courts. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-7T-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory structures. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7T-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7T-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
All buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of the Mesquite comprehensive parks and recreation plan or the terms of the conditional
permit as issued by the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7T-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and/or uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7T-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7T-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses authorized in this district. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
ARTICLE U. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
9-7U-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of the planned unit development is to encourage design flexibility, thereby enabling the applicant to capitalize on a site's desirable features in
ways that would be prohibited under the otherwise applicable zoning. Under the PUD approach, land may be designed in ways that would not be possible
under a strict application of existing zoning and subdivision regulations. It is intended to reduce the cost of infrastructure necessary to serve the new
development while better promoting land use efficiency and environmental protection. A PUD will exhibit excellence in design, site arrangements,
integration of uses and structures and protect the integrity of surrounding development. The rezoning of property to the PUD district may be deemed
appropriate if the development proposed for the district can accomplish one or more of the following goals:
A. Providing for an orderly and creative arrangement of land uses that are harmonious and beneficial to the community;
B. Providing for a variety of housing types, employment opportunities or commercial or industrial services, or any combination thereof, to achieve variety
and integration of economic and redevelopment opportunities;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 432/565
C. Providing for flexibility in the land uses, in the density of development, and in other matters typically regulated in zoning districts;
D. Providing for cultural, civic, educational, medical, religious or recreational facilities, or any combination thereof, in a planned or a unique setting and
design;
E. Providing for the redevelopment of areas where depreciation of any type has occurred;
F. Providing for the revitalization of designated areas;
G. Promoting or allowing development to occur in accordance with a uniform set of standards which reflect specific circumstances of the site;
H. Avoiding premature or inappropriate development that would result in incompatible uses or would create traffic and public service demands that exceed
the capacity of existing or planned facilities;
I. Encouraging area sensitive site planning and design;
J. Contributing to health, safety and general welfare of the community and providing development which is compatible with the city's goals and objectives.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article:
AASHTO STANDARDS: Standards that are published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: The minimum standards for development in the PUD district, including, but not limited to, standards for intensity and type
of use; densities, building and setback requirements; provision for utilities; topography and drainage patterns; signage; open space and landscaping; on
site vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking; urban design elements and features; and site amenities.
MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A specific written plan and accompanying maps which identify, with respect to a PUD district development, the
proposed location and size of development parcels, land uses and zoning designations; transportation plans and a traffic impact analysis; open space,
community facilities and amenity plans; and the applicable development regulations and design standards. (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-3: REZONING AND MINIMUM SITE AREA:
Property may be rezoned to the planned unit development district by the city council in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and chapter 5 of
this title. Each rezoning parcel shall be described as a separate district, with distinct boundaries and specific design and development standards. The
rezoning shall include the adoption of a specific master development plan and development standards. A development agreement is encouraged between
the city and the developer.
The minimum site area for a planned unit development is five (5) acres, except that the city council may waive this requirement when proper planning
justification is shown. (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the submittals required, the following must accompany an application for rezoning submitted by a property owner:
A. A metes and bounds description of the proposed planned unit development district;
B. A proposed master development plan for the entire site;
C. Development standards that are proposed to be applied to the development;
D. Any proposed conditions, covenants and restrictions for the development, including easements and grants for public utility purposes;
E. The location of primary and secondary thoroughfares proposed for the development, including right of way widths and the location of access points to
abutting streets;
F. Identification of all rights of way, easements, open spaces or other areas to be dedicated, deeded or otherwise transferred to the city;
G. A plan for the extension of any necessary public services and facilities, including sewer facilities and facilities for flood control and drainage;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 433/565
H. Guidelines for the physical development of the property, including illustrations of proposed architectural, urban design, landscape, open space and
signage concepts;
I. The location and description of all buffering that is proposed between the development site and adjacent properties;
J. Additional information and detail as may be required in order to respond to the unique characteristics of the site and its location. (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000,
eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-5: PERMITTED USES:
Any combination of residential, commercial, industrial or public uses may be permitted within a specific planned unit development to the extent they are
consistent with the master development plan for that district. The uses to be permitted within the district must be specified in the adopted master
development plan for the district. Because of the nature and purpose of the PUD district, notwithstanding any other provision of this article:
A. An application to rezone property to the PUD district may be denied by the city council, at its complete discretion, if it finds that the proposed
development is incompatible or out of harmony with surrounding uses or the pattern of development within the area;
B. No use, type of development or development standard is presumptively permitted within the PUD unless it already has been included in the adopted
plan for the district;
C. An application to allow within the PUD district a particular use, type of development or development standard which has not already been included in
the adopted plan for the district may be denied if it is not compatible or out of harmony with the surrounding uses or the pattern of development within
the area. (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-6: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Open Space Provision And Design Criteria:
1. All significant natural features shall be preserved and, where necessary, protected by setbacks and easements from development.
2. Development shall be designed and sited to preserve and protect the one hundred (100) year floodplain.
3. Significant stands of native trees and any other areas of substantial vegetation shall be preserved and protected from alteration and destruction.
4. No parking areas, storage areas, or required park acreage shall be computed as open space. Landscape buffer areas, however, may be included in
open space computations.
B. Ownership And Maintenance Of Common Open Space:
1. Common open space must be set aside for the use and benefit of the residents and owners.
2. If land is set aside for common open space, the PUD must be organized as a community interest community in one of the forms permitted by
Nevada Revised Statutes 116.
3. Association for the PUD my not be dissolved or disposed of any common open space by sale or otherwise, without first offering to dedicate the
common open space to the city. That offer must be accepted or rejected within in one hundred twenty (120) days.
C. Open Space Dedication: The city may accept dedication of common open space, or any interest therein, for public use and maintenance, but the city
cannot require, as a condition of approval of a planned unit development, that land set aside for common open space be dedicated or made available
to the public use. (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-7: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
In connection with the approval of a planned unit development district, the city council shall adopt a master development plan and development standards,
which will thereafter govern the development of the property within the district. In considering the approval of a master development plan and development
standards for a planned unit development district, the city council shall be guided by the following objectives, and may impose such conditions and
requirements deemed necessary to meet the following objectives:
A. Consistency of the proposed development with the long range comprehensive master plan, this title, and other applicable plans, policies, standards and
regulations;
B. Compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent and surrounding development;
C. Minimization of the development's impact upon adjacent roadways and neighborhood traffic, and upon other public facilities and infrastructure;
D. Protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 434/565
9-7U-8: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Residential districts in a planned unit development shall follow the standard subdivision procedure, as outlined in chapter 6 of this title. The tentative map
shall include the public and private street design and dimension, lot design and dimension, location of driveways, buildings, walls, fences, walkways, open
space areas, park areas, parking areas, drainage information, street names and location of utilities. The final map shall indicate the use location and
dimension of all proposed structures, streets, easements, driveways, walkways, parking areas, park areas, recreational facilities, open spaces and
landscaped areas.
A. Applicable Zoning Districts: A PUD may have the following residential zoning districts: RE-1, RE-2, RE-3, SF, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4.
B. Park Acreage Requirement: A PUD district must provide five (5) acres of park per one thousand (1,000) persons. If the development does not have one
thousand (1,000) persons, the park area required will be based on a ratio: five hundred (500) persons will equal two and one-half (21/2) acres of park,
and so forth. Park credit, refunds and dedication offers are subject to requirements found in the residential construction tax ordinance. The persons per
household figure from the census bureau will determine the number of people per unit.
C. Common Open Space Requirements:
1. A minimum of twelve percent (12%) of the gross land area must be preserved as common or public open space for the PUD.
2. In addition to the required base amount of common open space (12 percent), a minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross land area must be
provided as private open space. This required private open space is exclusive of any yard requirements and shall be allocated equally to each
residential lot and/or development envelope.
3. The location and character of a PUD's open space shall be as follows:
a. Common open space areas shall be linked to existing and planned public open space areas to provide an overall open space system, wherever
possible;
b. Common open space areas shall be arranged so as to maximize access and utilization by resident of the PUD;
c. Private open space shall be situated on each residential lot and/or development envelope or immediately adjacent to each unit. Common open
space will not be considered in the measurement of private open space;
d. Where open space improvements are to be provided, a safe, secure and barrier free system of trails, paths and walkways shall be designed. The
walkway system shall link residences with recreation areas, schools, commercial areas and public facilities;
e. Physical improvements that are permitted within common open space areas may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Pedestrian paths, located in street rights of way or pedestrian easements, at a minimum width of five feet (5') with a paved surface;
(2) Paved bike paths located in street rights of way or other open space per AASHTO standards;
(3) Trails, for equestrian, joggers or bikers, paved with materials such as wood chips or gravel, per AASHTO standards;
(4) Riding stables;
(5) Tennis courts;
(6) Swimming pools;
(7) Golf courses;
(8) Clubhouses;
(9) Athletic fields.
D. Building Regulations:
1. Building Height: No building or structure may be more than two (2) stories or exceed a total height of thirty five feet (35').
2. Building Setbacks: Due to the flexibility of the PUD concept, it is impractical to define an exact pattern for the arrangement of group dwellings. It is
the intent of this section, however, to provide a functional and nonmonotonous orientation of units with a maximum of open space. Actual setbacks
shall be established through PUD adoption, with the design standards for the development and the tentative map process. The minimum spacing
between buildings in a residential PUD shall comply with all fire code and building code regulations governing spacing. In the event that an approved
PUD does not have adopted design standards, the setbacks standards for the put will be as listed below.
3. Perimeter Lot Lines: All buildings shall have a setback of at least fifty feet (50') from a perimeter lot line.
4. Side Yards: Side yards abutting a street (public or private) shall not be less than twenty feet (20') without extenuating circumstances.
5. Spacing Between Buildings: The minimum spacing between buildings in a residential planned unit development shall comply with all fire code and
building code regulations governing spacing. In addition, the following minimum setbacks are required between structures:
a. Front To Street: The front setback of residential buildings is fifteen feet (15') from the back of sidewalk, or curb if a sidewalk is not planned. The
garage must be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk.
b. Front To Front: Buildings that have a front to front relationship across a landscaped area or open courtyard must maintain a minimum setback
between buildings of fifty feet (50').
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 435/565
c. Side To Side: Buildings that have a side yard to side yard relationship must maintain a minimum setback of ten feet (10').
d. Side To Rear: Buildings that have a side to rear yard relationship must maintain a minimum setback of twenty five feet (25').
e. Rear To Rear: Buildings that have a rear yard to rear yard relationship must maintain a minimum setback of forty feet (40').
f. MF Districts: In MF districts, for buildings in excess of thirty five feet (35') in height, the minimum setbacks require an additional ten feet (10') to
those listed above.
6. Parking Requirements: All buildings/uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title.
7. Road Requirements: All roads, including private, shall be built to minimum standards as required by these regulations and further detailed by the
engineering department.
8. Screening And Buffering Standards: Where appropriate and not in conflict with this section, the supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9
of this title shall apply to all structures and uses authorized by the PUD provisions. In residential projects, solid screening will be required where
appropriate.
9. Trash Enclosures: All trash enclosures shall comply with the adopted city standards.
10. Parking Of Commercial Vehicles: Commercial vehicles are prohibited from parking anywhere in the city except as per section 9-8-5 of this title.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; Ord. 260, 12-10-2001; Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
9-7U-9: COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Applicable Zoning Districts: A PUD may have the following commercial districts: CR-1, CR-2, PB and HT.
B. Uses: Permitted, conditional and accessory uses shall be as designated in the commercial districts listed above. Any additional uses, designated as
planned, may be incorporated subject to city council approval. Applicants may apply for any nondesignated uses through the conditional use process.
C. Requirements:
1. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross site area shall be in common open space.
2. Common open space shall not have any dimension less than ten feet (10') nor be less than three hundred (300) square feet in area.
3. Common open space may not include the required parking lot landscaping.
4. Common open space shall be arranged so as to maximize access and utilization by site users.
5. Common open space shall be linked to existing and planned public open space areas to provide an overall open space system, wherever possible.
6. Where open space improvements are to be provided, a safe, secure and barrier free system of trails, paths and walkways shall be designed. The
walkway system shall link the site with schools, recreation areas, other commercial areas and public facilities.
D. Building Regulations:
1. Building Height: No building or structure may be more than two and one-half (21/2) stories or exceed a total height of thirty five feet (35').
2. Building Setbacks: Due to the flexibility of the PUD concept, it is impractical to define an exact pattern for the arrangement of buildings. It is the intent
of this section, however, to provide a functional orientation of buildings with a maximum of open space.
3. Perimeter Lot Lines: All buildings shall have a setback of at least fifty feet (50') from a perimeter lot line of the PUD.
4. Side Yards: Side yards abutting a street (private or public) shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
5. Spacing Between Buildings: The minimum spacing between buildings in a commercial planned unit development shall comply with all fire code and
building code regulations governing spacing. In addition, the following minimum setbacks are required between structures:
a. Front Yard Setback: A building fronting on a street must be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk, or back of curb if a
sidewalk is not planned at the location.
b. Side Yard Setback:
(1) Side yard setbacks between commercial structures, or between commercial and industrial structures, are not required on internal lots.
(2) If a side yard abuts a residentially zoned property or use, a public or private street, a continuous landscaped side yard of twenty feet (20') is
required. This setback shall not be used for parking.
c. Rear Yard Setback:
(1) If a rear yard abuts a commercial or industrial use or zoning district, a minimum rear yard setback of ten feet (10') is required.
(2) If a rear yard abuts a residential use or residentially zoned property, a rear yard setback of twenty feet (20') shall be provided. This setback
shall not be used for parking or drives and shall be landscaped.
6. Screening Requirements:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 436/565
a. Where appropriate and where not in conflict with this section, the supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all
structures and uses authorized by the PUD provisions.
b. All commercial projects shall provide a solid screen fence or wall not less than six feet (6') in height along all rear and side property lines which are
common to property zoned for residential purposes, except where buildings and parking are more than one hundred feet (100') from the setback
line, or within a floodplain. In the case of a floodplain, the solid wall or fence may be replaced by a wrought iron structure where appropriate.
7. Trash Enclosures: All trash enclosures shall comply with adopted city standards.
8. Parking Requirements: All buildings/uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title.
9. Road Requirements: All roads shall be built to minimum standards as required by these regulations and by the engineering department. (Ord. 172,
9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-10: INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Applicable Zoning Districts: A PUD may have the following industrial zoning districts: IR-1, IR-2.
B. Uses: Permitted, conditional and accessary uses shall be as designated in the industrial districts listed above. Any additional uses, designated as
planned, may be incorporated subject to city council approval. Applicants may apply for any nondesignated uses through the conditional use process.
C. Common Open Space Requirements:
1. Fifteen percent (15%) of the gross site area shall be in common open space.
2. Common open space shall not have any dimension less than ten feet (10') nor be less than three hundred (300) square feet in area.
3. Common open space may not include the required parking lot landscaping.
4. Common open space shall be arranged so as to maximize access and utilization by site users.
5. Common open space shall be linked to existing and planned public open space areas to provide an overall open space system, wherever possible.
6. Where open space improvements are to be provided, a safe, secure and barrier free system of trails, paths and walkways shall be designed. The
walkway system shall link the site with schools, recreation areas, other commercial areas and public facilities.
D. Building Regulations:
1. Building Height: No building or structure in the IR-1 planned district may be more than one story or exceed a total height of twenty five feet (25'). No
building or structure in the IR-2 planned district may be more than four (4) stories or exceed a total height of fifty feet (50').
2. Building Setbacks: Due to the flexibility of the PUD concept, it is impractical to define an exact pattern for the arrangement of buildings. It is the intent
of this section, however, to provide a functional orientation of buildings with a maximum of open space.
3. Perimeter Lot Lines: All buildings shall have a setback of at least fifty feet (50') from a perimeter lot line of the PUD.
4. Side Yards: Side yards abutting a street (private or public) shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
5. Spacing Between Buildings: The minimum spacing between buildings in an industrial PUD shall comply will all fire code and building code
regulations governing spacing. In addition, the following minimum setbacks are required between structures:
a. Front Yard Setback: A building fronting on a street must be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the back of sidewalk, or back of curb if a
sidewalk is not planned at the location.
b. Side Yard Setback:
(1) Side yard setbacks between commercial structures or between commercial and industrial structures are not required on internal lots;
(2) If a side yard abuts a residential use or residentially zoned property, a continuously landscaped side yard of fifty feet (50') is required. This
setback shall not be used for parking and shall only be broken at points of access to the site.
c. Rear Yard Setback:
(1) If a rear yard abuts a commercial or industrial use or zoning district, a minimum rear yard setback of ten feet (10') is required.
(2) If a rear yard abuts a residential use or residentially zoned property, a setback of fifty feet (50') shall be provided. This setback shall not be used
for parking or drives and shall be landscaped.
6. Screening Requirements:
a. Where appropriated and where not in conflict with this section, the supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to
all structures and uses authorized by the PUD provisions.
b. All industrial projects shall provide a solid screen fence or wall not less than six feet (6') in height along all rear and side property lines which are
common to property zoned for residential purposes, except that such solid screening shall not extend in front of the front building line or though a
floodplain but may be replaced by wrought iron structure where appropriate.
7. Trash Enclosures: All trash enclosures shall comply with adopted city standards.
8. Parking Requirements: All buildings/uses shall comply with the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this title.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 437/565
9. Road Requirements: All roads shall be built to minimum standards as required by these regulations and by the engineering department. (Ord. 172,
9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
9-7U-11: MODIFICATION OF MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development of property within the planned unit development district may proceed only in strict accordance with the approved master development
plan and development standards. Any request by or on behalf of the property owner, or any proposal by the city, to modify the approved master
development plan or development standards shall be filed with the building and zoning department. In accordance with subsections A and B of this
section, the director shall determine if the proposed modification is "minor" or "major", and the request or proposal shall be processed accordingly.
A. Minor Modification: A minor modification is a modification which is requested or agreed to by the property owner and which is intended to accomplish
one or more of the following:
1. A change in the location of a use from the location specified in the approved master development plan, but only if the change in location will not have
a significant impact on other uses in the area;
2. The addition of uses that are comparable in intensity to those permitted in connection with the rezoning approval or the approval of a master
development plan for the district;
3. A change in the parking lot layout, building location or other similar change that conforms with the intent of the previously approved master
development plan and development standards;
4. A change in the species of plant material proposed for the district;
5. A decrease in the density or intensity of the development from that previously approved for the district; (Ord. 239, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000)
6. Any other change or modification of a similar nature which the director determines will not have a significant impact on the district or its surroundings.
A minor modification shall be reviewed and acted upon administratively by the director. An applicant who is aggrieved by the director's decision may
appeal that decision to the city council by filing a written appeal with the department no later than fifteen (15) days after the date the applicant
receives notice of the administrative decision, pursuant to subsection 9-4-9B of this title. (Ord. 382, 8-28-2007, eff. 9-20-2007)
B. Major Modification: A major modification includes any modification that does not qualify as a minor modification. A major modification shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures and standards applicable to a master plan amendment application, as set forth in section 9-5-1 of this
title. (Ord. 434, 2-23-2010)
ARTICLE V. MOBILE HOME SPECIAL DISTRICT (M-H)
9-7V-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The mobile home district is established to provide for the location and development of mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions in a quality
environment. Mobile home estates are not intended for the isolated lot, but shall be for use in areas where larger tracts of land are available for
development and can be developed to a high standard of quality with landscaping, recreation facilities, etc., and are designed and intended for mobile
homes only. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7V-2: PERMITTED USES:
In a mobile home district M-H, no building or other structure shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed other than the following uses:
A. Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks and normal incidental uses such as vending machines, laundromats and accessory buildings containing the
following: management offices, storage areas and recreational facilities for the sole use and convenience of the management and residents of the park,
upon the condition that the development plan, including advertising signs, etc., be approved by the city council.
B. Mobile Home Estates: One mobile home, provided it is used as a single-family residence and is located on its own lot or parcel of land, including all
required yard areas. Accessory uses, buildings and structures shall be allowed if they are clearly incidental to a permitted use and when placed upon
the same lot or parcel with the permitted use.
C. Conditional Use Permit: Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit. The following additional uses may be permitted, subject to securing a
conditional use permit as provided for in section 9-5-3 of this title:
1. Home occupations1.
2. Planned development units, subject to the provisions of article U of this chapter. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7V-3: USES PROHIBITED:
All other uses are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 438/565
9-7V-4: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property standards shall apply to mobile home parks or mobile home estates, except as may be modified or restricted as provided in chapter
8 of this title:
A. Mobile Home Estates:
1. Minimum Building Site Area: The minimum building site area for a mobile home estates subdivision is five (5) acres.
2. Dwelling Unit Density And Lot Area: The dwelling unit density shall not exceed five (5) dwelling units per gross acre and the lot area shall not be less
than six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet for any single-family dwelling.
3. Lot Dimensions:
a. Width: Interior lots shall have a minimum width of sixty five feet (65'); corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75'); lots located
on a knuckle or cul-de-sac shall have a minimum street frontage of thirty nine feet (39'); lots located on a curve shall have a minimum street
frontage of fifty two feet (52').
b. Depth: Lots facing on local streets (or frontage streets) shall have a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'), except any lot fronting on the
turnaround section of a cul-de-sac or knuckle shall have a minimum depth of one hundred fifteen feet (115'); lots facing on major streets or
highways shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125'); lots backing on freeways, major highways, railroad rights of way,
commercial or industrial districts shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125').
4. Yards:
a. Front: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') in depth from the front property line or future width line of a street. On corner
lots, both main and accessory buildings on the side street shall have a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15').
b. Side: There shall be a side yard on each side of a dwelling. No side yard shall be less than five feet (5').
c. Rear: There shall be a rear yard of not less than fourteen feet (14') in depth from the rear property line.
d. Height: The height of a dwelling or structure shall not exceed two (2) stories, nor shall the overall height exceed thirty five feet (35').
e. Lot Coverage: Regardless of the other provisions of this title, the maximum roofed area on any lot shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total
lot area, including accessory buildings and eaves, but excluding covered parking. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
f. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings may be erected in the rear yard; provided, that the building complies with all of the following conditions:
(1) The building height does not exceed fourteen feet (14').
(2) The building shall not be less than six feet (6') from any side or rear property line.
(3) No portion of the building shall be within one foot (1') of any utility easement.
(4) The building shall have a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from any dwelling or other building. (Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
g. Off Street Parking: Every dwelling shall have a minimum of two (2) off street parking places. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
h. Special Provisions: Cabanas, ramadas and other structures may be added to a mobile home; provided, that said cabanas, ramadas and other
structures comply with all of the foregoing provisions.
i. Skirting: All mobile homes shall be skirted. All skirting shall be kept in place and in good repair at all times.
j. State Requirements: In addition to meeting the preceding requirements, mobile home parks shall otherwise meet the minimum requirements of
Nevada Revised Statutes 461A, mobile homes and parks, 6-29-1984, or subsequent amendments. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd.
Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
B. Mobile Home Parks:
1. Building Site: The minimum building site for a mobile home park is ten (10) acres.
2. Density: The maximum density is eight (8) mobile home spaces per gross acre. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 184, 5-13-1997)
3. Spacing: The mobile home spaces shall be a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet in area.
a. Width: Minimum space width shall be forty feet (40').
b. Depth: Minimum space depth shall be ninety feet (90').
4. Front Street Edge Setback: The mobile home shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from front street edge. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996)
5. Side Space Line: A minimum setback of five feet (5') from any portion of the mobile home; room additions or related awnings shall be provided to the
side space line. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 184, 5-13-1997)
6. Rear Space Line: A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from any portion of the mobile home, room additions or related awnings shall be provided to
the rear space line.
7. Wall Fence; Landscaping Strip: A six foot (6') block wall fence shall be constructed along all property lines adjacent to a different zoning district and
between adjoining mobile home parks. A six foot (6') decorative block wall fence and a landscaped strip ten feet (10') wide shall be provided along
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 439/565
the exterior property line which abuts a public street. The wall shall be set back ten feet (10') from the property line and the landscaped strip installed
between the wall and property line. The developer/owner shall maintain all landscaping between the wall and street.
8. Access: Access to all mobile home spaces shall be from the interior private streets of the park. There shall be no individual access to any mobile
home space from any public right of way.
9. Paving Of Private Streets: The private streets within the park shall be paved (concrete or asphalt) a minimum width of twenty eight feet (28') with a
two foot (2') rolled type concrete curb and gutter on each side constructed to city specifications.
10. Improvements: Off site and on site improvements shall be provided at the time of construction of the park. All improvements shall be in accordance
with city specifications and shall include curbs and gutters, streets and driveways, fire hydrants of a number and location in conformance with fire
department specifications and served by a minimum six inch (6") water main, underground utilities and street lighting to provide a minimum of onetenth
(0.1) foot-candle of light at street level.
11. Off Street Parking: At least two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided at each mobile home space. The parking spaces shall be paved with
asphalt.
12. Recreation Space: Recreation space shall be provided for each park having ten (10) or more spaces and shall be maintained for such use. A
minimum usable area of two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be set aside and developed for each park having at least ten (10) spaces and one
hundred (100) square feet of additional area for each mobile home space above ten (10). (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
13. Sewer System: Every park shall be served with an approved public sewer system with connections thereto on every mobile home space. Septic
tanks shall not be permitted. The sewer system shall comply with the provisions of all laws and ordinances of the city, Southern Nevada health
district and the Clark County sanitation district. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
14. Water System: Every park shall be served with a public water system, with connections thereto on every mobile home space for the use of the
occupants thereof. The supply system shall be installed so as to comply with the uniform plumbing code and with all other regulations or ordinances
of the city.
15. Detached Storage Buildings: Detached storage buildings not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area are permitted on each mobile
home space. All storage buildings shall be located on the rear one-half (1/2) of the space. No setbacks are required.
16. Sign: Only one on premises sign of not more than one hundred (100) square feet shall be permitted for each park and any such sign shall be set
back at least ten feet (10') from the property line. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-7V-5: OTHER MOBILE HOME USES:
A. Caretaker, Watchman Uses: A mobile home may be used as quarters for a caretaker or night watchman in conjunction with a commercial or industrial
use if approved as a conditional use permit in accordance with section 9-8-3 of this title.
B. Temporary Residence: A mobile home may be used as a temporary residence up to twelve (12) months on property zoned for single-family residential
uses only during construction of a permanent residence under a valid building permit and under the following conditions:
1. Installation Permit: The installation permit identifies the methods and inspections required for the installation of the mobile home on the property. The
permit and successful completion of all inspections is required prior to occupancy of the mobile home on the property. The permit shall not be issued
prior to the issuance of a building permit for a permanent residence on the property. The installation permit is valid for twelve (12) months from date
of issue. No renewals or extensions will be authorized, except by approval of a variance in accordance with section 9-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-
1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
ARTICLE W. COMMERCIAL-CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CR-3)
9-7W-1: PURPOSE:
The Commercial-Central Business District is intended to provide retail, service, office, and mixed uses that serve the entire community. The Commercial-
Central Business District corresponds to and implements in part the commercial retail master plan category. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 562 - FUNERAL HOME AND INTERMENT SERVICE . Go to new ordinance.
9-7W-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses in the PB District.
Accounting and bookkeeping.
Advertising agency offices.
Airline company office.
Airplane broker.
Antiques, retail (refurbishment, accessory).
Art store (picture framing, accessory).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 440/565
Art studio or school.
Artist, commercial.
Bakery.
Bank.
Barbershop.
Beauty parlor.
Bed and breakfast.
Bible and church supplies.
Bicycle shop; retail, new (repair, accessory).
Billing service.
Board and rooming houses.
Body apparel shop (new).
Books, new (used, accessory).
Brokerage house.
Cameras and film, retail (photo finishing, accessory).
Candy, retail.
Ceramic products, retail.
Christmas tree sales lot (November 15 through December 25).
Cigar store.
Clock, retail (repair, accessory).
Clothing sale, retail (new).
Coffee shop (breakfast, lunch).
Collection agency.
Computer sales (repair, accessory).
Confectionery, cooking and sales.
Costume rental (sales, accessory).
Credit bureau.
Dancing school.
Delicatessen.
Department store.
Detective or police agency.
Drapery, retail.
Dry goods store.
Electrical appliances, retail (new).
Embroidery shop.
Engineering office.
Finance company.
Fine arts gallery or store.
Florist.
Fraternal association, nonalcoholic.
Furrier, retail (new).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 441/565
Gift shop.
Health food products, retail.
Herbs, retail.
Hobby shop.
Ice cream parlor.
Imported goods, retail.
Indian goods, retail.
Insurance agency.
Interior design or decorator gallery (studio, accessory).
Jewelry store, retail (new).
Knit shop, retail (classes, accessory).
Library (public or private).
Loan company office.
Locksmith.
Magazine sales.
Mail services, parcel post, post boxes.
Market (fruit and vegetable), retail.
Market (meat and fish), retail.
Massage therapy.
Messenger service.
Museum.
Music store.
Newsstand.
Notary.
Offices (business or professional).
Optician.
Perfume, retail.
Photographer's studio.
Photographic equipment, retail (photo finishing, accessory).
Public parks/open space.
Radio, stereo store (new).
Religious assembly.
Residential dwellings.
Restaurant, nonalcoholic.
Rubber and metal stamp, retail (shop, accessory).
Sewing machine; retail, new (repair, accessory).
Shoe repair.
Shoe sales, retail (new).
Shoeshine stand.
Sporting goods, retail (new).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 442/565
Stained glass, retail (studio, accessory).
Stationery store.
TV store, retail (new).
Tailor (new sales; alteration, accessory).
Tearoom.
Telegraph office.
Telephone company office.
Telephone sales (new).
Temporary outdoor display and sales. Temporary outdoor display and sales are subject to the following requirements:
A. Outdoor display and sales are limited to a duration of thirty (30) days within a calendar year;
B. The space occupied by such displays does not exceed five percent (5%) of the gross floor area of the building occupied by the business
displaying the goods;
C. Such display does not interfere with traffic circulation or cause the deletion of any required parking spaces. Furthermore, such display will not
interfere with the safe, convenient passage of pedestrians.
Theater.
Toys, retail (new).
Transient lodging establishment.
Travel agency.
Watch repair. (Ord. 528, 10-24-2017)
9-7W-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Alcoholic beverage sales (accessory to restaurant).
Amusement arcade.
Amusement devices, sales and service.
Appliances, retail (used).
Bar.
Blueprint shop, copy service.
Brewpub.
Business school.
Carpet and rug, retail (cleaning, accessory).
Caterer.
Childcare facility.
Clothing sale (used).
Club, supper.
Coin shop (new/used).
Dry cleaning/dyeing agencies, retail (no processing plant).
Equipment rental (within a building).
Factory outlet stores, retail.
Farmers' market.
Filing equipment and office supplies, retail (new).
Filling station (no repair, convenience market accessory).
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 443/565
Floor covering, retail.
Fortune telling.
Furniture sale, retail.
Furrier, retail (used).
Gaming (limited).
Gaming (unlimited).
Garage, public (parking).
Garden supplies.
Greenhouse, incidental to retail sales of flowers, etc.
Guns, retail.
Gunsmith.
Handyman shop.
Hardware stores, retail.
Health center (athletic club).
Hotel.
Janitor and building cleaning service.
Jukebox (rental, sales service accessory).
Laboratory (medical, dental and veterinarian).
Lapidary, retail.
Liquor store, retail.
Mail order house (catalog store only).
Motel.
Paint store, retail.
Palmistry establishments.
Pet grooming.
Pet shop.
Picture framing.
Radio service or repair.
Radio studio (no antennas).
Resort hotel.
Stamp shop, retail.
Street vendors. Street vendors shall be considered in the commercial-central business district only after approval of a special use permit by the city. The
following standards shall apply to all such requests for street vendor special use permits:
A. Only businesses licensed to do business within a building in the commercial-central business district may request consideration for a street vendor
special use permit.
B. Street vendors shall be approved at a specific, permanent location.
C. Carts used for street vending shall be on wheels and the carts shall not be larger than three feet by five feet (3' x 5').
D. Only consumable products may be sold from a street vendor cart.
E. If located within a city or state right of way, encroachment permits and liability insurance shall be required.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 444/565
F. If adjacent to or in front of a business not their own, street vendor cart operators shall be responsible for obtaining permission of the affected
business and property owner.
G. Electrical and gas services require review and approval of the building and safety division and the fire marshal.
H. Approval of the health department is required for all food vendors.
I. Other conditions deemed appropriate by the city, to mitigate any adverse impacts to adjoining properties and pedestrians.
TV repair shop.
Tattoo parlor (body piercing, accessory).
Taxicab stand.
Veterinarian.
Vocational school.
Wedding chapel. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000; amd. Ord. 360, 12-12-2006, eff. 1-4-2007)
9-7W-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Caretaker and security guard quarters.
Decks, gazebos, gardens. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7W-5: PLANNED USES:
None at this time. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7W-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the CR-3 district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:23 of this section, in addition to the standards established
in the other sections of these regulations.
Table 9-7:23
Maximum building height 4 stories/70 feet
Minimum building setbacks1:
Front
Side
Rear
Side street
10 feet
0 feet
0 feet
0 feet
Maximum roofed area 60 percent
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 40 feet
Note:
1.See table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter buffer yard requirements adjoining residential districts, arterial and collector streets.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
B. Supplemental Dimensions:
1. Commercial locations that are adjacent to a single- or multi-family zoning district are required to have a ten foot (10') setback, adjacent to those
zones.
2. Corner lots shall have the building set back as not to restrict the sight distance areas.
3. Minimum parcel size in the commercial-central business district shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. All existing, legally created parcels of less
square footage shall be considered as grandfathered parcels.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 445/565
4. Minimum lot width in the commercial-central business district shall be fifty feet (50'). All existing, legally created parcels of less lot width shall be
considered as grandfathered parcels.
5. On corner lots, if a building is adjacent to a zone boundary line, the side yard facing the zone boundary shall have the same setback as the front
yard of the more restrictive zone. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
6. Each building is limited to no more than thirty percent (30%) single story in height. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
9-7W-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. For parcels that are in the downtown redevelopment district, there are no parking requirements. If a property owner elects to provide parking, the
surface and dimensions of the parking lot shall be pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title.
B. For parcels that are not in the downtown redevelopment district, parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff.
3-3-2000)
9-7W-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
9-7W-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district. In addition, all structures shall comply with the design standards for the downtown central business district and pursuant to
section 9-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Display Of Goods: All display, storage, production and sale of goods shall be provided within the primary structure.
D. Lighting: Lighting shall be designed and located so that the source is not directly visible from adjacent residential properties or streets.
E. Objectionable Uses: All uses shall be free from objections because of odor, dust, noise, vibration or other causes. (Ord. 234, 2-8-2000, eff. 3-3-2000)
F. Signs: All signs shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 10 of this title. In addition, signs shall conform to the design standards for the downtown
central business district. (Ord. 346, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-21-2006)
ARTICLE X. COMMERCIAL-AUTO MALL (CR-4)
9-7X-1: PURPOSE:
The commercial-auto mall district is intended to provide sites for new automobile dealerships and related uses. The commercial-auto mall district
corresponds to and implements in part the commercial retail master plan category. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-2: PERMITTED USES:
Automobile dealerships, new and/or used. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
None. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Automobile rental.
Automobile service facility. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-5: PLANNED USES:
None. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 446/565
9-7X-6: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the CR-4 district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:24 of this section, in addition to the standards established
in the other sections of these regulations.
Table 9-7:24
Maximum building height 2 stories/35 feet
Minimum district size 20 acres
Minimum building setbacks:
Front
Side
Rear
Side street
10-25 feet1
5 feet2
5 feet2
15 feet
Maximum roofed area 60 percent
1 Front setback varies with the street right of way width. The table for all zoning district front setbacks can be found in section 9-8-4 of this title.
2 From nonresidential uses. Setback from residential uses is 40 feet.
(Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-7: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-8: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
9-7X-9: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Number Permitted: There shall be a minimum of five (5) car dealerships included in each CR-4 zoning district.
B. Acreage: Each of the required dealerships within the district shall be on a minimum two hundred thousand (200,000) square foot site.
C. Auto Display:
1. There shall be no racks, raised platforms, etc., that raise cars more than two feet (2') above adjacent display areas or grade. There shall also be no
racks that tilt the cars in any way to show the underside, unless they are used inside a showroom or sixty feet (60') from the property line;
2. Display areas within the CR-4 district shall use an enhanced paving material such as exposed aggregate, brick, stamped concrete or a similar
surface material approved by the planning and redevelopment director. Asphalt will not be accepted in these locations.
3. Automobile display shall not be allowed on top of any building.
D. Setbacks:
1. The following are excluded from setback provisions:
a. Steps and walks;
b. Driveways and associated curbs;
c. Customer parking areas not less than ten feet (10') from any property lines and occupying not more than fifty percent (50%) of the required
landscaped area.
d. Signs.
e. Lighting.
2. In addition to the standard setbacks, the following uses shall maintain these additional setbacks:
Sales or display buildings shall be set back a minimum of thirty five feet (35') from any property line.
E. Walls And Fences:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 447/565
1. All mechanical equipment, service, storage and trash areas shall be screened from view from any street by a wall. Landscaping alone shall not be
deemed sufficient.
2. Perimeter walls shall be no less than eight feet (8') and no greater than ten feet (10') in height.
F. Refuse Collection: All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be visually screened from access streets, highways and adjacent properties by an opaque
screen.
G. Vehicle Storage: No materials, supplies or equipment, including firm owned or operated trucks, shall be stored in any area on site except inside a
closed building or behind a visual barrier or service area which screens the equipment from view of all public streets. The single exception shall be any
vehicles which are a part of the dealer's customer display.
H. Noise Attenuation: All body shop repair and compressor work shall only be performed in an enclosed area. Enclosed buildings are those buildings
which activities are totally contained within walls of the building and that only adequate doors for access and egress are incorporated. Air compressor
exhaust stacks shall contain a muffling device. Noise attenuation shall meet all standards and ordinances of the city.
I. Flagpoles: A flagpole that is one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the nearest building shall be permitted. A flagpole flying a flag must be at a main
vehicular or pedestrian access to a building or site.
J. Building Planning Criteria: It is the intent that the architecture reflects a common theme or style. This style shall be evident in the building's forms and
materials.
1. Service Buildings: It will not be accepted that service buildings are utilitarian for the most part; rather they must be planned to blend aesthetically with
the rest of the site. End walls of long service bays must at least match in detail the walls of the adjacent areas and buildings.
2. Roofs: Because of the rather large floor areas in the dealerships and other commercial uses, the mall is required to have a minimum of fifty percent
(50%) sloping tile roofs. These variations in roof shapes must be carefully integrated into the design and relate the architectural theme. All flat roofs
must be below a parapet. The roof side of all parapets shall be finished with either roofing material or other exterior finish materials, such as plaster,
vertical metal siding, or other material approved by the redevelopment director. Any rooftop mounted mechanical equipment shall be hidden from
view from any surround public street by a parapet wall as well as an architectural screen such as a mechanical penthouse.
K. Lighting: Lighting shall be arranged so that it does not present a safety hazard to on site or off site traffic. No lighting shall be allowed to shine directly
into a residential area or otherwise to negatively impact surrounding properties.
L. Signs/Rooftop Displays: Rooftop signs and other rooftop displays are strictly prohibited. All other signage will comply with chapter 10 of this title.
M. Public Address System Prohibited: The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system is prohibited.
N. Service Bay Openings: Openings in service bays shall not face public rights of way and shall be designed to minimize the intrusion into adjoining
parcels.
O. Location Of Used Parts Or Equipment: No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment shall be located in any open area outside of an enclosed
building. (Ord. 261, 11-13-2001)
ARTICLE Y. COMMERCIAL - HOSPITAL SERVICES (CR-H)
9-7Y-1: PURPOSE:
The CR-H district is intended to provide for the development of hospital and specialized medical services in a central location for residents of the city and
surrounding communities. Hospitals, healthcare, medical offices and related uses for convenience to hospital activities are appropriate in the CR-H zone,
which should be located on streets with a designation of collector or larger. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-2: PERMITTED USES:
Birthing center.
Business offices for healthcare, health services and support organizations.
Childcare facility (as part of an employee benefit program).
Diagnostic imaging center.
Eating places and cafeterias.
Education (healthcare related programs).
Florist shop.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 448/565
Gift shop.
Health club/gymnasium (as part of an employee benefit program).
Hospice.
Hospital, including acute or specialty care.
Medical/dental offices.
Medical/pathological laboratories.
Medical supplies.
Nursing home.
Pharmacy.
Psychiatric or substance abuse facility.
Quick copy establishments.
Rehabilitation facility.
Surgery center.
Urgent care. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Childcare facility (except as part of an employee benefit program).
Fire stations and EMS facilities.
Parks and recreation areas and facilities.
Public, quasi-public and institutional facilities and uses.
Religious assembly.
Restaurant.
Taxi stand. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002; amd. Ord. 401, 6-24-2008, eff. 7-22-2008)
9-7Y-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings.
Accessory uses.
Decks, gazebos, gardens.
Parking lots and garages. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-5: HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Standards: Development in the CR-H district shall meet the standards established in table 9-7:24 of this section, in addition to the standards established
in the other sections of these regulations.
TABLE 9-7:24
Maximum building height 3 stories/50 feet
Minimum building/parking lot setbacks1:
Front
Side
Rear
Street side
20 feet; 25 feet from arterial streets2
15 feet
25 feet
15 feet
Maximum roofed area 50 percent
Minimum open space of lot 15 percent
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 449/565
Minimum building setback next to residential zone 40 feet
Notes:
1.See also table 9-8:2 in section 9-8-4 of this title for perimeter landscape buffer yard requirements.
2.For all buildings, walls and fences more than 2 feet in height.
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
B. Supplemental Dimensions: Properties abutting a residential zone shall meet the minimum setback requirements found in chapter 8 of this title.
C. Additional Height Permitted: Two (2) additional stories, for a total of five (5) stories may be permitted pursuant to an approved conditional use permit.
Applicable bulk regulations will be determined as part of the CUP requirements. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-6: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking shall be provided pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-7: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Site plan approval shall be required when appropriate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-8: DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Supplemental Standards Applicable: The supplemental standards set forth in chapters 8 and 9 of this title shall apply to all structures and uses
authorized in this district.
B. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited.
C. Display Of Goods: All display, storage, production and sale of goods shall be provided within the primary structure, except the display of operable
vehicles for sale, which may be displayed in any area located outside of required parking or landscaped areas.
D. Lighting: Lighting sources shall be designed and located so that the direct source of light is shielded from view at all property lines abutting residential
development, or from street rights of way.
E. Objectionable Uses: All uses shall be free from objections because of odor, dust, noise, vibration or other causes.
F. Signs: All signs shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002)
9-7Y-9: EXCLUSIVE SITE:
A. Economic Viability: In order to ensure the economic viability of hospital services to residents of the city and surrounding region, the city shall designate
only one site or activity node as CR-H. Hospital and healthcare related developments within the commercial-hospital (CR-H) zone shall be permitted
with the cooperation and consent of the directors of the central hospital development within the CR-H zone.
B. Land Use Exclusivity: Hospital services in the CR-H zone which are prohibited in all other zones within the city include:
Acute care hospital services.
Birthing center.
Cardiology - full service cardiology diagnostic unit.
Docking facility for specialized mobile diagnostic units (lithroscopy, cardiac, catheterization and MRI).
Emergency medical services for twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
Laboratory - full service hospital laboratory unit.
Radiology - full services, including CT, MRI and nuclear medicine.
Surgical suites - inpatient or outpatient.
Telemedicine services for transmission of hospital patient records to other healthcare facilities.
C. Termination Of Exclusivity: This section, entitled "Exclusive Site", shall expire and be terminated on the earlier to occur of the following:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 450/565
1. December 31 of the year 2022; or
2. The date upon which:
a. The central hospital in the CR-H zone achieves an average occupancy rate of seventy five percent (75%) (based upon the most recently
completed 3 month period); and
b. The population of the city exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) persons (as determined by the most recently completed decennial census as published
by the U.S. census bureau). (Ord. 275, 11-12-2002; amd. Ord. 301, 6-23-2004)
Chapter 8
SUPPLEMENTARY USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 560 - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. Go to new ordinance.
9-8-1: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory Dwelling Units:
1. Building Permit Required: Accessory dwelling units may be constructed only upon the issuance of a building permit, except as provided in the
Building Code.
2. Permanent Structures: Accessory dwelling units shall be permanent structures, and must be incidental to the primary building.
3. Water And Sewer: Accessory dwelling units shall be considered independent buildable sites, and be connected to public water and sewer services
where available, or have on site water and sewer facilities that comply with all City, County and State regulations.
4. Separate Sale: Accessory dwelling units may not be sold separately from the sale of the entire property, including the principal dwelling unit.
5. Height: The overall height of an accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to one story; provided, that a garage apartment or nonresidential caretaker's
quarters may be located over a garage.
6. Attached To Principal Dwelling: When the accessory dwelling unit is directly attached to the principal dwelling, it shall be considered an integral part
of the main building.
7. Square Feet: Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet of habitable area.
8. Setbacks: Accessory dwelling units shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') from any side or rear property line; shall have a minimum separation of
twenty feet (20') from any dwelling or other building (except garage apartments); and no portion of an accessory dwelling unit shall be within one foot
(1') of any utility easement.
9. Zoning: Accessory dwelling units are prohibited in manufactured housing, mobile home, single-family, and rural estates zoning designations, and
overlay uses thereof. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
B. Accessory Buildings:
1. Placement: Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited from being placed in front of the principal building and shall be placed in the rear yard,
except that a detached garage may be located in front of the principal residential building.
2. Side Street Yard: Accessory buildings adjacent to a side street shall have a side yard not less than six feet (6').
3. Rear Yard; Conditions: Accessory buildings may be erected in the rear yard in compliance with all of the following conditions:
a. There shall be a six foot (6') rear yard setback;
b. The building height does not exceed fourteen feet (14');
c. No portion of the building shall be within one foot (1') of any utility easement;
d. The building shall have a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from any dwelling or other buildings.
4. Building Permit Required: Accessory buildings may only be constructed upon the issuance of a building permit, except as provided in the building
code. Accessory buildings must be incidental to the principal building. (Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
C. Accessory Structures:
1. Swimming Pools, Private: Private swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the city swimming pool ordinance1 and all
city health and safety regulations.
2. Tennis Courts, Private: Private tennis courts shall not be constructed within twenty feet (20') of any adjoining residential property line. Tennis court
fences or walls shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height, and no lights for the tennis court shall be permitted within twenty five feet (25') of any
adjoining residential property line. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
3. Decks: If a deck extends into the established rear yard setback area for the lot or parcel, the floor elevation must not stand more than two feet (2')
above grade in the required setback area.
4. Setbacks: In no instance shall any permanent accessory structure, excluding a slab, be closer than six feet (6') to a side or rear property line.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 451/565
5. Height: Accessory structures taller than three feet (3') above natural grade shall comply with building setback lines.
6. Building Permit Required: Accessory structures may only be constructed after the issuance of a building permit for the proposed project, except as
authorized by the building code. Accessory structures must be incidental to the primary building. (Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
D. Guesthouses And Casitas:
1. These regulations for guesthouses and casitas, whether attached to or detached from the main structure, apply in districts where guesthouses are
permitted as an accessory to a single-family residence. Detached structures must meet all standards for accessory dwellings and buildings per
subsections A and B of this section, as well as the following standards:
a. A detached guesthouse or casita must not exceed five hundred (500) square feet of habitable area.
b. A detached guesthouse or casita must not exceed one story or fourteen feet (14') in height.
c. A guesthouse or casita must not be built with a full kitchen or other features of a dwelling unit, such as a separate power or water meter or unique
address. Electricity in the guesthouse must be limited to a single phase service and gas must be limited to service for a fireplace.
d. Any detached guesthouse or casita must be built with the same architectural style, roof angles, and colors as the main residence, or per any
design guidelines of the subdivision or PUD.
e. All setbacks and other zoning standards must be met without variance or waiver.
f. There shall be no more than one detached casita per residential lot.
2. A detached guesthouse or casita may be placed in the side or front yard of a single-family residence if all of the following conditions are met, in
addition to those found in subsection D1 of this section:
a. Front and side yard detached guesthouses and casitas are expressly permitted in the subdivision through the approved tentative map and/or PUD
standards and design manual.
b. The guesthouse meets all design criteria and standards for the appropriate PUD and/or subdivision, and must be built at the same time as the
main residence and under the same building permit.
c. The entrance must not face the street or an adjacent property, and the structure must be built at least twenty feet (20') from the front property line,
or greater if the required front setback is more than twenty feet (20'). Other setbacks and standards for the applicable zoning district shall also
apply, including subsection C4 of this section.
d. The minimum lot size for the single-family residence must be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, or fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet for
a residential lot within a PUD. (Ord. 296, 2-10-2004)
E. Residential Patio Covers:
1. Definition: A structure, not exceeding twelve feet (12') in height, and that is entirely open on two (2) or more sides. Patio covers shall only be used for
recreational and outdoor living purposes, and not as carports, garages, storage areas, or as habitable space.
2. Location: Patio covers may be allowed in the required rear yard area, but no portion of any such patio cover shall be closer than six feet (6') to any
rear or side property line and no stormwater runoff from any patio cover shall be allowed to run onto adjacent property.
a. Aluminum patio covers may extend within one foot (1') of the rear or side property line, only under the following conditions:
(1) The aluminum patio cover is a temporary structure that does not require a building permit;
(2) The residential lot is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size;
(3) The aluminum patio cover does not drain onto adjacent properties; and
(4) The aluminum patio cover is fire rated.
3. Maximum Patio Cover Area: In no case shall the area of any patio cover, or combination of patio covers, be greater than one-half (1/2) of the total
area of the rear yard; or exceed eight hundred (800) square feet; or exceed the maximum lot coverage of the residential zone, whichever is less.
4. Enclosed Patios: Any enclosed patio cover (a patio cover enclosed on more than 2 sides) shall comply with the required setbacks applicable to the
primary building.
5. Deck Or Balcony: There must be no deck or balcony incorporated above the patio cover structure in the rear yard.
6. Building Permit Required: Patio covers may only be constructed upon the issuance of a building permit, except as provided in the building code.
Patio covers must be incidental to the principal residential building. (Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
9-8-2: AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Unit Density And Lot Area:
1. Unit Density: The number of dwelling units per gross acre shall not exceed limits as set forth for the various districts for any lot or parcel within the
district.
a. If a lot or parcel lies within more than one district, the density of that portion within each district shall not exceed the density allowed for the district.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 452/565
b. The gross acres shall include all of the property within the interior lot lines and if the lot or parcel fronts on an existing or future public street or
other public right of way, the gross area may be calculated to the centerline of the future width of the public street or right of way, exclusive of
freeway or state highway.
2. Lot Area: The requirements of these regulations as to the minimum lot area shall not be construed to prevent the use of any lot or parcel of land in
any district for the construction of a single-family dwelling (except in those districts where single-family dwellings are prohibited), providing all other
requirements of these regulations are complied with, in the event such lot or parcel is:
a. Shown separately on any official subdivision map duly approved and recorded in the manner provided by law;
b. Deeded by a deed of record prior to the adoption of these regulations or amendment thereto;
c. Subject to a recorded contract of sales in full force and effect prior to the adoption of these regulations or amendment thereto.
3. Reduction Of Recorded Lot: Any lot or parcel of land, the title of which was recorded, shall not be reduced in any manner below the minimum lot
area, size or dimensions required by these regulations.
4. Use For Another Building: No portion of any lot or parcel of land which has been designated or used as any part of a building site area or yard as
required by these regulations shall be included as a portion of an area or yard for another building if such inclusion will reduce the building site or
yard requirement for the original lot or parcel of land to less than the minimum building site area dimension of yard for the land use district in which
such property is located.
5. Building Location: Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a "lot", as herein defined. In no case shall there be more than a main
residential building and its accessory buildings on one lot, except as otherwise provided in these regulations.
6. Individual Water And Sewer Systems; Lot Area: The minimum lot area required for any lot within any district is based on the lot being served by both
public utilities of water and sewer. Where applicable, the minimum lot area shall be not less than the minimum required by the Clark County district
health department for individual systems of water service and sewage disposal.
7. Reduction In Lot Area: No lot area shall be reduced so that the yards, other open spaces or total lot area shall be smaller than prescribed by these
regulations.
8. Insufficient Street Dedication: No building or grading permit shall be issued for a building or structure on a lot which abuts a street dedicated to a
portion of its required width and located on that side which insufficient dedication was secured and where the off site improvements of the street have
not been completed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the city engineer and the department of public works, except a
building permit may be granted for a single-family dwelling upon dedication of the required right of way and execution of an off site agreement.
a. Waiver: The city engineer may waive the completion of the off site improvements prior to issuance of the building permit subject to: 1) the
execution of a residential or commercial improvement agreement similar to the improvement agreement noted in subsection 9-6-6B of this title; 2)
the applicant furnishing a performance security similar to the security noted in subsection 9-6-6B3 of this title; and 3) the furnishing by the applicant
of a maintenance bond similar to the bond required in subsection 9-6-6C of this title.
b. Cost Of Inspection: Inspection and testing requirements are to be provided for in the same manner as noted in subsection 9-6-6R of this title.
9. Unimproved Disturbed Ground: No disturbed ground on any project shall remain unpaved or unimproved for more than thirty (30) days without the
application of dust palliatives. The palliatives shall be reapplied after every disturbance. Violation of this provision shall result in the temporary
revocation of all permits until corrections are made. Subsequent violations may result in permanent permit revocation. Continued violation, after
permit revocation, will authorize the city to put dust palliatives on property. The cost of palliative application will become a lien on the property if not
paid promptly.
B. Lot Dimensions: Every lot must have a minimum width and depth not less than that prescribed in the district under consideration. Each dimension is a
minimum only. One or both must be increased to attain the minimum lot area required.
1. Width: The width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting the front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured across the rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between
side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width
except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs and knuckles, where the eighty percent (80%) requirement shall not apply.
2. Depth: The depth of a lot shall be considered the minimum distance between the front and rear property line, measured perpendicular to the
centerline of the street upon which the lot fronts, and/or if the lot fronts on a curve, knuckle or cul-de-sac, measured by the radial of curve.
3. Minimum Less Than Prescribed: Where a lot has a minimum width or depth less than that prescribed by these regulations and the lot was of record
under one ownership at the time that the area was first zoned whereby the lot became nonconforming, the lot may be used subject to all other
property development standards of the district in which such lot is located.
4. Administrative Variance: When the minimum lot area requirement is met, but unusual practical difficulties are shown which preclude reasonably
meeting the lot width or depth requirement, or building setback requirement, the planning and redevelopment director may administratively allow a
deviation as allowed by Nevada Revised Statutes section 278.319 of up to ten percent (10%) from the minimum width or depth requirement, or
minimum setback requirement.
a. Such an administrative variance may be granted without the submission and approval of a formal variance application to the city council, so long
as the applicant obtains the written permission of the owner of any real property that would be adversely affected by the deviation, and so long as
the request is based on proven hardship due to physical challenges on the subject property.
b. Any decision regarding a denied or granted deviation may be appealed to the city council by the applicant or other aggrieved person.
C. Yards: Every lot shall have the minimum yards of not less than that prescribed in the district under consideration and all required yards shall extend the
width or depth of the lot and shall be open from the ground to the sky, except for permissible accessory buildings in the rear yard and as further
provided in these regulations. No yard or open space provided for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations for any building
shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on an adjoining lot or parcel whereon a building may be erected.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 453/565
1. Front Yards: Each lot shall have a front yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying along the front property line. The required front yard
shall be landscaped with appropriate materials and shall be maintained.
a. Multi-family, commercial and industrial parcels must comply with section 9-8-4, "Buffers And Landscaping", of this chapter, and subsection A9,
"Unimproved Disturbed Ground", of this section. Existing structures built and occupied prior to January 1, 2002, that are without landscaping in the
font yard may be granted a twelve (12) month grace period for landscaping installation upon written notice from the planning and redevelopment
department.
b. Single-family home front yards must be landscaped, with at least ground cover materials, within sixty (60) days of occupancy. Existing structures
built and occupied prior to January 1, 2002, that are without landscaping in the front yard may be granted a twelve (12) month grace period for
landscaping installation upon written notice from the planning and redevelopment department.
c. Where the future width line of a street does not conform to the front property line, the future width line of the street shall be used in determining the
front yard.
d. In determining the front yard, the required front yard depth for each district shall be measured by a line perpendicular to the front property line, or
by the radial line or radial line extended in the case of a curved front property line, to the corner or face of the building on the lot.
(1) Cul-De-Sac: Where a residential lot is facing on a cul-de-sac, the front yard may be reduced to ten feet (10') less than the minimum required for
the district in which the lot is located, but in no event shall any front yard be reduced to less than fifteen feet (15') in minimum depth, nor less
than twenty feet (20') where accessing a carport or garage.
(2) Knuckles: Where a residential lot is facing on a knuckle, the front yard may be reduced to five feet (5') less than the minimum required for the
district in which the lot is located, but in no event shall any front yard be reduced to less than fifteen feet (15') in minimum depth, nor less than
twenty feet (20') where accessing a carport or garage.
(3) Modification Of Front Yards For Partially Built Up Blocks: Where lots comprising fifty percent (50%) or more of the block frontage are developed
with a front yard either greater or lesser in depth than that prescribed in these regulations, the average of such existing front yards shall
establish the front yard for the remaining lots in the block frontage; however, a front yard determined in this way shall not be less than twenty
feet (20'). Existing front yards of more than fifty feet (50') shall be counted as fifty feet (50') in calculating the average.
(4) Collector Streets: Where a residential lot is facing on a major or minor collector street, the front yard shall be increased to thirty five feet (35') in
depth.
(5) Arterials: If circumstances require a residential lot to face an arterial, the front yard shall be increased to fifty feet (50') in depth.
2. Side Yards: Each lot shall have a side yard parallel to the side property line, extending from the rear of the front yard to the front of the rear yard. The
required side yard depth for each district shall be measured by a line perpendicular to the side property line to the corner or face of the building on
the lot.
3. Rear Yards: Every lot shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying along the rear property line. The required rear yard
depth as specified for each zoning district shall be measured by a line perpendicular to the rear property line to the nearest corner or face of the
building on the lot. In the case of a residential lot located on a cul-de-sac, knuckle or curve, the required rear yard depth may be reduced to ten feet
(10') less than the minimum otherwise required for the zoning district in which the lot is located; provided, that the total area of the remaining rear
yard is at least equal to the required rear yard area for a minimum size conforming lot in the zoning district.
4. Permitted Intrusions Into Required Yards: The following may project into required yards:
a. Architectural Features: Eaves, cornices, canopies, sills, belt courses and other similar architectural features may not project more than three feet
(3') into any required yard or space required between buildings on the same building site, but in no event under this provision shall any such
projection be closer than three feet (3') to any property line.
b. Fireplaces And Chimneys: Chimneys and fireplace structures not wider than eight feet (8'), measured in the general direction of the wall of which it
is a part, may not project more than two feet (2') into any required yard or yard required between buildings on the same building site; but in no
event under this provision shall any such projection be closer than three feet (3') to any property line.
c. Uncovered Porches And Landings: Uncovered porches, landings and platforms which do not extend above the floor level of the first floor may
project into any required yard or yard between buildings on the same building site not more than five feet (5'). An openwork railing not more than
thirty inches (30") in height may be installed or constructed on such porch, landing or platform without affecting this provision.
d. Ramps And Railings: Openwork fences, hedges, guard railings or other landscaping or architectural devices for safety protection around
depressed ramps may be located in required front yards; provided, that such devices are not more than four feet (4') in height.
5. Yard Requirements For Consolidated Lots: When the common property line separating two (2) contiguous lots is covered by a single building site
and the yard spaces required by these regulations shall then not apply to such common property line.
6. Driveway Sight Zones: See subsection 9-9-7D, "Corner Lots Sight Zones", of this title, for additional sight zone standards.
a. Residential Driveways: Sight zone triangles must be maintained for each single-family residence driveway, protecting the visibility and safety of
motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians.
(1) On a local street, the sight zone must be maintained between a point ten feet (10') behind the curb at the edge of the driveway and fifteen feet
(15') along the curb away from the driveway in each direction. See exhibit 9-8:2a of this section.
(2) On a collector street, the sight zone must be maintained between a point ten feet (10') behind the curb at the edge of the driveway and twenty
feet (20') along the curb away from the driveway in each direction. See exhibit 9-8:2a of this section.
(3) Rural and agricultural lots, townhouses and duplexes, and manufactured homes must maintain the same driveway sight zone standard as a
single-family residence.
(4) Within the sight zone triangle, no wall, fence or earthwork shall be built and no hedge, shrub or other plant shall be permitted to grow higher
than thirty inches (30") above grade. One tree trunk may be permitted to grow within a driveway sight triangle; provided, that all branches are
pruned seven feet (7') above the ground. Public safety and utility devices less than twelve inches (12") in diameter, such as street lights, are
exempt from these standards.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 454/565
(A) An open fence, such as a picket or wrought iron fence, that allows for clear visibility and safety may be built higher than the thirty inch (30")
standard in the residential driveway sight zone.
(B) The planning and redevelopment director may grant an administrative variance from these standards for mobile home parks and estates or
other established lots if conditions on the parcel make these regulations impractical.
Exhibit 9-8:2a
Residential Driveway Sight Zones
b. Multi-Family And Nonresidential Driveways: Sight zone triangles must be maintained for each driveway serving a multi-family or nonresidential
development, including commercial or industrial properties and public facilities, protecting the visibility and safety of motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians.
(1) The sight zone triangle must be maintained between a point fifteen feet (15') behind the curb at the edge of the driveway alignment and thirty
feet (30') along the curb away from the driveway alignment in each direction. See exhibit 9-8:2b of this section.
(2) Within the sight zone triangle, no wall, fence, sign or earthwork shall be built and no hedge, shrub or other plant shall be permitted to grow
higher than thirty inches (30") above grade. One tree trunk may be permitted to grow within a driveway sight triangle; provided, that all branches
are pruned seven feet (7') above the ground. Public safety and utility devices less than twelve inches (12") in diameter, such as street lights, are
exempt from these standards.
(3) The planning and redevelopment director may grant an administrative variance for driveway sight zones on smaller commercial properties and
public facilities in the downtown central business and neighborhood commercial zoning districts if conditions on the parcel make these
regulations impractical.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 455/565
Exhibit 9-8:2b
Multi-Family And Non-Residential Driveway Sight Zones
7. Special Conditions:
a. A residential building shall not be erected within fifty feet (50') of the right of way of any freeway or drainage channel. The required setback from a
drainage channel may be reduced to that which is required in the zoning district; provided, that the channel is concrete lined and/or a protective
wall is constructed in accordance with the requirements of the department of public works or city engineer.
b. Garages or carports shall be located not less than twenty feet (20') from any future width line of any street where the garage door on a carport
opening faces the street. Where the yard requirements pass a greater setback, such greater setback shall apply.
8. Public Street; Future Right Of Way: Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations relating to setbacks, no building or structure other than
a fence or an architectural intrusion permitted by subsection C4 of this section shall be constructed or maintained within ten feet (10') of any public
street or future right of way in any residential zone.
D. Height: All buildings or structures hereafter designed or erected and existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved or enlarged shall
comply with the height regulations and exceptions of the district in which they may be located.
E. Lot Coverage: All buildings hereafter designed or erected and existing buildings which may be reconstructed, altered, moved or enlarged shall not
exceed the maximum building coverage regulations of the district in which they may be located. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 242,
2-11-2000, eff. 8-3-2000; Ord. 264, 2-19-2002; Ord. 295, 3-10-2005; Ord. 296, 2-10-2004)
9-8-3: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
A. Airports, Airfields And Heliports: Aviation fields and airports may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit; and provided, that the
following conditions are satisfied:
1. Plans Required: Plans of any aviation field or airport shall include all approach and departure paths as necessary to assure safe and adequate
landing and takeoff area, and shall be supplemented by an aeronautical study by the local airport district office of the federal aviation agency (FAA);
2. Safety Provisions: Adequate safety provisions shall be provided and indicated by plans which control or restrict access to the landing and takeoff
areas by the general public; and
3. Surfacing: Landing and takeoff areas shall be surfaced in such a manner as to avoid the blowing of dust or dirt onto neighboring property.
B. Animal Exhibits And Zoos: Animal exhibits and zoos may be permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit; and provided, that the following
conditions are satisfied:
1. Information Required: The application for a conditional use permit must contain or be accompanied by the following information:
a. Copies of all federal and state permits that are required by law;
b. A copy of the bill of sale or receipt for the purchase of each animal;
c. A complete and detailed description and diagram of the confinement space proposed for each animal;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 456/565
d. A list of the animal species to be displayed at the facility;
e. Written proof that a veterinarian licensed as such by the state has committed to the owner to provide care to the animal and to advise the owner
regarding its care;
f. Proof of insurance, together with an underwriting memorandum stating knowledge of the exposure that will protect the public against bodily injury
or death caused by the animal, providing for limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person, per occurrence and for notice to the zoning
official within thirty (30) days of its cancellation or renewal; and
g. In addition to other standards for the grant or denial of a conditional use permit, a permit may be denied for failure to satisfy any submittal
requirement and for failure to provide a safe and sanitary confinement space for each animal.
2. Parcel Size: The animal exhibit or zoo shall located on a parcel of land not less than two (2) acres in size;
3. Location To Residential District: The animal exhibit or zoo shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of any residential zoning district or any
existing dwelling;
4. Screening And Landscape Buffering: The following screening and landscape buffering shall be provided between any animal cages or other
structures and any adjacent residential district or dwelling:
a. A landscaped opaque wall or fence at least six feet (6') in height; and
b. A natural, wooded or planted buffer yard of at least ten feet (10') in width for each twenty five (25) animals of greater than forty (40) pounds in body
weight. For purposes of this subsection, the buffer yard shall include at least four (4) trees and sixteen (16) shrubs for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of required landscape area.
5. Lighting: Outside lighting shall be shielded so that the light source is not directly visible to adjacent residential property;
6. Behavior Of Animals: The behavior of the type and/or number of animals owned or maintained by the applicant shall not infringe on the enjoyment of
any existing adjacent residential use in terms of noise, odor, safety or aesthetics;
7. Registration: The applicant shall register exotic or wild animal(s) as required by state law;
8. Revocation For Nuisance: Permission for this use may be revoked by the city council if any animal becomes a nuisance or a danger to any person,
or if any condition of approval of the permit is violated, or if any other law or lawful rule is violated, or if the health, safety and welfare of the public are
threatened.
C. Bed And Breakfast Inns:
1. Standards: In all districts in which bed and breakfast inns (B&B) are permitted, the following standards shall apply:
a. All applicable local, state and federal requirements must be satisfied;
b. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in individual guestrooms;
c. In addition to required residential parking, one off street parking space shall be provided for each guestroom.
2. Common Dining Areas; Leasing Allowed: In A and RE-1 through RE-3 zoning districts, common dining areas may be leased for social events;
provided, that off street parking is provided, for a meeting/reception area, pursuant to section 9-8-5 of this chapter.
3. Common Dining Areas; Leasing Not Allowed: In all other residential zoning districts, common dining areas shall not be leased for social events.
D. Childcare Facilities; Generally:
1. Applicant for a permit to establish a childcare facility must provide sufficient proof that the proposed use will comply with all state and local
regulations.
2. A childcare facility shall be located on a site that will accommodate and provide space for an off street passenger loading zone to provide for the safe
delivery and pick up of passengers, in addition to applicable parking requirements.
3. The outdoor play areas of a childcare facility shall be enclosed with a fence, which shall be built and maintained to a minimum of four feet (4') in
height. No play areas shall be permitted in the required front yard.
E. Cocktail Lounges, Bars, Taverns And Nightclubs: These uses shall be located on a roadway designated as a collector or minor arterial, shall not be
located adjacent to or abutting residential districts, shall obtain all required state and local licenses, and shall comply with all conditions of said licenses.
F. Compost Facilities:
1. Purpose: The purpose of these conditions is to protect the state's environmental resources by regulating the siting and operation of a composting
facility, while encouraging resource recovery and recycling. This subsection does not apply to yard waste composted on the parcel on which the yard
waste was generated.
2. Permits: Prior to commencing site preparation for this composting facility, all necessary permits must be obtained from the zoning official and all
applicable local, state and federal governmental agencies and authorities, and thereafter, before any alteration in site preparation, construction or
operation is done, any such alteration must be approved by the Clark County health department and sanitation director and all necessary permits
obtained from the various governmental authorities.
3. Preparation: No wastes permitted to be composted shall be accepted at the site until after the site has been fully prepared, inspected by the Clark
County health department and sanitation director, and the site made fully operational for composting.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 457/565
4. Acceptance: Yard wastes, municipal solid wastes, sewage sludge, agricultural wastes and other materials, as defined and permitted pursuant to
state and federal regulations, may be accepted at the composting facility. No clean fill, solid waste, treated or untreated biohazardous waste, or any
waste of any nature other than permitted compost waste shall be accepted at the composting site or utilized in the composting process.
5. Discharges: There shall be no discharge of air pollutants which causes objectionable odors to surrounding property owners.
6. Fill Material Use Prohibited: No compost shall be used as fill material in any natural or artificial body of water, open sinkhole, or dewatered pit.
7. Sufficient Support For Operation: The composting facility and site shall have sufficient support for the composting operation.
8. Plans Required: Information to be filed with the zoning official upon application for the required conditional use permit shall include compost facility
design, operation and closure plans, and such plans shall include:
a. Maps and available aerial photographs showing significant features of the proposed site area;
b. Site plans which show dimensions and details of proposed structures and areas involved in receiving, processing, producing, curing, storage and
fencing of materials taken onto and removed from the proposed facility;
c. Topographic maps which indicate original and proposed land contours, placements of roads, structures and drainage control measures;
d. A report which addresses:
(1) Facility capacity;
(2) Available detail concerning materials to be received;
(3) Anticipated source of materials to be received; and
(4) Additives to be used in the composting process and discussion of the potential environmental impacts of additives.
e. Storm water management plans and designs are in accordance with the hydrologic criteria and drainage design manual of the CCRFCD, for
preventing runoff from entering or leaving the process areas of the facility and for managing storm water which comes into contact with the
composted material;
f. Liner installation plan which addresses:
(1) Areas and operations where liners will be installed;
(2) Materials and construction specifications; and
(3) Testing procedures.
g. A ground water monitoring system which features, at minimum, one up gradient and two (2) down gradient wells;
h. Measures taken to ensure clean and orderly operations, including:
(1) Barriers to prevent unauthorized entry or egress;
(2) An all weather access road;
(3) Signs indicating operational hour and emergency information;
(4) Dust control methods;
(5) Control of operation related litter;
(6) Fire protection; and
(7) Odor control measures.
i. An operations plan which provides written instruction for the daily operation and maintenance of the facility and which specifically addresses:
(1) Designation of persons responsible for site operation and maintenance;
(2) Equipment;
(3) Controlling the entry point to ensure that only appropriate wastes are introduced into the facility;
(4) Methods for quantifying incoming wastes;
(5) Vehicle traffic control and loading;
(6) Method and sequence for processing wastes;
(7) Operation of leachate and stormwater control systems;
(8) Interaction with backup receiving or disposal areas; and
(9) Contingency plans for such occurrences as natural disasters, equipment failures or receipt of inappropriate materials.
j. A site closure plan which addresses:
(1) Estimated useful life of the facility;
(2) Closure plans, which may be in narrative form and/or sketch form, subject to all applicable agency reviews at time of closure; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 458/565
(3) Assurance of financial capability to complete closure plans.
9. Maintenance Of Design Features: The design features, as approved by the Clark County health department and sanitation director, of the
composting facility shall be properly maintained.
10. Staff And Equipment: The composting facility shall be properly staffed and equipped to ensure that:
a. An attendant is on site during those hours when permitted wastes are to be received;
b. Communications systems are in operation in all facilities for use in the event of an emergency.
11. Mixing Of Waste: Incoming permitted wastes shall not be mixed with finished compost which is ready to be used or sold. Prevention of the
reintroduction of weed seed, pathogens and waste to finished compost shall be handled in the following manner:
a. At least half the finished compost will be used or sold for use each year;
b. The amount of compost stored at the facility shall not exceed the design capacity;
c. All yard waste received at the facility shall be confined to a delivery storage area, where it shall be monitored before further processing:
(1) Yard wastes which will be composted must be removed from the facility at least monthly; and
(2) Yard wastes and nonyard wastes which are not to be composted must be removed to a licensed landfill within seventy two (72) hours.
d. The temperature of composting material shall be monitored on a daily basis at a depth approved by the Clark County health department and
sanitation director;
e. When the facility is closed, all residuals, wastes and recyclable materials shall be removed from the site and recycled or disposed of in a proper
manner.
12. Wells: Two (2) down gradient wells and one up gradient monitoring well shall be installed at the facility at sites approved by the Clark County health
department and sanitation director. Surface elevations and depth to ground water will be used to determine "up gradient" and "down gradient"
elevations.
13. Ground Water Samples Conducted: Prior to site preparation, initial ground water sampling shall be conducted to establish baseline standards as is
provided in these conditions. Thereafter, periodic sampling shall be conducted on a not less than quarterly basis during all phases of site preparation,
construction, operation and closing of the composting facility. Ground water sample results shall be compared to state and federal drinking water
standards.
14. Sample Results And Log Sheets: Sample results and log sheets showing all monitoring of the ground water and composting process performed,
the quantity and volume of waste received, the quantity and volume of compose produced, and the quantity, volume and ultimate disposition of
material screened from the landfill shall be maintained, and quarterly reports including all of this information shall be delivered to the Clark County
health department and sanitation director.
15. Analyzed: Ground water samples will be analyzed for the materials identified by the zoning official.
16. Less Than State Standard: If the initial baseline water samples show the water quality for a particular parameter is at or less than the appropriate
state standard, then the appropriate state standard shall apply that parameter to ground water samples subsequently taken from the facility with
adjustment by statistical methods as approved by the Clark County health department and sanitation director. Such standards shall not be exceeded
in the ground water samples periodically taken from the facility.
17. State And EPA Standards: If the initial baseline samples have levels greater than the appropriate state standards and less than the U.S. EPA
standards, then the U.S. EPA standards shall apply for that parameter with adjustment by statistical methods as approved by the Clark County health
department and sanitation director. Such standards shall not be exceeded in the ground water samples periodically taken from the facility. If initial
baseline samples have levels of a particular parameter greater than both the appropriate state standards and the U.S. EPA standards, then no
statistically significant contamination of the aquifer shall be permitted. Statistical methods for examining sample variation will be allowed upon
approval of the Clark County health department and sanitation director.
18. Deterioration Of Quality: In addition to the requirements of this subsection, there shall be no deterioration of ground water quality between the
upstream monitoring well and the downstream monitoring wells. Downstream analytical results will be compared with upstream background levels. If
these downstream results for any parameter exceed the upstream results, this will immediately be reported to the Clark County health department
and sanitation director. In addition, the laboratory analytical data will be reviewed for analytical problems such as contamination in the method blank
or contaminant carryover between samples.
19. Additional Sampling: The sanitation director may request additional sampling be performed to determine statistical significance of the data if
periodic samples exceed appropriate standards in a manner that cannot be explained after examining the analytical factors.
20. Close Of Facility: Notwithstanding any other available testing or additional sampling of the ground water, any measurement in excess of the
standards set out above shall be grounds to close the facility and revoke this special use permit.
21. Cost Responsibility: The operator/applicant is responsible for all costs associated with the monitoring wells, sampling, testing and interpretation of
test results and reports to the sanitation director. An independent testing laboratory approved by the sanitation director with expertise in the field of
water quality and groundwater standards shall be hired and paid for by the operator/applicant and laboratory reports shall come directly to the
sanitation director with copies to operator/applicant.
22. Sedimentation And Runoff Ponds: Sedimentation and runoff ponds and berms described in the site evaluation and operations plan submitted as
part of the application for this conditional use permit and/or required building permit shall be designed and constructed under the supervision of a
registered professional engineer.
23. Compliance With Laws: The composting operation shall be conducted at all times in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and
regulations including, but not limited to, those related to pollution of air and water.
G. Firing Ranges And Gun Clubs:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 459/565
1. Indoor; Location: All indoor firing ranges and gun clubs shall be located at least two hundred feet (200') from any residential district or dwelling, and
within a completely enclosed structure, designed to significantly prevent the escape of sound from the property.
2. Outdoor; Location: All outdoor firing ranges shall be located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any residential district or dwelling, and on a site
of at least ten (10) acres.
3. Fencing: A solid fence, wall, berm or shield shall be provided behind all shooting areas, and be reviewed by the police department.
4. Projectile Prevention: Facilities shall be designed to prevent projectiles from escaping the property.
5. Police Department Review: The location and type of facility shall be reviewed by the police department.
6. Access; Off Street Parking: Access and off street parking shall be provided subject to the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this chapter.
7. Buffer: An appropriate buffer yard shall be provided along all abutting property lines of outdoor facilities, pursuant to this chapter.
8. Hours Of Operation: Hours of operation for outdoor facilities shall be limited to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
H. Flea Markets And Swap Meets:
1. Location: Flea markets and swap meets shall be located on a roadway designated as a collector or arterial street.
2. Access; Off Street Parking: Access and off street parking shall be provided subject to the requirements of section 9-8-6 of this chapter.
3. Buffer: An appropriate buffer yard shall be provided along all abutting property lines, pursuant to this chapter.
4. Conducted On Private Property: The event shall be conducted entirely on private property, with the consent and approval of the property owner.
5. Structures: Any structure used in conjunction with the event shall meet all applicable zoning, health, safety and building code requirements. Any
temporary structure used shall be promptly removed upon the cessation of the event.
6. Banners; Signs: No more than one banner shall be displayed, and which shall be displayed for a maximum of fifteen (15) days. All other signage
requirements are subject to chapter 10 of this title.
7. Compliance With Regulations: The flea market or swap meet shall be conducted at all times in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
laws, regulations, permits and licenses. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
I. Community Residences (Family And Transitional):
1. Generally:
a. Community residences - family for people with disabilities provided: 1) they are located more than six hundred sixty (660) linear feet from the
closest existing community residence as measured from front door to front door and 2) the operator or applicant is licensed or certified by the state
of Nevada to operate the proposed community residence, has certification from an appropriate national accrediting agency, or has been
recognized or sanctioned by congress to operate the proposed type of community residence.
A community residence - family for people with disabilities proposed to be located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of the closest existing
community residence as measured from front door to front door shall require a conditional use permit.
A community residence - family for people with disabilities for which a license or certification by the state of Nevada is not required, for which
certification from an appropriate national accrediting agency is not required, or which has not been recognized nor sanctioned by congress shall
require a conditional use permit.
b. Community residences - transitional for people with disabilities provided: 1) they are located more than six hundred sixty (660) linear feet from the
closest existing community residence as measured from front door to front door and 2) the operator or applicant is licensed or certified by the state
of Nevada to operate the proposed community residence, has certification from an appropriate national accrediting agency, or has been
recognized or sanctioned by congress to operate the proposed type of community residence.
A community residence - transitional for people with disabilities proposed to be located within six hundred sixty (660) linear feet of the closest
existing community residence as measured from front door to front door shall require a conditional use permit.
A community residence - transitional for people with disabilities for which a license or certification by the state of Nevada is not required, for which
certification from an appropriate national accrediting agency is not required, or which has not been recognized nor sanctioned by congress shall
require a conditional use permit.
c. Access and off street parking for community residences - family and transitional shall be provided subject to the requirements of section 9-8-5 of
this chapter.
d. Landscaping, screening and buffer yards for community residences - family and transitional shall be provided subject to the requirements of
section 9-8-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011)
2. Nursing Homes And Convalescent Hospitals:
a. These uses shall be located on a city roadway designated as an arterial or collector.
b. Building coverage shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot or parcel.
c. Seventy (70) square feet of open space, which may be utilized for recreational use or landscaping/screening, shall be provided for each bed.
d. For the purposes of determining buffer yard requirements of this chapter, these uses shall be considered commercial uses.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 460/565
J. Hazardous Waste Facility:
1. Generally: A hazardous waste facility may be authorized within an IR-2 district, pursuant to a conditional use permit and subject to the conditions of
this subsection and any additional conditions established pursuant to the conditional use permit.
2. Location:
a. No part of the active portion and closed portion of a hazardous waste facility shall be within one air mile of any occupied dwelling place or house,
any school or educational institution, any hospital or sanatorium, or in any area that poses a substantial or imminent danger to human life or
health.
b. No hazardous waste facility shall be located within:
(1) A wetland;
(2) A 100-year floodplain.
c. A six hundred foot (600') buffer zone shall be established between the perimeter of the active portion and closed portion of the hazardous waste
facility and all boundary lines of the facility. Within said buffer zone, trees, shrubs and suitable vegetation shall be planted and landscaping
provided to fully obscure, to the extent feasible, any view of the facility from public roadways and adjacent public or private properties at all times of
the year, as to maintain, preserve and enhance the environmental integrity of the surrounding area.
d. A minimum separation of five hundred feet (500') shall be maintained between any part of the active portion of the hazardous waste facility and
any existing pipeline, underground utility, or underground electrical transmission line right of way or easement.
3. Facility Access:
a. A permanent sign shall be posted at each facility entrance identifying the official name of the facility.
b. Access to the proposed hazardous waste facility shall be limited to normal operating hours. Attendants or operating personnel shall be present at
the facility during normal operating hours.
c. Access to the proposed hazardous waste facility by unauthorized vehicles or persons outside of normal operating hours shall be prohibited.
Entrance gates and fencing shall be erected to prevent access to the facility during hours when the facility is not open to the public. Gates shall be
kept locked, except during those times when an attendant or equipment operator is on duty. Upon request, operators shall provide access keys to
entrance gates for emergency personnel. The hazardous waste facility shall be completely enclosed by chainlink fencing, or such other durable
fencing as may be approved by the city council, which fencing shall be not less than ten feet (10') in height. All fencing shall be set back at least
twenty five feet (25') from the property line.
d. All access roads from the entrance and exit of the proposed hazardous waste facility to any public thoroughfare shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete, curbed, and provided with a base capable of withstanding anticipated load limits, and shall be constructed and maintained in such a
manner so as to minimize tracking or carrying of mud, dirt or debris onto any dedicated thoroughfare by any vehicles using the proposed
hazardous waste facility. A road maintenance bond in an amount sufficient to ensure road maintenance may be required as a condition of permit
approval.
4. Operations Plan: A conceptual report describing the proposed hazardous waste facility shall be prepared and submitted by a professional engineer
licensed in the state. Required information shall include the following:
a. A description of the planned method of operation of the proposed facility;
b. A description of the technology underlying the proposed operational methodology;
c. A description of all equipment which will be used to manage hazardous waste at the proposed facility;
d. The expected or projected life of the proposed hazardous waste facility, including a statement of any assumptions used in determining such
projections;
e. A traffic analysis estimating vehicle trips, by type of vehicle, to be generated by the proposed facility, including average daily trips, A.M. peak hour
trips, and P.M. peak hour trips;
f. A site plan shall be drawn to scale of not to exceed two hundred feet to the inch (1" = 200') and shall include and depict, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) Name and address of record of landowner and architect/engineer/surveyor;
(2) Date, north arrow and scale;
(3) Location of existing and proposed rights of way, easements and infrastructure (streets, sewers, water lines, etc.);
(4) Size, use and location of existing and proposed structures and drives on the subject property;
(5) Location of floodplain areas subject to flooding and centerlines of drainage courses;
(6) Location of proposed drives and parking area, including location, number and dimensions of parking spaces;
(7) Property lines;
(8) Location of existing and proposed landscaping and screening.
g. A map to a scale of not to exceed two thousand feet to the inch (1" = 2,000') with ten foot (10') contour intervals shall be provided and shall include
and depict, at a minimum, the following information as it pertains to the area within one air mile of the proposed facility boundaries:
(1) Original contours;
(2) Original surface water drainage patterns;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 461/565
(3) Location of disposal facility and facility boundary lines;
(4) Actual and proposed access roads;
(5) Major sinkholes within the map area; and
(6) Occupied permanent residential dwelling houses or units within one air mile of the facility boundary lines.
5. Federal And State Compliance: A proposed hazardous waste facility shall comply with all applicable federal and state regulations and copies of all
federal and state permits issued to the facility shall be submitted to the department of building and zoning.
K. (Rep. by Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
L. Quarries, Mines, Sand And Gravel Pits: Quarries, mines, and sand and gravel pits may be authorized as a conditional use under the following
conditions:
1. Ownership: Surface and subsurface rights are in single ownership or under unified control or surface rights are dedicated to public use and
subsurface rights alone are retained for mining and subsequent use;
2. Activities: No activities shall be conducted upon the surface of such mine or mined out area other than those specifically permitted;
3. Exhaust Air Vents, Shafts: Exhaust air vents, air shafts or other surface features necessary and incidental to the underground operation shall be
enclosed on four (4) sides to a height of at least eight feet (8'). No noxious gas or fumes shall emanate from any exhaust air vent on the surface of
such mine or mined out area. Such facilities shall observe the height and yard requirements of respective zoning district regulations;
4. Plan Of Operation: A plan of operation indicating the extent of the area proposed to be mined accompanied by profiles describing any proposed
subsequent use of the mined out areas shall be included with the site plan submitted to the zoning official;
5. Blasting; Hours Permitted: Blasting shall be restricted to the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.;
6. Blasting; Boundary Line: There shall be no blasting within five hundred feet (500') of the boundary line;
7. Entranceway: There shall be not more than one entranceway from a public road to said lot for each six hundred sixty feet (660') of front lot line;
8. Equipment And Machinery Location: All fixed equipment and machinery shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any lot line and five
hundred feet (500') from any residential zoning district, but in the event the zoning classification of any land within five hundred feet (500') of such
equipment or machinery shall be changed to residential use subsequent to the operation of such equipment or machinery, the operation of such
equipment or machinery may continue henceforth but in no case less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot line;
9. Blasting; Vibration: Blasting shall be conducted so that vibration does not exceed 0.25 inches per second as measured by seismographic tests at
adjacent, abutting and opposite property boundary lines; seismographic tests shall be conducted by and bear the seal of a registered professional
engineer or a certified professional geologist;
10. Seismograph Reports: Seismograph reports of monthly tests shall be submitted to the zoning official monthly; daily blasting schedule and
seismograph reports shall be available for inspection by the zoning official; additional seismograph tests and reports may be required upon written
complaint by an affected property owner and such tests and reports shall bear the seal of a registered professional engineer or a certified
professional geologist;
11. Blasting; Atmospheric Conditions: No blasting shall be conducted when the atmospheric conditions are such that sound or shock waves are easily
conducted or transmitted, such as occur when there is a condition commonly known as a temperature inversion;
12. Surface Preparation: All surface preparation for underground mining shall be completed within twenty four (24) months of issuance of permit.
Extensions may be granted upon specific appeal to the city council;
13. Sedimentation Ponds And Berms: Sedimentation ponds and berms, as described in the site evaluation and operations plan submitted as part of the
application for a conditional use permit, shall be designed and constructed under the supervision of a registered professional engineer prior to any
site preparation or mining;
14. Ingress And Egress: All points of ingress and egress shall be limited to arterials and collectors and shall be approved prior to construction in
accordance with local or state highway department regulations and requirements, as applicable;
15. Annual Status Report: The operator shall be required to file an annual status report with the zoning official concerning all surface and subsurface
development and a survey of the extent of subsurface development and a survey of the extent of subsurface mining operations, certified by a
registered land surveyor;
16. Air And Water Regulations: The quarrying operation shall be conducted in compliance with all existing federal, state and local laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, those related to the pollution of air and water;
17. Plan Implementation: The operator shall be required to implement and conform to all plans, specifications and provisions filed as a part of the
application;
18. Biodegradable Additives: Only biodegradable additives shall be used in the wetting agent which shall be applied at the primary and secondary
crushing facilities and transfer points. Stock piles of rock and truck loads shall also receive wetting treatments sufficient to minimize airborne
particulates;
19. State And Federal Requirements: The permit is further subject to all state and federal requirements which are made a part hereof as though set out
in their entirety;
20. Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis shall be provided to the zoning official or public works director, in accordance with subsection 9-9-
6C of this title;
21. Restoration Plan Required:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 462/565
a. The operator shall file with the zoning official a detailed plan for the restoration of the development area which shall include the anticipated future
use of the restored land; proposed final topography indicated by contour lines of not greater interval than five feet (5'); steps which shall be taken
to conserve topsoil; the type and number per acre of trees or shrubs to be planted; and the location of future roads, drives, drainage courses
and/or other improvements contemplated;
b. The restoration plans shall be filed with and approved by the zoning official before quarrying or removal operations shall begin. The plans shall be
certified by a soil or geology engineer. In restoration, no filing operations shall be permitted which will likely result in contamination of ground or
surface water, or soils, through seepage of liquid or solid waste or which will likely result in the seepage of gases into surface or subsurface water
or into the atmosphere. A drainage plan and study is required;
c. The restoration plan shall provide that all areas within any single development be rehabilitated progressively as they are worked out or abandoned
to a condition of being entirely lacking in hazards, inconspicuous and blended with the general surrounding ground form so as to appear
reasonably natural or to an approved restoration plan.
M. Recreational Facilities, Amusement Parks, Etc:
1. Defined: Recreational facilities and amusement parks are defined pursuant to chapter 2 of this title.
2. Development; Overnight Parking: No cabin development or overnight parking of trailers or lodgings shall be permitted on the premises.
3. Location: These uses shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from a public right of way and at least two hundred feet (200') from any dwelling.
4. Access; Off Street Parking: Access and off street parking shall be provided subject to the requirements of section 9-8-5 of this chapter.
5. Buffer: An appropriate buffer yard shall be provided along all abutting property lines, pursuant to section 9-8-6 of this chapter.
N. Salvage Yards And Junkyards:
1. Screening: Storage and work areas must be screened by an opaque eight foot (8') tall fence (block wall) from all surrounding uses and all roadways,
or be located within a completely enclosed building.
2. Unusable Items; Disposal: Unusable items shall be disposed of and not allowed to collect on the premises.
3. Tires: All tires not mounted on a vehicle shall be neatly stacked or placed in racks.
4. Garbage: No garbage or other putrescent waste likely to attract vermin shall be kept on the premises.
5. Hazardous Materials: Gasoline, oil or other hazardous materials which are removed from scrapped vehicles or parts of vehicles kept on the premises
shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable local, state and federal regulations.
6. Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage which occupies a volume of more than one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet shall comply with the following:
a. No such storage shall be placed or maintained within a required yard setback;
b. Such stored items shall not project above the screening;
c. All screening shall be installed in a professional and workmanlike manner, and maintained in good condition.
O. Temporary Uses:
1. Construction Buildings: Temporary buildings, structures and building material storage areas may be used for construction purposes on a site in any
district which is not yet occupied. Such buildings may be permitted for a specific period of time in accordance with the building permit issued by the
zoning official, subject to periodic renewal for cause shown. Temporary buildings and building material storage areas shall be removed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
2. Sales/Special Events:
a. No booths, stalls or other display areas shall be placed or maintained within any required setback area.
b. Off street parking shall be provided at the ratio of one and one-half (11/2) spaces per booth or stall, and meet other applicable standards of section
9-8-5 of this chapter.
c. Approved sanitary facilities shall be provided on site.
d. All items for sale shall be stored indoors, or within an approved screened storage area, or removed from the site at the close of each business day.
e. Hours of operation shall be limited to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
f. No storage of items other than those available for sale shall be stored on the premises, unless confined within an approved, screened storage
area.
P. Telecommunication Towers And Antennas:
1. Intent; Height References: The regulations and requirements of this subsection are intended to provide for the location and development of
commercial broadcast, noncommercial residential and amateur radio service telecommunications towers, antennas and antenna supporting
structures. All references to height include antennas, support structures and all appurtenances measured from ground level to the highest point of
said structures.
2. Minimum Regulations: In addition to any regulations set forth in federal communications commission (FCC) regulations, federal aviation
administration (FAA) regulations, or the statutes of the state, all antennas and antenna supporting structures shall meet the minimum regulations of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 463/565
this subsection.
3. Commercial Antennas:
a. Antennas shall be set back from property lines a distance equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna and supporting structure.
Height regulations for commercial antennas shall be the same as those for noncommercial antennas provided in subsection P4 of this section.
b. Antennas, guy wires, guying anchors, electrical equipment and energy transfer components shall be installed according to manufacturers
specifications using sound engineering and safety practices.
c. An applicant for a building permit for a commercial antenna system shall provide an engineering report specifying the following information:
(1) Detailed structural plans for the antenna and the support system; and
(2) An engineer's certification that anticipated levels of electromagnetic radiation to be generated by facilities on the site, including the effective
radiated power (ERP) of the antenna, shall be within the guidelines established by the federal communications commission (FCC). An antenna
radiation pattern shall be included for each antenna, along with directional data concerning the pointing of any directive antennas.
4. Noncommercial Antennas:
a. All authorized noncommercial antennas and antenna support structures, except those specifically in the amateur radio service, shall comply with
applicable FCC and FAA regulations and meet the following standards:
(1) A building permit shall be required for any antenna or antenna supporting structure extending more than thirty five feet (35') above the ground
level and any freestanding antenna or antenna supporting structure extending more than twenty five feet (25') above ground level. The zoning
official shall require submission of documentation to verify compliance with any specific applicable building or electrical code(s). When a building
permit is denied, the applicant shall be furnished with a statement of the reason(s) for denial;
(2) Antennas and supporting structures shall be installed in a manner that meets or exceeds manufacturers installation instructions;
(3) Antennas and supporting structures shall be installed so as to prevent safety hazards to persons on or off the property under any
circumstances which reasonably can be anticipated;
(4) Antennas and supporting structures shall not be erected in required building setback areas unless authorized by a conditional use permit;
(5) Guy wires shall not extend into any required street yard.
b. In A, RE-1, RE-2 and RE-3 zoning districts, up to four (4) exterior antenna structures are authorized as accessory uses, subject to the following
additional regulations:
(1) The height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') unless specifically authorized by a conditional use permit;
(2) Antennas that do not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height shall meet the minimum building setback requirements for the district. Antennas that
are greater than thirty five feet (35') in height shall be set back the greater of fifty feet (50') or one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna and support
structure;
(3) One TV receive only (TVRO) satellite dish antenna and one direct broadcast system (DBS) satellite antenna are permitted per lot or parcel;
provided, that the antennas shall not:
(A) Exceed twelve feet (12') in diameter for TVRO or three feet (3') for DBS;
(B) Exceed fifteen feet (15') aboveground if ground mounted;
(C) Exceed thirty five feet (35') aboveground if roof or pole mounted;
(D) Have any signage legible from any property line.
c. In SF, MR-1, MF-2 MF-3 and MF-4 zoning districts up to two (2) exterior antenna structures may be permitted, subject to the following additional
regulations:
(1) The height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') unless specifically authorized by a conditional use permit;
(2) Antennas that do not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the district. Antennas that are
greater than thirty five feet (35') in height shall be set back the greater of twenty feet (20') or one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna and antenna
support structure;
(3) One TV receive only (TVRO) satellite dish antenna and one direct broadcast system (DBS) satellite antenna are permitted per lot or parcel;
provided, that the antenna shall not:
(A) Exceed twelve feet (12') in diameter for TVRO or three feet (3') for DBS;
(B) Exceed fifteen feet (15') aboveground if ground mounted;
(C) Exceed thirty five feet (35') aboveground if roof or pole mounted;
(D) Have any signage legible from any property line;
(E) Be located in the front yard or required street yard.
d. In CR-1, CR-2, PB and HT zoning districts, antennas and support structures are authorized as accessory uses, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The height shall not exceed fifty feet (50') unless specifically authorized by a conditional use permit;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 464/565
(2) Antennas that do not exceed forty feet (40') in height shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the districts. Antennas that are greater
than forty feet (40') in height shall be set back a distance equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna or antenna support
structure;
(3) One TV receive only (TVRO) satellite dish antenna and one direct broadcast system (DBS) satellite antenna are permitted per lot or parcel;
provided, that the antenna shall not:
(A) Exceed twelve feet (12') in diameter for TVRO or three feet (3') for DBS;
(B) Exceed fifteen feet (15') aboveground if ground mounted;
(C) Exceed thirty five feet (35') aboveground if roof or pole mounted;
(D) Be located in the front yard or required street yard.
e. In IR-1 and IR-2 zoning districts, antennas and support structures are authorized as accessory uses, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The height shall not exceed fifty feet (50') unless specifically authorized in a conditional use permit;
(2) Antennas that do not exceed forty feet (40') in height shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the district. Antennas that are greater
than forty feet (40') in height shall be set back a distance equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) the height of the antenna or antenna support
structure;
(3) Satellite antennas shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height if pole or roof mounted unless specifically authorized in a conditional use
permit.
5. Amateur Radio Antennas:
a. Due to the nature of the amateur radio service, the antennas and antenna supporting structures are many and varied. This service is strictly
noncommercial and nonprofit under FCC regulations as covered by FCC regulations in part 97.
When proposed amateur radio service antennas do not comply with the regulations established in this subsection, the antenna shall be subject to
the conditional use permit provisions of section 9-5-3 of this title, with conditions being established in accordance with the guidelines set out under
FCC part 97.
b. All authorized amateur radio service antennas shall comply with applicable FCC and FAA regulations and meet the following additional standards:
(1) Antennas and supporting structures shall be set back a distance of at least one-half (1/2) the height of the structure. A building permit shall be
required for freestanding antenna structures exceeding twenty five feet (25') in height or antenna support structures exceeding thirty five feet
(35') which are attached to a building. The zoning official may require submission of documentation to verify compliance with specific building
and electrical codes. When a building permit is denied, the applicant shall be furnished with a statement of the reasons for denial;
(2) Antenna support structures shall be installed in a manner that meets or exceeds manufacturers installation standards. Home built antenna
support structures shall follow sound engineering practices as referenced in applicable documents, such as those of the American radio relay
league or other recognized engineering texts;
(3) Guy wires may not extend into any required street yard;
(4) In the A district:
(A) A conditional use permit shall be required for any amateur radio service antenna or support structure exceeding thirty five feet (35') in height;
(B) Not more than eight (8) exterior antenna support structures shall be permitted on any parcel, except as approved subject to a conditional use
permit.
(5) In the RE-1 through RE-3 districts:
(A) No more than four (4) exterior antenna support structures shall be erected except as approved subject to a conditional use permit.
(B) Amateur radio service antennas or supporting structures over thirty five feet (35') may not be erected except as approved subject to a
conditional use permit.
(6) In the SF and MF-1 through MF-4 districts:
(A) No more than two (2) exterior antenna supporting structures shall be erected except as approved subject to a conditional use permit.
(B) Amateur radio service antenna and support structures shall be limited to thirty five feet (35') except as approved subject to a conditional use
permit.
(7) In the nonresidential districts, amateur radio service antennas and supporting structures shall be treated as any other commercial antenna or
supporting structure.
Q. Utility Transmission Lines: All transmission lines must be placed underground, except as allowed by the building official. In no case shall an overhead
utility line be closer than forty feet (40') above the ground.
R. Utility Structures: Aboveground water storage tanks, sewage pumping stations, telephone relay towers, electric regulating substations and similar
utility/communications structures shall comply with the following standards:
1. Location From Residential Structure: Facilities shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from any residential structure;
2. Fencing: The zoning official may require facilities to be secured by a fence;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 465/565
3. Telephone Exchange Stations: Telephone exchange stations in residential districts shall be limited to unmanned facilities, and shall provide at least
two (2) parking spaces for service vehicles. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
S. Vacation Home Rental:
1. Standards: In all districts in which vacation home rentals are permitted, the following standards shall apply:
a. The operator must obtain a license from the business licensing division of the development services department to operate the use. The use must
be operated by either the property owner or a property manager who holds a license to engage in property management pursuant to Nevada
Revised Statutes chapter 645. A separate license must be obtained for each rental property. The license shall be an annual license, renewable
annually at the discretion of the business licensing division. In each case, the operator shall pay such fee as the licensing division may establish
for the license. A copy of the license, including all conditions established or imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit, shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the rented premises.
b. The use must comply on an ongoing basis with all governmental licensing and regulatory requirements, including the payment of applicable room
taxes and licensing fees.
c. The operator must obtain a permit from the southern Nevada health department to operate transient (short term) lodging rentals, if required by the
health department.
d. No radio receiver, musical instrument, phonograph, compact disk player, loudspeaker, karaoke machine, sound amplifier, or any machine, device
or equipment that produces or reproduces any sound shall be used outside or be audible from the outside of any vacation rental unit between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
e. The owner must by written agreement, limit the number of vehicles of overnight occupants to the number designated in the license; with the
number of vehicles of overnight occupants not to exceed the number of designated on site parking spaces. Parking buses on site or on the street
is prohibited. Vehicles of guests and invitees shall not obstruct traffic or access to other properties in the area.
f. The operator shall notify the business services division of any change in the operator's telephone number and other contact information. Any
change in operator shall require the issuance of a new license.
g. The operator/agent must be available at all times to respond to law enforcement authorities and to concerns from neighborhood residents, and to
take remedial action in the event of noncompliance with law or with permit conditions.
h. The owner shall comply with all regulations contained in section 2-13-11, standard license conditions, of this code. (Ord. 455, 10-23-2012)
9-8-4: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING:
A. Open Space Landscaping; Statement Of Intent: The purpose of these landscaping requirements is to promote the health, safety and welfare of existing
and future residents by establishing minimum standards for the protection of natural resources and the installation and continued maintenance of
landscaping within the city. The city encourages creative landscape design. These requirements will be applied to all new development, redevelopment
or building expansion projects. Minimum landscaping requirements will:
Provide greenery to visually soften paved areas and buildings;
Improve air and water quality;
Maintain permeable land areas essential to surface water management and the conservation of lakes, ponds and lagoon;
Reduce air, noise, heat and chemical pollution through the biological filtering capacities of trees and other vegetation;
Screen certain unsightly equipment or materials from the view of persons on public streets or adjoining properties and buffer uncomplementary land
uses;
Promote energy conservation through the creation of shade, reducing buildings' heat gain;
Provide habitat for wildlife;
Encourage the preservation and stabilization of wetland and other natural habitats;
Maintain property values;
Generally enhance the quality and appearance of developed properties within the city.
1. Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan shall be required whenever landscaping or alteration of existing landscaping is required by this title,
"Unified Development", and shall be submitted at the time of site plan approval for multi-family, commercial, industrial or public use developments, or
at the time improvement plans are submitted prior to final map approval for subdivisions.
Two (2) sets of drawings shall be submitted to the planning and redevelopment division at the time of site plan review or with improvement drawings
for subdivisions prior to final map approval. Such landscape plans shall conform to the requirements specified in this chapter. Landscape plans shall
be prepared by a Nevada licensed landscape architect, architect, engineer, or landscape contractor (for own work).
2. Landscape Plan Contents: Landscape plans submitted for approval shall be drawn to a standard engineer's or architect's scale on twenty four inch
by thirty six inch (24" x 36") sheets, and shall include the following components:
a. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights of way,
sidewalks, ground signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas, fences, walls, parking areas, electrical equipment, recreational areas, and other
freestanding structural features;
b. Location, quantity, size, botanical and common names of all proposed plants;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 466/565
c. Location of existing buildings, structures, and plants on adjacent property within twenty feet (20') of the site;
d. Proposed berming;
e. Elevations and cross sections of all proposed fences and retaining walls;
f. Summary data indicating the total area of property and percentage of the site devoted to landscape area; and
g. The source, supply, and point of connection for irrigation water.
3. Design Standards: Landscape plans shall incorporate the design standards set forth in this section and shall be evaluated and approved based on
compliance therewith.
a. Landscape plans shall incorporate water conserving design which includes appropriate soil, soil amendments to absorb and retain water and
encourage the formation of deep root systems, mulch, drainage, and microclimates, and includes groupings of plants with similar water
requirements on an irrigation line.
b. The scale and nature of landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the structures on the premises and character of the location.
c. Plants shall be selected for form, texture, color, pattern of growth and adaptability to local conditions. Plants shall be of good quality, and capable
of withstanding the extremes of individual site microclimates. The mature height and spread of plants shall be taken into account during selection.
Tree and plant species provided to meet the landscaping and screening standards of this section shall comply with the city of Mesquite long range
master plan.
d. Plants may be selected from the Clark County plant list, or the Southern Nevada water authority's "Water Smart Landscapes Program" plant list.
Both lists are available in the Mesquite planning and redevelopment division office, and online at the city's home page at www.mesquitenv.com.
See also subsections I and J of this section for a list of prohibited and discouraged plant species.
e. Plants shall be placed intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences, and other barriers to create a softening effect.
f. Detention/retention basins and ponds shall be landscaped where possible. Such landscaping may include shade and ornamental trees,
evergreens, shrubbery, turf, and ground cover.
g. The selection and orientation of plant material on the south and west sides of buildings is preferred to promote energy conservation and solar
gains.
h. Whenever practical, earthen berms and existing topographic features shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, particularly
when combined with plant material to facilitate buffering.
i. Landscape design shall recognize the climatic and geologic limitations of the Mesquite city area and the need for water conservation. While
irrigation systems are required for certain landscape areas, and may be desirable for other applications, all irrigation systems shall be designed to
minimize the use and runoff of water.
(1) All areas to be landscaped with sod, seed, and hydroseed shall have sprinklers and/or an irrigation system. All other landscaped areas shall be
provided with drip irrigation systems.
j. Landscape plans shall address all applicable sight visibility concerns, including the location of traffic control signs and devices, sight visibility zones,
and adequate spatial considerations for the (future) size and spread of plant materials at maturity.
4. Plant Size: Minimum plant sizes shall be as follows:
a. Tree Sizes: All tree sizes shall fall between the minimum and maximum allowable plant sizes for a twenty four inch (24") box (#25 container) as
specified in the "American Standard For Nursery Stock".
b. Evergreen Trees: All evergreen trees (including palms) shall have a minimum height at time of planting of six feet (6') measured from finished
grade to the top of the plant.
c. Shrubs: All shrubs shall have a minimum height or spread of eighteen inches (18") depending on the plant's natural growth habitat. Shrubs planted
to satisfy the standards of this section shall have a minimum container size of five (5) gallons.
d. Ground Covers: Ground covers shall have a minimum container size of one gallon.
e. Ground Treatments:
(1) Rock Mulch: Rock mulch shall be installed and maintained at a minimum depth of two inches (2") and a maximum depth of four inches (4") on
all planted areas except where ground cover plants are fully established.
(2) Grass Seed And Sod: Turf areas shall be planted with species suitable as permanent lawns in Mesquite. Turf areas may be sodded or seeded.
Additional maintenance shall be provided until coverage is complete. Ground covers suitable for the soil and climate conditions of the area may
be approved within required landscape areas.
(3) Other: Other ground covers suitable for the soil and climate conditions of the area may be approved with required landscaped areas.
5. Landscape Planting Area: Open space landscaping area shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule of requirements:
Table 9-8:1
Minimum Landscaping Requirement
By Zoning District (Percent Of Lot)/Maximum
Percentage Of Lot Used As Decorative "Hardscape"
Single-family Not required
Multi-family 20/5
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 467/565
RV park 20/5
Manufactured home subdivision Not required
Commercial 15/5
Professional/business office 15/5
Industrial 15/5
Hotel-tourist 15/5
Resort hotel 25/10
Public facilities 15/5
Mobile home 20/5
6. Hardscape: A certain percentage of required landscaping, as noted in table 9-8:1 of this section may include decorative walkways (not including
required sidewalks), play areas, improved pads for barbecues, picnic areas, sports facilities, pools, fountains, courtyards, plazas, or other functional
amenities.
7. Location Of Open Space Landscaping: Plant units required pursuant to this section shall be installed in required front and street side setback areas
to the maximum extent possible.
8. Plant Units: At least one tree and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per each five hundred (500) square feet of required front and side setback.
9. Planned Unit Developments: Planned unit developments are required to submit a landscape plan of their open space with the final map of each
subdivision.
10. Residential Front Yard Landscaping:
a. Multi-family, commercial, and industrial parcels must comply with this section, "Buffers And Landscaping", and subsection 9-8-2A9, "Unimproved
Disturbed Ground", of this chapter. Existing structures built and occupied prior to January 1, 2002, that are without landscaping in the front yard
may be granted a twelve (12) month grace period for landscaping installation upon written notice from the planning and redevelopment
department.
b. Single-family home front yards must be landscaped, with at least ground cover materials, within sixty (60) days of occupancy. Existing structures
built and occupied prior to January 1, 2002, that are without landscaping in the front yard may be granted a twelve (12) month grace period for
landscaping installation upon written notice from the planning and redevelopment department.
B. Perimeter Landscape Buffer:
1. Applicability: Perimeter landscape buffers shall be provided abutting street rights of way and parcels abutting developing site in accordance with the
standards of this subsection.
2. Buffer Width: The minimum width of required landscape buffers shall be as follows:
Table 9-8:2
Landscape Buffer Yard Requirements
Multi-Family, RV, Mobile
Home Zoning Districts
Professional/ Business
Office Zoning Districts
Commercial, Public Facility, Hotel-
Tourist Zoning Districts
Industrial
Zoning Districts
Adjacent to arterial street 100
foot ROW1
25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Adjacent to collector street 61
foot to 80 foot ROW1
20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Adjacent to local street 60 feet
or less ROW2
10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Adjacent to residential zoning
district3
10 feet 15 feet4 15 feet4 15 feet4
Adjacent to nonresidential
zoning district
5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
Notes:
Parcels Less Than 200 Feet Deep: The buffer width on such parcels may be reduced up to 10 feet off the street right of way requirement, but in no
case can the buffer width be less than 5 feet.
Parcels With Physical Constraints: Buffer width may be reduced up to 50 percent by the planning and redevelopment director when necessary to
accommodate unique site conditions or physical constraints, provided that any reduction is offset by greater buffer widths in nonconstrained areas,
such that the "average" buffer width complies with the minimum requirement. Such deviations shall be noted on the plans, with a justification as to
why the deviation is requested.
1.Buffer width measured from back of curb. Landscape buffer includes 5 foot sidewalk.
2.Buffer width measured from back of sidewalk.
3.Buffer requires 24 inch box trees planted no more than 20 feet on center, or an equivalent number of trees with irregular spacing. The species of
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 468/565
tree shall be one with mature height and canopy width between 20 and 25 feet.
4.A solid masonry or concrete wall with a minimum height of 6 feet and a maximum height of 8 feet shall be provided to screen nonresidential
zoning districts from adjoining residential districts. Walls adjoining the front yards or street side yards of adjoining residential lots shall not exceed
30 inches in height.
3. Plant Material: Unless otherwise expressly stated, a minimum of one shrub shall be provided per three (3) linear feet of landscape buffer. A minimum
of one tree shall be provided per twenty five (25) linear feet of landscape buffer. All landscape plant areas that are not dedicated to trees or shrubs
shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other appropriate landscape treatment in accordance with this section.
4. Parking Area Screening:
a. All off street parking areas serving nonresidential uses and containing five (5) or more spaces shall be screened from view of all adjacent
residential districts by a solid, decorative concrete, wood, or masonry wall. The fence or wall shall have a minimum height of six feet (6'), except
that the height of a wall adjoining required front setback in a residential district shall not exceed thirty inches (30"). Required landscape buffers
shall be located on the outside of the fence or wall, but entirely located on the parcel that is being developed, unless an existing wall separates the
applicant's property from an adjoining property. In such event, the planning and redevelopment director will determine whether or not the outside
buffer is necessary to accomplish the purpose of this section.
b. All carports or open parking areas serving residential uses and containing five (5) or more spaces shall be screened from all adjacent residential
districts by a solid, decorative wall or fence with a minimum height of six feet (6'). The height of a wall or fence adjoining a required front setback in
a residential district shall not exceed thirty two inches (32"). The only exception is a chainlink or wrought iron picket fence with a maximum height
of four feet (4'), which may be located in a front or corner side setback. Chainlink or wrought iron must not restrict visibility within corner of
driveway sight zones. Required landscape buffers shall be located on the outside of the fence or wall, but entirely located on the parcel that is
being developed.
5. Driveways: Necessary driveways from the public right of way shall be permitted to run through all required landscaping; however, the required
driveway sight zones and corner lot sight zones required in subsections 9-8-2C6 of this chapter and 9-9-7D of this title shall be maintained.
C. Parking Lot Landscaping:
1. Applicability: The interior parking lot landscaping standards of this section shall apply to all off street parking lots containing five (5) or more off street
parking spaces. They shall not apply to vehicle/equipment storage lots or vehicle and equipment sales lots.
2. Terminal Islands: Landscape terminal islands shall be provided at the end of each parking row. Terminal islands shall have a minimum interior
dimension of at least five feet (5') in width and fifteen feet (15') in length. At least one tree shall be provided within each terminal island. All tree
planting areas shall have a minimum width of seven feet (7').
3. Divider Medians: Divider medians that form a continuous landscaped strip may be installed between abutting rows of parking spaces. The minimum
width of divider medians shall be five feet (5') if wheel stops or raised curbs prevent vehicle overhang of the median. If vehicle overhang is allowed,
the minimum width shall be eight feet (8'). All tree planting areas shall have a minimum width of seven feet (7').
4. Plant Units:
a. Each parking space within an off street parking area shall be located within forty feet (40') of a tree (measured from the tree trunk to the outer
perimeter of the parking space).
b. All landscape planting areas that are not dedicated to trees or shrubs shall be landscaped with ground cover or other appropriate landscape
treatment. No turf shall be allowed within the parking lot landscaped areas.
D. Mechanical Equipment Screening:
1. Applicability: The mechanical equipment screening standards of this section shall apply to all of the following:
a. Electrical and gas powered mechanical equipment;
b. Duct work and major plumbing lines used to heat, cool or ventilate; and
c. Power systems for the building or site upon which the equipment is located.
2. Screening Standards: For all developments other than single-family residential, the following mechanical screening standards shall apply to the
maximum practical extent. If full compliance with these standards cannot be achieved, an alternative screening plan may be approved in accordance
with subsection D3 of this section.
a. Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened by a parapet wall or similar structural feature that
is an integral part of the building's architectural design. The parapet wall or similar structural feature shall be of a height equal to or greater than
the height of the mechanical equipment being screened.
b. Wall Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Wall mounted mechanical equipment that protrudes more than six inches (6") from the outer building wall
shall be screened from view by structural features that are compatible with the architecture or the subject building. Wall mounted mechanical
equipment that protrudes six inches (6") or less from the outer building wall shall be designed to blend with the color and architectural design of the
subject building.
c. Ground Mounted Mechanical Equipment:
(1) Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view by a decorative wall, vegetative screen, or other design concept approved
by the city as a part of its architectural review, that is compatible with the architecture and landscaping of a development site. The wall shall be
of a height equal to or greater than the height of the mechanical equipment being screened.
(2) To prevent damage to power equipment and high power vaults, a five foot (5') buffer of desert landscaping shall surround each vault and
equipment pad. Irrigation shall be directed away from such facilities. This requirement shall appear on all new construction drawings on the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 469/565
general notes page.
3. Alternative Screening: Mechanical equipment that is not screened in full compliance with the screening standards of subsection D2 of this section
shall be reviewed in accordance with the architectural review procedures of this section. As part of the architectural review, decision making bodies
shall be authorized to approve alternatives to full compliance with the screen standards of subsection D2 of this section if the decision making body
determines that any adverse visual impacts associated with the mechanical equipment have been mitigated to the maximum practical extent.
Alternative screening methods may include, but shall not be limited to, increased setbacks, increased landscaping, grouping of equipment on specific
portions of the site, painting or otherwise camouflaging the equipment.
E. Dumpster Screening:
1. Design And Other Specifications: Dumpsters or other trash receptacles shall be screened from public view as per section 4-2-2 of this code.
Applicants shall be responsible for coordinating with the solid waste disposal provider on matters relating to appearance, quantity, interior
dimensions, locations and access.
2. Setbacks: All enclosures shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from residential zoning districts, and from the property lines of sites containing
existing or proposed residential, school, licensed daycare, public and semipublic uses.
3. Screening Material: Deciduous and evergreen shrubs and/or trees shall be utilized around the dumpster to soften its appearance. Nothing, however,
shall be done that inhibits or obstructs the collection of solid waste.
F. Loading And Access Areas; Design And Screening: Commercial and industrial buildings with rear or side vehicular access shall maintain adequate room
for loading docks, loading spaces, customer pick up areas, trash enclosures (and their setbacks), vaults, transformer pads, other utility service boxes,
and all ground mounted mechanical equipment. Beyond the physical boundaries of the docks and other such adjacent circulation impediments,
property owners shall provide and maintain a minimum setback of thirty four feet (34') from all property lines. Within this minimum thirty four foot (34')
setback, the twenty four feet (24') closest to the building and its adjacent circulation impediments shall remain clear at all times, and the ten feet (10')
nearest the property line shall be available for vaults, transformer pads and other aboveground utility service boxes. Areas within ten feet (10') of the
property lines that are not used for utility boxes shall be landscaped with minimum six foot (6') high pine trees, planted fifteen feet (15') on center, or a
continuous evergreen or deciduous shrub hedge. This shrub hedge shall have an expected mature height of not less than six feet (6') within three (3)
years of planting. Alternative plant materials may be approved by the planning and redevelopment director, provided the alternative materials result in
equivalent immediate and long term screening.
G. Permits And Enforcement:
1. Permits:
a. No permits shall be issued for building, paving, grading or construction until a detailed landscape plan is submitted, approved or bonded by the
planning and redevelopment director. A conceptual or generalized landscape plan shall be shown as part of the site plan. Prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place, or bonded for, in accordance with the
landscape plan.
b. In any case in which a certificate of occupancy is sought at a season of the year in which the planning and redevelopment director determines that
it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass, or to lay turf, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. Such temporary permit
shall be conditioned upon the installation of all landscaping required by the landscaping plan within six (6) months of the date of the approval of the
landscape plan.
c. Bonding shall be required for all landscaping improvements where occupancy permits are requested prior to landscaping installation. Bonds shall
be subject to the requirements of section 9-6-6, "Completion Of Improvements; Improvement Agreements", of this title. Bonding for landscaping
improvements shall be separate from the bond for civil improvements. Terms of the bond agreement shall specify the length of time allowed for the
landscaping to be completed.
(1) The landscaping bond shall be computed at one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per square foot of landscaping, unless the developer submits at least
two (2) bids from licensed landscape contractors to be considered.
2. Nonconforming: If at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the approved landscaping is found to be in nonconformance to the
standards and criteria of this section, the planning and redevelopment director shall issue notice to the owner, citing the violation and describing what
action is required to comply with this section. The owner, tenant or agent shall have thirty (30) days from date of said notice to restore the
landscaping as required. If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of these regulations.
H. Installation, Maintenance And Irrigation:
1. Installation:
a. General: All landscaping shall be installed according to sound nursery practices in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth. Landscaping
shall be installed by a Nevada licensed landscape contractor. All landscape material and irrigation improvements shall be in place prior to issuance
of the final certificate of occupancy unless an extension is approved by the planning and redevelopment director and a deferred completion
agreement is executed.
b. Root Guards: Trees planted within ten feet (10') of public improvements within the public right of way shall be protected by root guards, if
determined by the public works director to be necessary.
c. Building Additions And Remodeling: For projects consisting primarily of additions to or remodeling of existing buildings for which landscaping is
required, a deferred completion agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the planning and redevelopment director prior to the issuance of
the building permit. The agreement shall include a commitment by the applicant to guarantee the installation of the landscape and irrigation
improvements within one year or prior to occupancy, whichever occurs first.
2. Maintenance: Trees, shrubs, fences, walls, irrigation improvements and other landscape features depicted on plans approved by the city shall be
considered elements of the project in the same manner parking, building materials and other details are elements of the plan. The landowner, or
successors in interest, or agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the following:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 470/565
a. Regular maintenance of all landscaping and irrigation improvements in good condition and in a way that presents a healthy, neat, and orderly
appearance. All landscaping shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds and litter. This maintenance shall include weeding, watering,
fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging, mulching or other maintenance, as needed and in accordance with acceptable horticultural practices;
b. The repair or replacement of required landscape structures (e.g., walls, fences) to a structurally sound condition; and
c. The regular maintenance, repair, or replacement, where necessary, of any landscaping required by this section.
3. Irrigation: Landscaping areas shall be irrigated as necessary to maintain required plant materials in good and healthy condition. Irrigation plans shall
be submitted with development plans and shall contain all construction details for an automatic system. A backflow prevention device shall be
provided in accordance with the Nevada Revised Statutes.
I. Prohibited Plant Materials:
1. Plants with an allergen potential:
European olive Olea europaea (wilson/swan varieties acceptable)
Fruitless mulberry Morus alba (fruitless)
2. Very weedy, high water usage:
Athel/salt cedar Tamarix species
J. Discouraged Plant Materials:
1. Poisonous species:
Castor bean Ricinus communis
Chinaberry Melia azedarach
Oleander Nerium oleander
2. Plants with maintenance problems:
All willow species Salix species (brittle wood, borers)
California laurel Prunus caroliniana (borers, chlorosis)
California sycamore Platanus racemosa (borers)
Chinaberry Melia azedarach (brittle branches)
Deodara cedar Cedrus deodara (poor growth)
Evergreen pear Pyrus kawakamii (borers)
Fraser's photinia Photinia X fraseri (chlorosis)
Leyland cypress Cupressocyparis leylandii (borers)
Mimosa (silk tree) Albizia julibrissin (borers)
Russian olive Elaeagnus angustifolia (gradual decline)
Siberian elm Ulmus pumila
3. Plants with demonstrated poor cold hardiness:
African sumac Rhus lancea
All eucalyptus Eucalyptus species
Blue palo verde Cercidium floridum
Bottle tree Brachychiton populneus
Carob tree Ceratonia siliqua
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 471/565
Creeping acacia A. redolens
Desert cassia C. nemophila
Feathery cassia Cassia artemisiodes
Foothill palo verde C. microphyllum
Hopseed bush Dodonaea viscosa
Leather leaf acacia Acacia craspedocarpa
Lemon bottlebrush Callistemon citrinus
Mexican honeysuckle Justicia spicigera
Mexican primrose Oenothera berlandieri
Mission cactus Opuntia fiscus indica
Mojave yucca Yucca achidigera
Mulga tree Acacia anuera
Peruvian verbina Verbina peruviana
Purple trailing lantana Lantana montevidenis
Red desert bird of paradise Caesalpinia pulchermima
Saguaro Carnegiea gigantea
Shoestring acacia Acacia stenophylla
Southwestern sweet acacia Acacia minuta
Spanish bayonet Yucca aloifolia
Weeping bottlebrush Callistemon veminalis
Wirewood Acacia coriaceae
Yellow trumpet flower Tecoma stans var. angustata
(Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
9-8-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
A. Guiding Principles:
1. Ensure sufficient off street parking is provided for each land use without providing excessive parking;
2. Ensure sufficient accessible parking is provided for people with disabilities and that proper enforcement is available; and
3. Provide options for meeting parking requirements.
B. Off Street Parking Required: An off street parking space shall be provided and sized nine feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19'), with adequate provisions for an
ingress or egress space by standard sized automobiles, as herein described.
1. Application: The provisions of this section shall apply whenever:
a. A new structure is constructed; or
b. An existing structure is enlarged for any purpose, the parking requirements for the entire structure shall apply; or
c. The intensity of use, or expansion of use is changed, the parking requirements for the new use shall apply.
2. Requirements Cumulative: The amount of parking represents the sum of the parking spaces required for each individual use in an area, unless
otherwise provided under shared parking.
3. Parking Requirements For Uses Not Specified: Similar uses shall be determined by the zoning official. Certain parking requirements may be
determined by a conditional use permit. The parking requirement for uses, which are neither listed nor similar to the uses in the following tables, shall
be 1.5 spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross floor area (GFA) or 1.5 spaces per two (2) employees, whichever is greater.
C. Parking For Residential Land Uses: Table C-1 of this subsection describes parking requirements for residential land uses. (Ord. 376, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-
5-2007)
TABLE C-1
PARKING FOR RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
Residential Land Use Minimum Off Additional Requirements
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 472/565
Street
Parking
Requirement
Single-family detached; single-family
attached; duplexes; community residence -
family
2 spaces per unit Garage spaces are counted toward parking requirement
Multi-family, apartments, townhomes and
condominiums studio unit
1 space per unit 0.2 visitor space per unit
1 bedroom unit 1.5 spaces per unit 0.2 visitor space per unit
2 bedroom unit 2 spaces per unit 0.2 visitor space per unit
3 or more bedroom unit 2 spaces per unit 0.2 visitor space per unit
Garage spaces are counted toward parking requirement. If the space is
dedicated to a unit, the 20 foot long garage apron may be counted as a parking
space
Manufactured home parks 1.5 per
manufactured home
0.2 visitor space per unit
Community residence - transitional 0.25 space per bed,
plus 1 per employee
(Ord. 376, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007; amd. Ord. 443, 1-25-2011, eff. 2-17-2011)
D. Parking For Civic Land Uses: Table D-1 of this subsection describes parking requirements for civic land uses.
TABLE D-1
PARKING FOR CIVIC LAND USES
Civic Land Use
Minimum Off Street
Parking Requirement Additional Requirements
Auditoriums, assembly halls, community center,
senior centers, and private clubs
1 space per 3 seats or 1 space per 125
square feet GFA if no fixed seats
Childcare facilities 1 space per employee plus 1 space per
5 children
1 off street loading space for every 8 children
Church, temple, mosque or other religious
assembly
1 space per 3 seats 1 space per 300 square feet of additional public
space; 24 linear inches of bench equals 1 fixed seat
Convalescent hospitals and nursing homes 1 space per 4 beds plus 1 space per
employee
Hospital, including acute and specialty care 0.5 space per bed plus 1 space per
employee
Library (public or private), museums 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet GFA
plus 1 space per employee
Parks and recreation, active and passive 1 space per employee
Public utility facilities, without business offices,
such as electric, gas, water or telephone facilities
1 space per employee plus 1 space per
vehicle used in connection with facility
Schools:
Elementary and middle schools 2 spaces per classroom
High schools 0.3 space per student of driving age plus
1 space per employee
Colleges, universities and higher learning
institutions
0.3 space per student of driving age plus
1 space per employee
Trade schools, business colleges, and
commercial schools
0.3 space per student of driving age plus
1 space per employee
Terminal facilities, including airports, freight
stations, bus depots and similar uses
As specified by use permit
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 473/565
Notes:
GFA refers to gross floor area.
Per employee refers to the number of employees during peak employment shift.
(Ord. 376, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
E. Parking For Commercial Land Uses: Table E-1 of this subsection describes parking requirements for commercial land uses.
TABLE E-1
PARKING FOR COMMERCIAL LAND USES
Commercial Land Use
Minimum Off Street
Parking Requirement Additional Requirements
Automotive repair facilities 1 space per 300 square feet GFA Not less than 5 spaces per business
Automotive sales or rental 1 space per 300 square feet of office area plus 1 space
per 1,000 square feet of display area
Includes indoor and outdoor display
areas
Automotive service stations 1 space per 250 square feet GFA plus 2 spaces per
service bay
Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and
financial services
1 space per 250 square feet GFA
Banquet facility 1 space per 3 seats or 1 space per 125 square feet
GFA if no fixed seats
Barbershops and beauty salons including tanning
salons, nail salons and uses of a similar nature
3 spaces per station
Bars, lounge, tavern 1 space per 90 square feet GFA
Call center business or other high employee ratio
per square foot businesses
1 space per 150 square feet GFA
Car wash:
Full service 1 space per employee per shift Not less than 10 spaces
Self-service 2 spaces per wash bay Wash bay not counted as parking
space
Casino (unlimited gaming facilities) 8 spaces per 1,000 square feet GFA plus 1 space per
employee
Convenience stores, minimarkets 1 space per 200 square feet GFA plus 1 space per
employee
Convention and meeting facilities 1 space per employee plus 0.5 space per seat or 20
spaces per 1,000 square feet of convention hall space
Additional 1 space per seat if not
associated with hotel/lodging facility
Dry cleaners 1 space per 200 square feet GFA
Grocery store, food markets 1 space per 200 square feet GFA plus 1 space per
employee
Health club, athletic club, gymnasium 1 space per 200 square feet GFA plus 1 space per
employee
Independent testing laboratory 1 space for each 300 square feet of GFA
Launderette 1 space per 3 machines A washer/dryer combination is
considered 1 machine
Lodging:
Bed and breakfast inns, board and rooming
houses, fraternities and sororities
1 space per room plus 1 space per employee
Hotels and motels 1 per room plus 1 per employee
Timeshare or condominium hotels:
1 bedroom unit
2 or more bedroom unit 1.2 spaces per unit
2 spaces per unit
Additional parking required for any
commercial uses
Marijuana cultivation facility 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor/yard
area for cultivation
Marijuana dispensary 1 space for each 250 square feet of GFA
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 474/565
Marijuana production facility 1 space for each 500 square feet of GFA
Massage treatment; medical spa 1 space per 200 square feet of service area and 1
space per employee
Mortuaries and funeral homes 1 space per 3 seats and 1 space per employee 24 linear inches of bench equals 1
fixed seat
Offices:
Medical or dental clinics 1 space per 200 square feet GFA
Professional 1 space per 300 square feet GFA
Recreational facilities:
Bowling alleys 4 spaces per lane
Golf courses:
Driving ranges
Miniature golf
Regulation courses
1 space per tee
3 spaces per hole
4 spaces per hole
Skating rinks, ice or roller 1 space per 100 GFA
Tennis clubs 3 spaces per court
Restaurants:
Conventional sit down, including any bar portion 1 space per employee and 1 space per 75 square feet
service area
Includes indoor and outdoor seating
areas
Drive-through or fast food 1 space per employee and 1 space per 100 square feet
of service area
Not less than 6 spaces. Includes
indoor and outdoor seating areas
Retail commercial:
General retail uses under 50,000 square feet GFA
1 space per 200 square feet GFA
General retail uses 50,000 square feet GFA or
greater
1 space per 250 square feet GFA
Theater, movie 1 space per 3 seats, plus 1 space per employee
Notes:
GFA refers to gross floor area.
Per employee refers to the number of employees during peak employment shift.
(Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
F. Parking For Industrial Land Uses: Table F-1 of this subsection describes parking requirements for industrial land uses.
TABLE F-1
PARKING FOR INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
Industrial Land Use
Minimum Off Street
Parking Requirement
Additional
Requirements
General industrial 1 space per employee
Laundry, professional 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet GFA and 1 space
per employee
Manufacturing, fabrication, production,
restoration
1 space per employee 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of showroom
space
Moving, storage and transportation
facilities
1 space per employee
Research laboratories, high technology
industries
1 space per employee
Salvage yards 1 space per employee
Warehouses and warehouse complexes 1 space per employee
Wholesaling, storage and distribution: 1 space per employee
Heavy 1 space per employee 0.5 space per 1,000 square feet of area open to
the public
Light 1 space per employee 0.5 space per 1,000 square feet of area open to
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 475/565
the public
Notes:
GFA refers to gross floor area.
Per employee refers to the number of employees during peak employment shift.
G. Shared Parking: "Shared parking" is defined as parking that can serve more than one land use, without conflict. The cumulative parking spaces
required for land uses in a given area may be less than the sum of each individual use, if the City approves a shared parking plan based on one of the
following:
1. The approved parking plan was developed and designed, based on the Urban Land Institute (ULI) "shared parking" methodology for calculating the
peak demand over time for parking in a development of mixed uses using the same parking facilities and using locally adapted data, which consider
the City's seasonality and demographics.
2. In cases where shared parking is desired but insufficient data is available to use the preceding method, an experimental parking arrangement may
be temporarily approved subject to all of the following conditions:
a. Reasonably comparable data from similar joint uses demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City that the joint use proposal is potentially workable;
b. The joint uses are separated in time by a minimum of sixty (60) minutes and/or are for separate days;
c. A fifteen percent (15%) excess capacity is provided to accommodate unforeseen miscalculation of peak use and/or separation of time;
d. The joint time shared use of parking facilities is a binding part of one or more approved plans for the uses requiring the parking;
e. To guarantee a two (2) year proof period, the land for additional parking is reserved or optioned and a bond or acceptable equivalent mechanism
(in favor of the City) is posted to cover the costs plus ten percent (10%) for acquiring the land and constructing the credited parking spaces for a
period of two (2) years from the commencement of the last joint use at one hundred percent (100%) capacity, or until such time prior to the
expiration of the two (2) year period as the City elects to release the guarantee pursuant to the conditions of approval;
f. A program of data gathering to document the actual parking demand claimed during the trial period is implemented to the satisfaction of the City.
H. Parking Space And Lot Regulations:
1. Size; Standards: Each parking space shall be a permanently maintained space of not less than nine feet (9') wide by nineteen feet (19') long,
exclusive of driveways and aisles, but a parking space designated for recreational vehicle parking shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide by twenty
two feet (22') long. If the space is dedicated to a residential unit, the twenty foot (20') long garage apron may be counted as a parking space.
Overhangs of up to one foot (1') into landscaped areas may be counted as part of the required stall length. Tandem parking spaces, which block a
vehicle in the space, other than parallel parking spaces along a road or driveway, are discouraged. Please refer to table H-1 and figure H-2 of this
subsection. (Ord. 376, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
TABLE H-1
Parking Angle
(Degrees)
Stall Width
Projection
(WP)
Module Width1
(MW)
Vehicle
Projection
(VP) Aisle Width (AW)
45 12'9" 49'10" 17'7" 14'8"
50 11'9" 51'7" 18'2" 15'3"
55 11'0" 53'0" 18'8" 15'8"
60 10'5" 54'6" 19'0" 16'6"
65 9'11" 55'9" 19'2" 17'5"
70 9'7" 57'0" 19'3" 18'6"
75 9'4" 58'0" 19'1" 19'10"
90 9'0" 62'0" 19'0" 24'0"
RV 10'0" 22'0"
Note:
1.Wall to wall, double loaded aisle.
(Ord. 406, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-4-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 476/565
2. Surfacing Drive-In Lots: Every parcel of land hereafter used for any public or semipublic automobile parking, truck parking, storage sales service,
public garage or any type of drive-in business or similar use where vehicles regularly and customarily require parking space, and ingress and egress
thereto shall be paved with a surfacing material of asphalt or concrete composition and shall have appropriate bumper guards where needed as
determined by the building official. Parking lots for construction equipment storage may use gravel for surfacing material if city staff deems it
necessary or appropriate.
3. Approval And Plans: Such a parking lot shall require detailed plans drawn to scale for driveway openings or curb cuts and shall be submitted for
approval with regard to the location and relation of same to the dedicated public streets and highways.
4. Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the parking lot shall be arranged per the following provisions:
a. Proper illumination shall be provided for safety which, at a minimum, shall be the equivalent of one foot-candle average of illumination throughout
the parking area. Lighting plans shall take into account the placement and growth of landscape materials;
b. All lighting shall be designed to confine direct rays to the premises with the use of shielding or shades. No spillover beyond the property line shall
be permitted, except onto public thoroughfares provided, however, that such light shall not cause a hazard to motorists;
c. All lighting shall be on a time clock or photo sensor system;
d. Light standard heights shall be as per manufacturer's recommended photometrics, but in no case shall the height exceed twenty five feet (25')
(measured from finish grade at the base of the standard). Graduated light standard heights within a site with lower heights in peripheral areas may
be required by the planning commission and/or city council to provide compatibility with adjoining properties and streets.
I. Off Street Truck Loading Space: Whenever the city determines that the normal operation of any use or development requires that goods, merchandise or
equipment to be routinely delivered to or shipped from that location, sufficient off street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance
with this subsection to accommodate such activities in a safe and efficient manner. For purposes of this section, the term "loading" means both loading
and unloading. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a minimum ten foot by twenty five foot (10' x 25') loading space
with a minimum fourteen foot (14') height clearance, for every fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of two thousand
(2,000) square feet of building floor use for the above mentioned purposes, or for every one hundred twenty five thousand (125,000) square feet or
fraction thereof in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet of land use for the above mentioned purposes.
Loading spaces must be designed which will not necessitate delivery vehicles to obstruct a street property line or required parking area during normal
business hours. A loading area shall not be located in a required setback.
J. Setbacks: In a commercial or industrial district, required off street parking spaces may occupy any part of the property, except within required landscape
areas or sight distance triangles.
K. Prohibited Parking Locations: Except for the time required to conduct deliveries or pick ups, commercial vehicles are prohibited from parking within the
city limits:
1. On any street in the city;
2. On a vacant commercial property within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a residential zone;
3. On residential property whether vacant or not.
L. Accessible Parking For Physically Handicapped Persons: A portion of the total number of required off street parking spaces in each off street parking
area shall be specifically designated, located and reserved for the use by persons with physical disabilities. Accessible parking is not required for a
single-family home.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 477/565
1. Number Of Spaces: The minimum number of accessible spaces to be provided shall be a portion of the total number of off street parking spaces
reserved, as determined from table L-1 of this subsection. Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall be counted toward fulfilling off
street parking standards.
The required accessible parking provided for hospital/medical office land uses that provide outpatient units and facilities should equal ten percent
(10%) of the total parking provided. Medical land uses specializing in the treatment of mobility impairments should provide twenty percent (20%) of
the total parking provided as accessible parking. The number of accessible parking for physically handicapped persons may be increased at
businesses whose clientele may contain a disproportionately larger portion of physically handicapped persons.
TABLE L-1
ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
Total Parking
Spaces Provided
Minimum
Number Of
Accessible Spaces
Minimum
Number Of Van
Accessible Spaces
Minimum
Number Of
Car Accessible
Spaces
1 - 25 1 1 0
26 - 50 2 1 1
51 - 75 3 1 2
76 - 100 4 1 3
101 - 150 5 1 4
151 - 200 6 1 5
201 - 300 7 1 6
301 - 400 8 1 7
401 - 500 9 2 7
501 - 1,000 2 percent of total spaces 1 out of every 8 accessible spaces 7 out of every 8 accessible spaces
Over 1,000 20 plus 1 per each 100 spaces over 1,000 1 out of every 8 accessible spaces 7 out of every 8 accessible spaces
2. Minimum Dimensions: All parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall comply with the parking space dimension standards of this
section; provided that access aisles shall be provided immediately abutting such spaces as follows:
a. Car Accessible Spaces: Car accessible spaces shall have at least a five foot (5') wide access aisle located abutting the designated parking space.
b. Van Accessible Spaces: Van accessible spaces shall have at least an eight foot (8') wide access aisle located abutting the designated parking
space. One van accessible space is required for every eight (8) accessible spaces.
3. Location Of Spaces: Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall be located in close proximity to building entrances and shall be designed to
permit occupants of vehicles to reach the building entrance on an unobstructed path. A maximum slope of two percent (2%) is required in all
directions for both the space and the access aisle since level surfaces are important for wheelchair transfer to and from vehicles.
4. Handicapped Parking Sign Requirements Per Figure L-2:
a. Statute Requirements: Each space shall be identified with a sign as required by and conforming to Nevada Revised Statutes 484.408.
b. Location: The bottom of all signs must be no less than sixty inches (60") from ground level and no more than eighty four inches (84") from
pavement level.
c. Van Accessible Space: The space designed for a vehicle with a side loading wheelchair lift must be marked with a sign as required by and
conforming to Nevada Revised Statutes 484.408. A space is also required on the right side of the van accessible space, which is immediately
adjacent and intended for use in the loading and unloading of a wheelchair. The adjacent space must also be marked with a sign as required by
and conforming to Nevada Revised Statutes 484.408.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 478/565
Figure L-2
M. Recreational Vehicles And Trailers: Unless otherwise permitted by this code, or during loading, unloading or recreational travel, recreational vehicles
and trailers are not permitted to park:
1. On any street in the city.
2. On vacant commercial or residential property.
N. Vehicles For Sale: It is unlawful for any person to display for the purpose of sale or lease any vehicle upon any vacant lot or unimproved portion of
public right of way unless the following conditions are met:
1. The property has the proper zoning for the activity and a conditional use permit if selling more than three (3) vehicles on the property at the same
time.
2. The person selling the vehicle has received the written consent of the property owner and evidence of the consent:
a. Is posted on the vehicle in an easily seen and read location, preferably on the inside of the windshield facing out.
b. Is signed by the property owner.
c. Contains the name and address of the property owner.
d. Contains the name and address of the vehicle owner.
e. States the period of time the display is authorized. (Ord. 376, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-5-2007)
9-8-6: SCREENING AND BUFFERING:
(Rep. by Ord. 254, 6-12-2001, eff. 7-5-2001)
9-8-7: SPECIALIZED STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICT:
In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter, the following standards shall apply to each zoning district as indicated:
A. Residential Districts:
1. RE-1, RE-2, RE-3 (Rural Estates) Districts: The following specialized standards apply in the RE districts:
a. Farming Uses: The following accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with a residential dwelling for the use of the family residing on the lot
or parcel:
(1) Farming, including all types of agricultural and horticulture such as flower and vegetable gardening, field crops, berry and bush crops, tree
crops and orchards;
(2) Small livestock farming and/or the keeping of cows, horses, sheep, goats or similar animals, except no hogs or pigs shall be allowed. One cow
or one horse or two (2) sheep or two (2) goats will be allowed for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area, but the total number of any
combination of the above animals shall not exceed twenty (20), other than their young under the age of six (6) months;
(3) A maximum of two hundred (200) chickens or two hundred (200) rabbits or similar animals will be allowed on a lot or parcel of land; provided,
that all killing or dressing is done for the owner's consumption;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 479/565
(4) A maximum of one hundred (100) pairs of chinchillas will be allowed on a lot or parcel of land; provided, that no pelting is done on the
premises;
(5) The keeping, breeding and raising of domestic animals;
(6) Aviaries;
(7) Apiaries, upon the following conditions:
(A) Occupied hives shall be at least four hundred feet (400') from any other apiary or existing dwelling on another property, unless the written
consent of the owner of such dwelling or apiary is secured;
(B) Occupied hives shall have a minimum separation of fifty feet (50') to any common property line of another property;
(C) Occupied hives shall have a minimum separation of one hundred fifty feet (150') to any street or highway;
(8) The above may be raised for commercial purposes and sold from the premises; provided, that no advertising signs or structures shall be
allowed on the premises;
(9) If the lot or parcel contains more than five (5) acres, any one of the following additional uses may be permitted:
(A) The commercial raising, including hatching, fattening, marketing and sale of poultry, fowl, rabbits, chinchillas, nutria, mice, frogs, fish, bees,
earthworms, and other similar animals of comparable nature, form and size;
(B) The grazing of cattle, sheep or horses, including the supplementary feeding of such cattle, sheep or horses, provided such grazing is not a
part of nor conducted in conjunction with any dairy or livestock sales yard located on the same premises.
2. A, RE-1, RE-2, RE-3 (Agriculture And Rural Estates) Districts: The following specialized standards apply in the A and RE districts:
a. Animal Enclosures: Animal enclosures shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from any property line, excepting grazing areas for horses, cattle or
other livestock. Animal enclosures include, but are not limited to, corrals, holding pens, kennels, aviaries and other animal confinement areas.
b. Fencing: Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing, except for containment of farm animals on tracts that are two (2)
acres or larger. Farm fences shall be permitted on property lines.
c. Fence Height: Fences or freestanding walls must not exceed a height of six feet (6') outside of the lot's buildable area.
d. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited, excepting farming machinery, farm products and temporary storage of road materials.
e. Sanitary Sewers; On Site Sewage Disposal Systems:
(1) Connection To Sanitary Sewer System: All nonagricultural uses shall be required to extend and connect to the sanitary sewer system if the lot
on which the land use is located is within four hundred feet (400') of an existing sanitary sewer line. (Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd.
Ord. 256, 8-30-2001)
(2) On Site Sewage Treatment And Disposal: Uses not connected to the sanitary sewer system shall provide an individual, on site sewage
treatment and disposal system that complies with the requirements of the sanitation department and is approved by the Southern Nevada health
district. On site sewage disposal and treatment systems shall be located wholly within the boundaries of the lot on which the land use is located.
Prior to the approval of an on site sewage disposal system, the owners and successors in the ownership shall agree to connect to the sanitary
sewer system within one year after being notified by the city that the sanitary sewer service is available to serve the tract. The required
agreement shall be submitted to the director of sanitation. The director of sanitation shall be responsible for recording the agreement in the
official property records. (Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. Ord. 256, 8-30-2001; Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
3. A, RE-1, RE-2, RE-3, SF (Agriculture, Rural Estates And Single-Family) Districts: The following specialized standards apply in the A, RE and SF
districts:
a. Manufactured Housing: This section does not void a recorded restrictive covenant nor does it apply in historic districts. Manufactured houses must
comply with the following:
(1) Must be permanently affixed to a residential lot;
(2) To be manufactured within five (5) years preceding placement;
(3) Have exterior siding and roofing material similar in color, material and appearance to the exterior siding and roofing primarily used on other
single-family residential dwelling units in the immediate vicinity;
(4) Must consist of more than one section;
(5) Must have at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area;
(6) Have an architectural treatment masking the foundation, if the home has an elevated foundation;
(7) If the homes in the immediate vicinity have garages or carports, then a garage or carport will be required off the manufactured home, to match
the architectural design of the neighborhood.
The building and zoning department will review and consider for approval an application for manufactured housing. If the application is denied,
the applicant may appeal to the city manager, and then to the city council.
b. Yard/Garage Sales: Yard/garage sales shall be restricted to four (4) per year per residence, each lasting no longer than two (2) consecutive days.
(Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. Ord. 256, 8-30-2001)
4. MF-3, MF-4 (Multi-Family) Districts: The following specialized standards apply in the MF-3 and MF-4 Districts:
a. Timesharing Apartments: Any conditional use permit issued for such use shall be irrevocable, except on grounds of noncompliance with conditions
imposed at the time of initial approval. (Ord. 544, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-2-2018)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 480/565
5. MF-2, MF-3, MF-4 (Multi-Family) Districts: The following specialized standards apply in the MF-2, MF-3 and MF-4 Districts:
a. Commercial Business Uses: Commercial business uses shall only be permitted if incidental to a multi-family structure or dwelling group containing
not less than one hundred (100) dwelling units and provided solely for the convenience of the occupants thereof. The following restrictions shall
also apply:
(1) There shall be no entrance to such business use, except from inside the multi-family building in which the use is located;
(2) The business use shall be restricted to the ground floor or basement;
(3) The floor area of such business use shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the multi-family building in which the
business use is located;
(4) There shall be no outside advertising signs for the business use.
b. Height: Two (2) additional stories, for a total of four (4), may be permitted pursuant to an approved conditional use permit. Applicable bulk
regulations will be determined as part of the CUP requirements. (Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. Ord. 256, 8-30-2001)
c. Open Space Requirements: A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the net lot area shall be retained as open space.
(1) The frontage open space shall not be required to exceed fifty (50) square feet per one foot (1') of public street frontage and shall not be less
than twenty (20) square feet per one foot (1') of public street frontage;
(2) A private outdoor living space shall be provided adjoining each dwelling unit equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross size of the
dwelling unit, except that dwelling units above the first story shall provide such space equal to a minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross size
of the dwelling unit;
(3) The remainder of the required open space shall be provided in common open space. (Ord. 339, 6-27-2006, eff. 8-15-2006)
d. Special Provisions For Multi-Family Dwelling Groups: All of the following special provisions shall apply to multi-family dwelling groups, except as
may otherwise be provided in this title:
(1) Considered One Building: Groups of multi-family dwelling units shall be considered as one building for the purpose of front, side and rear yard
requirements.
(2) Face Direction: All multi-family dwelling units shall face upon a public or private street or private outdoor living space.
(3) Private Outdoor Space: The private outdoor living space shall be open and unobstructed by any buildings or structures, except swimming pools
or other recreational facilities, providing they do not obstruct the minimum open space required.
(4) Distances Between Buildings: No building or structure may be within ten feet (10') of any other building or structure, except that buildings or
structures separated by alleys or access driveways shall be required to maintain a minimum separation of not less than thirty feet (30').
6. MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4 (Multi-Family) Districts: The following specialized standards apply in the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3 and MF-4 Districts:
a. Animals:
(1) Number of animals is limited to those that are permitted in this code2;
(2) Enclosures are limited to those for domestic pets only. (Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. Ord. 256, 8-30-2001)
b. Open Storage Prohibited: Open storage is prohibited. (Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. Ord. 256, 8-30-2001; Ord. 377, 6-12-2007, eff. 7-
5-2007)
B. Commercial Districts:
1. Temporary Commercial Permit:
a. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to provide for a temporary commercial permit to allow certain short term activities that otherwise would
not be allowed and to limit the activities to the circumstances and conditions set forth in this subsection. The requirements of this subsection apply
to the activities specified herein whether or not they are conducted for profit.
b. Authority:
(1) The director of the building and zoning department or his designee shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
temporary commercial permit.
(2) The director may at any time refer an application for a temporary commercial permit to the city council.
c. Permitted Uses: The following temporary uses may be permitted by means of the issuance of a temporary commercial permit:
(1) A temporary real estate office located within a recorded subdivision; provided, however, that the use is limited to the sale of new homes within
that subdivision. The approval of the use shall be limited in duration to a maximum of two (2) years, or a shorter period may be approved by the
director, but shall expire at any earlier time when all lots within the subdivision have been sold;
(2) A contractor's construction yard in conjunction with an approved development project;
(3) A Christmas tree sales lot during the period of November 1 through December 31; provided, however, that no permit is required when the sales
are in conjunction with the operation of an established commercial business with a valid business license;
(4) A pumpkin sales lot during the period of October 1 through November 5; provided, however, that no permit is required when the sales are in
conjunction with an established commercial business with a valid business license;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 481/565
(5) A haunted house operated in conjunction with the Halloween season; provided, however, that the operation shall be limited to a duration of
thirty one (31) days;
(6) A snow cone shack from May 1 to Labor Day, on commercially zoned property;
(7) A fireworks stand during the period of June 28 through July 4; provided, however, that the operation shall be subject to the uniform fire code
and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations;
(8) A parking lot sale; provided, however, that such sales occur no more than four (4) times in one year;
(9) Any other temporary use that is similar to those enumerated in this section and which, in the opinion of the director, is compatible with the
zoning district and surrounding land uses.
d. Application And Decision: An application for a temporary commercial permit shall be filed with the director and shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as set forth in the fee schedule. The application shall contain sufficient information and detail to enable the director to determine the
appropriateness of issuing a permit under this section. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a complete and sufficient application, the director shall
take appropriate action to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. The director may approve a temporary commercial permit if
the director determines that:
(1) The proposed use is compatible with existing land uses on the same property and on surrounding properties;
(2) The subject site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of the use being proposed;
(3) There will be adequate public access to the site and adequate provision for on site parking;
(4) The application is not a continuation of consecutive applications or otherwise an attempt to circumvent the limitations contained in this section.
e. Appeal: The applicant may appeal a decision of the director to the city council by filing a written request with the building and zoning department.
Any appeal pursuant to this section must be filed within ten (10) days after the date of the decision that is the subject of the appeal. The decision of
the city council is final.
f. Conditions Of Approval: In approving a temporary commercial permit, the director (or, upon appeal, the city council) may impose conditions,
stipulations or limitations as are deemed necessary to ensure that the activity will be consistent with subsection B1d of this section. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Provision for temporary parking facilities, including handicap spaces, vehicle ingress and egress;
(2) Measures to prevent or reduce nuisance factors such as glare, excessive illumination, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases and
heat;
(3) Regulation of placement, height, size and location of structures, facilities, landscaping and equipment, including provisions for buffering and
separation;
(4) Provision for sanitary facilities and for waste collection and disposal;
(5) Measures to promote safety and security;
(6) Regulation of signs and other attention gaining devices;
(7) Regulation of operating hours and duration of the temporary commercial use;
(8) Compliance with applicable provisions of this code;
(9) Any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use is conducted in an orderly, efficient manner and in
accordance with the intent and purpose of this section.
g. Cleanup Of Temporary Site: The holder of the temporary commercial permit shall be responsible for leaving the property free of debris, litter or
other evidence of the temporary use immediately upon completion or removal of the use.
h. Revocation: A temporary commercial permit may be revoked or modified by the director, upon notice to the permit holder, if the director finds that:
(1) The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
(2) The activity is not in compliance with the permit or any condition of approval;
(3) The use to be allowed by means of the permit is conducted in violation of any applicable statute, ordinance or regulation; or
(4) The permit is being employed as a means to circumvent the limitations contained in this title. (Ord. 238, 5-23-2000, eff. 6-19-2000; amd. Ord.
256, 8-30-2001)
C. Industrial Districts:
1. Sign, Parking Lot: An advertising sign or parking lot may be located at a distance of not less than twenty feet (20') from the street and/or future street
width line, if in accordance with site plans as required herein.
2. Setback; IR-2 District: Along any other property line within or adjoining an established IR-2 district, there shall be a setback of at least ten feet (10').
This requirement may be modified or waived if in the judgment of the city council a fire lane is not considered to be necessary.
3. Setback; Other District: Along any other property line abutting or adjoining any zone district other than IR-2 or IR-1, there shall be a setback of at
least twenty feet (20'), or as per section 9-8-4, table 9-8:2 of this chapter, whichever is more restrictive, and the property line shall be sodded, planted
(or other approved ground cover) and shrubbed in such a way as to form a permanent evergreen screen.
4. Compliance Required: All industrial uses shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards described in this subsection and, in
addition to these standards, all uses shall be so constructed, maintained and operated so as not to be injurious to the use or occupation of the
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 482/565
adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, radiation, fire and explosive hazard or glare. Nothing in this subsection
shall be constructed to alter, change, modify or abrogate any authority granted exclusively to any State agency.
5. Outdoor Storage Areas: Outdoor storage areas shall be screened with a solid, opaque eight foot (8') tall fence; however, the fence or wall shall not
occupy any portion of the setback area where fronting along a street or future width line. The maximum height requirement for the fence or wall may
be modified or waived if, in the judgment of the City Council, the increased height is necessary and not detrimental to the intent and purposes
established in these regulations.
6. Operation Of Uses: All uses shall be operated so as to comply with standards of performance or their equivalent which have been or which may be
adopted or amended from time to time by the State with respect to smoke, dust, particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste and radiation hazard.
7. Ground Vibration: No use shall be operated so as to produce ground vibration, noticeable without instruments, at the lot line of the premises on
which the use is located.
8. Electromagnetic Interference: No use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with normal radio or
television reception in any residential or commercial district.
9. Fire And Explosion Danger: Each use shall be operated so as to minimize the danger from fire and explosion and to comply with the regulations
contained in the Mesquite Building Code and applicable fire prevention ordinances.
10. Humidity: Any activity producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in such a manner that
steam, humidity, heat or glare is not perceptible at any lot line. (Ord. 246, 11-28-2000, eff. 12-21-2000)
9-8-8: SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN CERTAIN USES:
9-8-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT OF SEPARATION AND DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. The City Council declares that this liquor license and marijuana or medical marijuana license distance requirements section is an exercise of the
regulatory powers delegated to the Council by the State of Nevada pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes 268.090, and 453A inter alia.
B. The public health, safety, morals and welfare of the inhabitants of the City require the regulation and control of all persons engaged in the businesses of
alcoholic liquor and marijuana or medical marijuana sales. All such persons as defined in title 2, chapters 4, 14 and 16 of this Code shall be licensed
and controlled so as to protect the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and to safeguard the
public. (Ord. 502, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016; amd. Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-8-8-2: SEPARATION OF LICENSEES:
A. No tavern or full off-sale liquor license shall be issued in the City unless the entry door of the prospective business is located one thousand feet (1,000'),
in a direct line, from the entry door of the nearest existing business holding a tavern license or full off-sale license. This distance limitation does not
apply to a resort hotel as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 463.01865 or as may be amended or renumbered from time to time, and a commercial
business containing thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more of floor space. (Ord. 502, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
B. No tavern liquor license or marijuana or medical marijuana dispensary license shall be issued in the City unless the entry door of the prospective
business is located one thousand feet (1,000'), in a direct line, from the entry door of the nearest existing business holding a sexually oriented business
license. (Ord. 502, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016; amd. Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-8-8-3: SEPARATION OF LIQUOR LICENSE BUILDINGS FROM PUBLIC FACILITIES:
A. No tavern or full off-sale liquor license shall be issued in the City unless the entry door of the prospective liquor license building is located one thousand
feet (1,000'), in a direct line, from the entry door of the nearest church or school. This liquor license distance limitation does not apply to a church that is
located in a Commercial or Hotel/Tourist Zone.
B. A liquor license business shall not be located in any zone classified residential. (Ord. 502, 10-25-2016, eff. 11-16-2016)
9-8-8-4: SEPARATION OF MARIJUANA AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE BUILDINGS FROM PUBLIC
FACILITIES:
A. No marijuana or medical marijuana establishment license shall be issued in the City unless the entry door of the prospective marijuana or medical
marijuana license building is located one thousand feet (1,000'), in a direct line, from the closest point of the property line of the nearest church, school,
or other community facility. This marijuana or medical marijuana license distance limitation does not apply to any church, school or community facility
whose owners/operators sign a disclosure statement acknowledging that they are moving to a location within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing
marijuana or medical marijuana establishment.
B. All marijuana and medical marijuana dispensaries must be located at least three hundred feet (300') from the closest residential dwelling. (Ord. 525, 9-
26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
ARTICLE A. HOME OCCUPATIONS
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 483/565
9-8A-1: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICABILITY:
Provisions of chapter 7 of this title, including the articles contained therein, or any other provision of this code, which refer to "home occupations" as
conditional uses in certain residential districts, do not apply if this chapter exempts a home occupation from the requirement for a conditional use permit in
certain residential districts as set forth herein. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
HOME OCCUPATION: Any commercial activity carried out for gain and conducted from a residence or structure located in a residential district.
MAJOR IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS: A home occupation which disrupts or would disrupt the residential character of a residential
neighborhood. These businesses require a permit, a business license, a conditional use permit and city council approval prior to operate or to continue
operation and are not favored in residential districts or neighborhoods.
MINOR IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS: A home occupation which maintains the residential character of a residential neighborhood but has
some impact on the neighborhood. These home occupations require a permit and business license to operate but do not require a conditional use permit
unless they have been determined to be a major impact home occupation business as set forth herein.
NO IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS: A home occupation business which maintains the residential character of a residential neighborhood and
which has no impact on its surrounding neighborhood. These businesses require no permit or business license to operate in any residential district or
neighborhood.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: Any location where the property at issue is zoned for any residential use. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-3: HOME OCCUPATIONS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS AND DISTRICTS:
A. "No impact home occupation businesses", as defined herein, may operate in any residential districts and neighborhoods without necessity of permit or
business license, subject to the limitations and conditions set forth herein.
B. "Minor impact home occupation businesses", as defined herein, may operate in residential districts and neighborhoods with a permit and business
license but do not require a conditional use permit or city council approval, subject to the limitations and conditions set forth herein.
C. Major impact home occupation businesses require a permit, a business license, a conditional use permit and city council approval to operate or
continue operation and are not favored in residential districts or neighborhoods. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All home occupations must comply with the following performance standards unless a conditional use permit and city council action provide otherwise:
A. The use of the dwelling as a home occupation location must be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes. The home
occupation must occupy no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of the residence;
B. No more than one person, other than those residing on the premises, shall be engaged in the activities of the home occupation;
C. A home occupation which is authorized to receive patrons, students or any business related individuals at the home occupation location may only do so
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.; (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
D. No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single dwelling unit, unless the additional activity qualifies as a "no impact home
occupation". No home occupation is allowed if such use of the property is deed restricted by CC&Rs or HOA rules; (Ord. 438, 7-27-2010)
E. There shall be no exterior displays, no exterior storage of equipment or goods, including unlicensed equipment, materials, vehicles or open lot storage;
F. Home occupations shall not produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors or heat. Any noise, vibration, smoke, electrical
interference, dust, odors or heat detectable beyond the property lines or beyond the walls of a multiple-family unit shall not be permitted;
G. Home occupations shall not require internal or external structural alterations of the principal residence which may change the outside appearance of the
principal residence or change the residential character of the property;
H. Home occupations shall not require the installation of equipment or machinery creating utility demand, noise, fumes or other impacts in excess of
equipment or machinery that is customarily found in a residential area;
I. No electric devices may be used in any home occupation which may cause electrical interference or create visual and audible interference in any radio,
television receiver or telephone, which violates FCC standards, or which causes fluctuations in off site line voltages;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 484/565
J. No on premises advertising for the home occupation shall be allowed. Window areas must not purposely, intentionally or unintentionally be used as
display areas or to offer merchandise for sale;
K. All related business activities shall take place entirely within the residential dwelling, unless the building and zoning department finds that business
activity conducted outside the dwelling is similar to noncommercial activities normally associated with single-family residences;
L. No pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential area;
M. No delivery truck shall operate out of a residential district as a function of the home occupation. A single delivery or business vehicle may be operated
from a home occupation so long as it is limited to a maximum size of one ton gross vehicle weight and so long as it is stored entirely within a building or
structure;
N. No home occupation will be permitted which requires receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than a passenger motor vehicle
or by parcel or letter carrier mail service using vehicles typically employed in residential deliveries;
O. No deliveries by semitractor/trailer truck are permitted;
P. Low intensity (traffic generation, land use, noise, etc.) occupations, professions and business activities, and those uses or activities of a similar nature,
as provided by the permitted home occupation uses in this section, may be permitted as home occupations in the indicated residential zoning
district(s), subject to the conditions of these regulations and other applicable federal, state or local laws;
Q. This section does not permit the establishment and operation of home occupations without a permit and business license unless they have been
exempted from the requirements of permitting and licensing by this section;
R. All vehicles of customers or residents of the home occupation location must be parked in authorized parking locations either on the lot where the home
occupation is located or in the public parking adjacent to the home occupation location; and
S. The home occupation shall not create a hazard by using flammable, explosive or other dangerous materials or by keeping, raising or storing animals
which are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health and safety of any person or property. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-5: NO IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESSES WHICH REQUIRE REGISTRATION BUT DO NOT REQUIRE A PERMIT
OR BUSINESS LICENSE:
The following home occupations require registration with the city clerk but do not require a permit or business license so long as the activity of the
business has no impact on the residential neighborhood where they operate:
A. Artists;
B. Composers;
C. Writers;
D. Piano teacher for one student at a time;
E. Dance or aerobics instructor for no more than one student at a time;
F. Persons who conduct the home occupation entirely on a telephone or personal computer and do not invite business customers to or receive customers
at the home occupation location;
G. Sale of personal goods and services, such as cosmetics and kitchenware away from the residence, and which does not invite customers to or receive
customers at the home occupation location and which does not have storage of equipment, goods or supplies outside the home occupation residential
dwelling; or
H. Any other activities similar to one of the above categories. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-6: MINOR IMPACT HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESSES WHICH REQUIRE A PERMIT AND BUSINESS LICENSE BUT NOT
A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL:
The following home occupations require a permit and a business license but do not require a conditional use permit and city council approval so long as
the activity of the business does not have a major impact on the residential neighborhood where they operate:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 485/565
A. Babysitters for less than five (5) children, including the children of the babysitter;
B. A business which sees only one client at a time at the location of the home occupation and does not affect the residential character of the residential
district by operation of the business;
C. Piano teacher for two (2) or more students at a time;
D. Dance or aerobics instructor for two (2) or more students at a time;
E. A business which maintains one business car or pickup truck at the home occupation location. Contractors, provided there is no outside storage of
equipment or supplies;
F. A business which receives commercial deliveries of goods or equipment to be sold as part of the business venture;
G. Consultant with office in home who sees no more than one customer at a time at the home occupation location;
H. Designer/decorator who does not see more than one customer at a time at the home occupation location;
I. Personal sewing, clothing alterations and dressmaking if the proprietor does not invite or receive more than one customer to the home occupation
location at a time;
J. Maintenance/handyman/janitorial service;
K. Window coverings sales;
L. Mail order or telephone order business;
M. Small bookkeeping or typing service;
N. Telephone answering service;
O. Telephone reception for a mobile business; or
P. Any other activities similar to one of the above categories. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-7: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AND LICENSE TO OPERATE HOME OCCUPATION; FEE REQUIRED:
An applicant for a home occupation license must first apply for and receive a permit from the Building and Zoning Department. Permit applications may be
obtained at the Building and Zoning Department. A one-time permit application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) must be submitted by the applicant with
the permit application. The Building and Zoning Department shall inspect the premises and work area of every home application location, if determined to
be a major impact home occupation. (Ord. 537, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
9-8A-8: DUTIES OF BUILDING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT:
When an applicant for a home occupation permit and license files an application for a home occupation permit, the Building and Zoning Department will:
A. Review the application and determine if the home occupation would have major or nonmajor impact on the residential neighborhood where it proposes
to operate;
B. Physically inspect the proposed business location to determine whether the proposed business complies with the provisions of this section and whether
the proposed home occupation will likely affect the residential character of the neighborhood where it proposes to operate or not. If the Building and
Zoning Department determines the proposed home occupation will likely change the residential character of the neighborhood where it proposes to
operate, a conditional use permit and City Council permission are required; and
C. Determine whether a proposed home occupation requires a conditional use permit and City Council approval. In making that determination, the Building
and Zoning Department will utilize the standards set forth in this chapter and other relevant provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, the
table of permitted home occupations contained in this section.
PERMITTED HOME OCCUPATIONS1
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 486/565
Home Occupation District
A RE-1 RE-2 RE-3 SF
MF-1 -
MF-4
Antique sales * * * * * *
Artists, composer, photographer * * * * * *
Arts and crafts production, sales * * * * * *
Brokers * * * * * *
Building contractor, construction services2 * *
Clergy * * * * * *
Computer applications * * * * * *
Cooking, preserving * * * * * *
Electronics repair * * * * * *
Instruction3 * * * * * *
Insurance agents * * * * * *
Jewelry repair * * * * * *
Newspaper distribution * * * * * *
Professional services4 * * * * * *
Sales representative5 * * * * * *
Seamstress, tailor * * * * * *
Secretarial service * * * * * *
Small engine, appliance * * * * * *
Work processing, typing * * * * * *
Notes:
1. The table lists specific home occupations and the districts in which they are permitted. Other home occupations may be permitted by the zoning official if
they meet the standards specified in this chapter.
2. Includes, but is not limited to, carpentry, electrical, masonry, painting and plumbing.
3. Art, dance, music, tutoring; limited to no more than 2 students at one time.
4. Accountant, architect, attorney, engineer, etc.
5. Provided there is no exchange of tangible goods on the premises, though mail distribution may be allowed.
(Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-9: PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following types of home occupations are prohibited in residential districts without a conditional use permit and City Council approval:
A. A business which invites, attracts or receives customers or client traffic beyond the normal traffic associated with the residential district;
B. Businesses which require storage of equipment or inventory outside the home occupation location dwelling;
C. Any business which is conducted outdoors on the premises where the residential dwelling is located, except as specifically authorized in this chapter;
D. A business which would change the residential character of the neighborhood if permitted to operate and a home occupation business which has
changed the residential character of the neighborhood where it is located;
E. Ambulance services;
F. Animal/veterinary clinics;
G. Auto painting, repair and body services;
H. Banks or credit unions;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 487/565
I. Beauty salons and barber shops;
J. Cabinetry, mechanical repair or modification, fabrication, treatment or assembly of goods, the process of which requires intensive use of equipment,
machinery, raw materials or component parts (e.g., welding, construction or assembly of cabinets or furniture, treatment of steel or the finishing of
wood);
K. Clinics/hospitals;
L. Commercial stables;
M. Kennels;
N. Large engine repair;
O. Liquor establishments which either sell packaged liquor or serve alcohol;
P. Medical, dental, optical, etc., office;
Q. Mortuary;
R. Real estate or development sales offices;
S. Restaurants; (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
T. Taxi services, not applicable to transportation network drivers; (Ord. 537, 8-28-2018, eff. 9-18-2018)
U. Vehicle sales, leases or parts sales;
V. In order to avoid health and sanitation risks associated with disposal of medical wastes, medical, dental and other health professional offices are
specifically excluded as home occupations; or
W. The proposed home occupation will not be in violation of any covenants, codes or restrictions (CC&Rs) for the subject property unless the CC&Rs are
less restrictive than this code, in which case this code will prevail. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-10: APPLICATION PROCESS WHEN CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL ARE REQUIRED:
The following procedures shall apply to all proposed home occupations which require a conditional use permit and city council approval:
A. When an application for a home occupation permit and license requires a conditional use permit to operate a home occupation in a residential district or
neighborhood, the applicant must comply with all requirements for issuance of a conditional use permit, including, but not limited to, payment of any
required fee;
B. Application for a home occupation conditional use permit may be made by the owner, purchaser under contract, or lessee of the property for which the
permit is sought, or his agent, duly authorized in writing; and
C. An application for home occupation conditional use permit must be submitted on forms furnished by the building and zoning department. The building
and zoning department may request any information as prescribed or reasonably necessary to process the application. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-
1999)
9-8A-11: CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT BY BUILDING AND ZONING
DEPARTMENT:
For the purpose of the review of the building and zoning department, proposed home occupation businesses which do not comply with the following
restrictions are considered major impact home occupation businesses:
A. The site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed activity;
B. The site is accessible by streets adequate in width and pavement type to accommodate the proposed activity;
C. The proposed use will have no adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 488/565
D. The activity shall be conducted entirely by persons residing therein except as authorized otherwise in this chapter;
E. No outside employees shall work on the premises except as authorized otherwise in this chapter;
F. The dwelling shall not be used to dispatch employees to their job sites, nor shall it be used as a site from which paychecks are issued;
G. The activity shall be secondary to the residential use and not change the residential character of the dwelling;
H. No exterior display or exterior storage of material or indication of said use shall be allowed;
I. No mechanical equipment or materials shall be used except those normally used for domestic, hobby or household purposes;
J. Such use shall not produce any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, electrical disturbance or in any way interfere with the peace,
contentment or general welfare of the residential area; (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
K. No more than one home occupation shall be permitted at any one residential property, unless the additional activity qualifies as a "no impact home
occupation". No home occupation is allowed if such use of the property is deed restricted by CC&Rs or HOA rules; (Ord. 438, 7-27-2010)
L. Such activity shall not create any illegal discharge or materials, fluids, or gasses into the air or the sewer system;
M. There shall be no entrance or exits in the dwelling used solely for the home occupation activity; and
N. There shall be no advertising of the address or location to promote customer traffic. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-12: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE OR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Either the building and zoning department or the city council may place reasonable conditions on the issuance of a home occupation either in granting a
business license or conditional use permit in order to ensure that the proposed business will not disrupt or change the residential character of the
residential neighborhood where the home occupation proposes to operate or to otherwise carry out the provisions of this section.
B. All home occupation permits and business licenses may be issued for no longer than one year in duration, unless determined otherwise by the city
council, and may be renewed provided there have been no reported violations, complaints, or detrimental characteristics which may, in the opinion of
the building and zoning department or the city council, require termination of the home occupation. In its discretion and for good cause, the building
department or the city council may limit the home occupation license to six (6) months in duration. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-13: HEARING, FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS:
Except for those home occupations which do not require a conditional use permit to operate in a residential district as set forth in this chapter, the city
council, before granting a conditional use permit to allow the operation of a major impact home occupation in a residential district, shall find at a public
hearing as follows:
A. That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, spaces, walls, fences, parking, loading,
landscaping and other features required by this title are compatible with the land and uses in the neighborhood;
B. That the streets and highways related to the site are adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and kind of traffic generated by the
proposed use;
C. That the proposed use will have no adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof;
D. That the conditions stated in the resolution are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions may include:
1. Special yards, spaces and buffers, fences and walls;
2. Regulations of points of vehicular egress and ingress;
3. Regulation of signs;
4. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc.;
5. Regulation of time of certain activities;
6. Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed;
7. A request for a site plan for purposes of review, said site plan to be submitted by the applicant; and
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 489/565
8. Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner in conformity with the intent and purposes
set forth in the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-14: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL; CONDITIONS IMPOSED; EFFECTIVE DATE OF ACTION:
A. The city council shall issue its decision at a public meeting following the public hearing on the matter.
B. The decision of the city council approving a major impact home occupation in a residential district shall set forth any recommended or required
conditions deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons in the neighborhood and the community as a whole.
C. The action of the city council on a home occupation license request is effective when taken. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
9-8A-15: REVOCATION OF HOME OCCUPATION LICENSE:
A business license or conditional use permit to operate a home occupation business may be revoked when:
A. The home occupation business has not commenced operation of the business activity within six (6) months of the date of final approval, unless a longer
period is specified in the approval;
B. An applicant receives a business license to operate the home occupation at a new business address;
C. An applicant has not renewed his/her business license at his/her approved location within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the prior business
license;
D. After a public hearing, the city council revokes any home occupation license for the following reasons:
1. Noncompliance with conditions set forth when the license of conditional use permit was granted;
2. It is determined that the home occupation licensee is adversely impacting the residential neighborhood by operation of the business; or
3. For violation of any of the requirements of this chapter or any provision of this code.
E. The licensee has been given written notice at least ten (10) days prior to a public hearing required on any proposed license revocation pursuant to this
chapter or any other provision of this code. (Ord. 224, 5-11-1999, eff. 6-3-1999)
Chapter 9
SITE DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
9-9-1: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES REQUIRED:
A. Generally: Land proposed for development shall be served by public facilities and services which are adequate to support the proposed development.
Land shall not be approved for development unless and until adequate public facilities exist or provision has been made for the following essential
public facilities: water service, wastewater treatment and disposal, storm water management, electrical service, telecommunications service and
streets.
B. Master Plan Consistency Required: Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the Mesquite master plan and applicable
capital improvements plans.
C. Water: All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system which is capable of providing water for health and
emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection as required in section 9-9-2 of this chapter.
D. Wastewater: All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment as required in
section 9-9-3 of this chapter.
E. Storm Water Management: Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed
to prevent increases in peaks or velocity of downstream flooding. The city may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention,
and/or the construction of off site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development, pursuant to section 9-9-5 of this
chapter. Further, all projects must conform to the requirements of the Clark County regional flood control district.
F. Streets And Sidewalks: Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular,pedestrian and bicycle circulation, shall be
properly related to the master plan, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. Adequate street
capacity shall be provided as required in section 9-9-6 of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 490/565
G. Phasing: The city may require the phasing of development or improvements in order to maintain current levels of service for existing public services and
facilities or for other reasons based upon maintaining the health, safety and general welfare of the city's inhabitants.
H. Extension Policies: All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed.
Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new development
to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The city may require the applicant of a subdivision to extend off site improvements to reach the
subdivision or oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of plat approval.
I. Easements/Rights Of Way:
1. Adequate: Except as otherwise provided in the UDO, an applicant for a development approval shall ensure that adequate on site and off site
easements are provided for future roadways, water, wastewater and other public utilities.
2. Utility Easements: The property owner shall grant adequate utility easements for all public and private utilities along rear and side property lines as
required by the director of public works. Utility easements shall be submitted to the zoning official prior to plat recordation.
3. Utility Easements; Width: All public utility easements shall be at least ten feet (10') wide along front or back ROW and five feet (5') in other locations.
Additional width may be required for reason of unusual topography or the need to use easements for multiple utilities.
4. Placement: Easements shall be centered along or to be adjacent to a common property line where practical. All easements for drainage or sewer
shall be selectively cleared of undergrowth, trees and other obstructions by the developers prior to final approval. This does not apply to easements
which are provided for possible future use.
5. Anticipated Traffic Demands: An applicant shall provide adequate on site rights of way for anticipated traffic demands in a manner consistent with the
UDO, the master plan and project specific traffic impact analysis (TIA), if applicable. If a TIA, prepared in accordance with subsection 9-9-6C ofthis
chapter shows that a proposed development creates the need for additional off site right of way, the applicant may be required to provide said right of
way prior to development approval.
J. Construction And Materials: Except as otherwise provided in the UDO, the construction and material specifications shall comply with the standards
established by "USPWCOSICCAN".
K. Inspections/Acceptance: The city will inspect public improvements to ensure that such improvements are constructed to city standards and
specifications. City acceptance of required improvements shall be required prior to use or occupancy of a development.
L. Maintenance: The city shall require performance bonds and/or maintenance guarantees for any street, wastewater line or drainage facility as a condition
of accepting such improvement in accordance with subsection 9-6-6C of this title. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-9-2: WATER SYSTEMS:
A. Generally: All proposed development shall be connected to a public water system providing adequate supplies for normal usage and emergency needs.
The guidelines in table 9-9:1 of this section shall be used to evaluate compliance with this provision. The zoning official and/or staff review committee
may recommend and the city council may approve subdivisions which do not comply with the guidelines in table 9-9:1 of this section, subject to the
following conditions:
1. The water supplier has reviewed the proposed development and stated in writing that it has budgeted improvements to provide water supplies
consistent with the guidelines in table 9-9:1 of this section within two (2) years or that there is no feasible way to meet the water supply guidelines
within five (5) years;
2. The fire department has reviewed the proposed development and has recommended alternative strategies for delivering fire protection services to
the proposed development; and
3. The city council finds that the proposed development:
a. Will be adequately served for normal water demands;
b. Will not reduce system water pressures or supplies so as to create a hazard to the public health or safety within other development served by the
water system;
c. Will not pose a threat to life or property within or adjacent to the proposed development due to inadequate fire protection; and
d. Will not impede the logical extension of services to serve growth in the city in accordance with the master plan.
B. Design Standards: All water supply systems shall be designed and constructed to meet APWA and AWWA standards or other standard adopted by the
water supplier, including the VVWD and Mesquite uniform standards. Written authorization from the water supplier shall be required prior to approval of
any system which does not meet these standards.
C. Off Site Improvements: The developer of a parcel shall provide for on site and off site improvements required to adequately serve a proposed
development; provided, however, that the zoning official may authorize development to proceed if the director of public works certifies that the
necessary capital improvements have been funded for construction within eighteen (18) months. In no event shall a certificate of occupancy be granted
prior to connection to an adequate public water supply.
Table 9-9:1: Water System Design Guidelines1,2
Improvement
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 491/565
Minimum diameter line size (inches) 8
Minimum distance from approved emergency water supply to structure (feet)
400
Fire flow (gallons per minute) Building separation >100' 500
Building separation 31' - 100' 750
Building separation 11' - 31' 1,000
Building separation <11' 1
Notes:
1.Or otherwise as determined by the Mesquite fire code.
2.Fire flow for buildings closer than 11 feet should comply with applicable fire safety codes.
D. Extension/Oversizing: Upon recommendation of the Virgin Valley water district, the public works director, the planning commission or the city council
may require that water lines be oversized to accommodate future development. The city or Virgin Valley water district shall arrange to reimburse the
developer for the cost in excess of the minimum line size required to serve the proposed development; provided, that no reimbursement shall be
granted for installation of a water main with less than or equal to a ten inch (10") diameter.
E. Water System Construction: The zoning official shall have public works review and approve all proposed public water system improvements prior to
construction and shall require inspection during construction of such improvements and final approval prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.
F. Water System Easements: The property owner shall dedicate adequate easements to accommodate all water system facilities required to serve new
development, except individual service lines. The director of public works, in consultation with the Virgin Valley water district, shall ensure the location
and dimensions of required easements are properly identified on the plan, but in no instance shall an easement be narrower than ten feet (10') in width.
Easements should follow property lines to the greatest extent possible. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-9-3: PUBLIC WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
A. Generally: The following developments shall be connected to a centralized wastewater collection and treatment system complying with this section:
1. All new, nonresidential development;
2. All residential development located on lots smaller than one-half (1/2) acre;
3. All new subdivisions located within one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') of an existing wastewater system that can provide adequate service;
4. All existing development located within five hundred feet (500') of an existing wastewater system that can provide adequate service;
5. Any development located on soils which cannot support on site treatment and disposal; and (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
6. Any other development which cannot obtain on site treatment and disposal system approval from the Southern Nevada health district. (Ord. 172, 9-
24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
B. Design Standards: All wastewater systems shall be designed and constructed to comply with Clark County standards.
1. These design standards are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances where
considered justified by the director of sanitation.
2. Sanitary sewer systems should be designed or built for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning
regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum
hourly quantity of sewerage and industrial waste, together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. Designflows shall be
subject to approval of the director of sanitation for each particular development.
C. Off Site Improvements: The developer of a parcel shall provide for on site and off site improvements required to adequately serve a proposed
development; provided, however, that the zoning official may authorize development to proceed if the director of public works certifies plans are
approved for the necessary capital improvements and have been bonded to ensure construction within eighteen (18) months. In no event shall a
certificate of occupancy be granted prior to completion of off site improvements.
D. Extension/Oversizing: Upon recommendation of the director of sanitation or the planning commission, the city council may require that wastewater lines
be oversized to accommodate future development. The city shall reimburse the developer for the cost in excess of the minimum line size required to
serve the proposed development; provided, that no reimbursement shall be granted for installation of a wastewater line with a diameter of eight inches
(8") or less.
E. Wastewater System Construction: The director of sanitation shall review and approve all proposed wastewater system improvements prior to
construction, and shall require inspection during construction of such improvements.
F. Wastewater System Easements: The property owner shall dedicate adequate easements to accommodate all wastewater system facilities required to
serve new development, except individual service lines. The zoning official shall identify the location and dimensions of required easements, but in no
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 492/565
instance shall an easement be narrower than twenty feet (20') in width. Easements should follow property lines to the greatest extent possible. (Ord.
172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-9-4: PRIVATE (ON SITE) WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
A. Private Systems, Generally: Where septic tanks or other individual sewage disposal systems are to be installed, they shall be subject to Southern
Nevada health district and city approval and compliance with any applicable county and/or state regulations.
B. Permit Required: Any person who desires to install, add to, alter, expand or repair a private waste treatment system shall make a written application on
forms provided by the director of sanitation or Southern Nevada health district. No person shall install, add to, alter, expand or repair a private waste
treatment system without a valid and unrevoked permit issued by the city and/or Southern Nevada health district. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
C. Failure To Comply With Stop Work Order: Failure to comply with a stop work order or other lawful order of the zoning official issued pursuant to this
chapter is a violation of these regulations.
D. One Residence Per Individual On Site System: Only one structure shall be connected to an individual on site sewage treatment system.
E. Public Nuisance: Any private waste treatment system installed, added to, altered, expanded or repaired in violation of this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the zoning official is a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the city and is a public nuisance.
F. Private Waste Treatment, Issuance Of Permit: The building official shall issue the appropriate permit in compliance with this chapter and any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, and payment of the appropriate fee.
G. Private Waste Treatment, Standards: All private waste disposal systems shall be installed, altered, expanded, repaired or operated according to the
Mesquite sanitation district standards and the following standards:
1. Systems Designed By Professional Registered Engineer: All individual on site sewage disposal systems shall be designed by an engineer registered
in the state. A minimum of two (2) copies of the design plan shall be submitted to the zoning official for review. Design plans must be approved by the
director of sanitation and building official before construction of the system begins. System installations shall be inspected and approved by the city
before backfilling;
2. Not Create Public Nuisance: The location and installation of private waste disposal systems shall be such that with reasonable maintenance, the
private waste disposal system will function in a sanitary manner and will not create a nuisance, health hazard or endanger the safety of any domestic
water supply;
3. Factors Considered: When reviewing an application for an individual waste treatment system, consideration shall be given to the size and shape of
the lot, slope of natural and finished grade, soil type and classification, depth of ground water, proximity of existing or future water supplies and
possible expansion of the system;
4. Minimum Lot Size: All lots platted subsequent to May 1, 1996, shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre in size and contain a minimum of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of suitable land designed for on site sewage treatment;
5. Basis For Type Of System: The type of system shall be determined by a registered professional engineer on the basisof location, topography, soil
permeability and ground water level;
6. Designed To Receive All Sewage: The system shall be designed to adequately receive all sewage from the dwelling. Footing or roof drainage shall
not enter any part of the system; (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
7. Percolation Test: Percolation tests shall be made as required by the Mesquite director of sanitation or Southern Nevada health district. The tests
shall be conducted by or under the supervision of an engineer registered in the state; (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-
2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
8. Sewage Treatment, Issuance Of Rules And Regulations: The director of sanitation may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to implement
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
a. Minimum Standards: Any rule and regulation promulgated shall meet the minimum state standards of the Southern Nevada health district, but
nothing in this chapter shall prevent the director of sanitation and building official from requiring compliance with higher requirements than the state
or county regulations. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 345, 6-27-2006, eff. 7-20-2006)
b. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of public hearing on any proposed rule or regulation shall be in at least one newspaper having general circulation within
the city at least ten (10) days before the hearing.
c. When Effective: Rules and regulations issued by the director of sanitation and building official shall be effective after approval by the city council.
d. Enforcement Of Rules: The director of sanitation and building official may enforce this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted under this
chapter in the manner set forth below.
e. Suspend Or Revoke Permit: The director of sanitation and building official may suspend or revoke any permit for noncompliance with this chapter
or any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter.
f. Notice Of Violation: When the director of sanitation and building official determines a violation exists, the building official shall notify the violator in
writing. Such notice of violation shall be delivered to the property owner who is deemed to be the person causing the violation or the legally
authorized representative of the person or mailed to the last known address of that person.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 493/565
g. Stop Work Order Issued: In addition to the notice of violation, the director of sanitation and building official may issue a written stop work order if it
is believed that the violation poses a serious threat to health and safety. The stop work order shall be delivered to the owner of the property
involved, to the agent of the owner or to the person doing the work.
h. Removal And Reinstallation Of System: The director of sanitation and building official may require a system installed in violation of this section and
the rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section be removed and reinstalled in compliance with this section and any rules and regulations
adopted.
i. Alternative Method: If the system installed in violation of this section and the rules and regulations issued under this section cannot be reinstalled
and be in compliance, the director of sanitation and building official may approve an alternative method of sewage disposal. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996,
eff. 10-31-1996)
9-9-5: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A. Purpose: The purposes of these storm water management provisions are to protect life and property from reasonably preventable flood hazards; protect
the quality of surface waters from contamination, and to minimize loss of valuable wildlife by preserving habitat and linkages between wildlife habitat
areas.
B. Design Objectives:
1. Minimum Interference: In rural, suburban and, where appropriate, urban areas, natural drainageways shall be retained to minimize interference with
floodwater conveyance, floodwater storage, wetlands, and both surface and subsurface hydrology. The director of public works may approve
modifications to natural channels that are consistent with the other provisions of the UDO.
2. Exposure; Nuisances: Development design should comply with CCRFCD's hydrologic criteria and drainage design manual and reduce the exposure
of people and property to flood hazards and nuisances associated with inadequate management of storm water runoff.
3. Erosion: Erosion and sedimentation problems should be minimized to conserve/enhance water quality and conserve valuable topsoil.
4. Floods: Development design should accommodate large floods and smaller, more frequent floods along major and minor waterways.
5. Future Expenses: Storm water systems should be designed to minimize future operational and maintenance expenses.
6. Public Facilities Exposure: Storm water systems should be designed to reduce the exposure of streets, utilities and other public facilities to damage
from storm water.
7. Rescue And Relief Efforts: Development design should minimize need for rescue and relief efforts from floods and provide sufficient access for such
efforts when needed.
C. Floodplain Management:
1. Scope Of Floodplain Management: The provisions of this section shall apply to all areas of the city identified on the flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM) or floodway maps as promulgated by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
2. Disclaimer Of Liability: The provisions of this section do not imply or otherwise warrant that areas outside of the FIRM or floodway maps will be free
from flooding or flood damage, nor does this subsection create liability on the part of the city, its officers or employees for any flood damages that
may result from reliance on these floodplain management provisions, FEMA or any regulations or administrative decision made hereunder.
3. Permit Required: In all areas covered by these floodplain management provisions, no development or construction, including manufactured homes,
located, extended, converted, structurally altered or otherwise shall be permitted except upon city issuance of a permit to develop granted under the
procedures stated herein.
a. No person shall initiate any development, construction or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done within a designated floodplain
without first obtaining a separate permit for development under these floodplain management provisions and in compliance with FEMA regulations.
b. Application for a permit for development, construction or substantial improvement within a designated floodplain shall be made in accordance with
CCRFCD regulations.
4. Residences Within Designated Floodplain: All residences to be placed or substantially improved within a designated floodplain shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least eighteen inches (18") above base flood elevation and shall be
permanently anchored to said foundation.
5. Preventing Water Accumulation: Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within thecomponents during conditions of flooding.
6. Automatic Equalization Of Hydrostatic Flood Forces: For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. Openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
7. Enforcement Officer: The director of public works or building official is hereby designated as the enforcement officer for compliance under these
floodplain management provisions and FEMA regulations.
8. Duties Of Enforcement Officer: The duties of the enforcement officer shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Review of all applications for development permits to require that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this
section have been satisfied as well as the other requirements of these regulations;
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 494/565
b. Review of all permits for proposed developments to confirm that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;
c. Notify adjacent communities and the appropriate state agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and to provide evidence of
such notification for FEMA;
d. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished;
e. Require verification, recording and updating of records of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, using reference marks (RM) established by FEMA;
f. Require verification, recording and updating of records of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) using reference marks (RM)
established by FEMA, to which the new orsubstantially improved structures have been floodproofed and certified by a qualified individual as
defined by FEMA when "floodproofing", as defined herein, is utilized for a particular structure;
g. Take any actions necessary to assure compliance with FEMA regulations in the granting or denial of applications for any permits in a designated
floodplain;
h. Require that all proposals for subdivisions and other new development (including manufactured home subdivisions or parks) are consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage and that:
(1) All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate
damage from floods; and
(2) Adequate drainage is provided for the purpose of reducing exposure to flood hazards; and
(3) Regulatory flood elevations utilizing FEMA "RM" are included in all proposals for all development.
9. Floodplain Permit Application Requirements: All written applications for development or substantial improvement in a designated floodplain shall:
a. Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit;
b. Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or development;
c. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended;
d. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction;
e. Be signed by the proposed permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;
f. Provide such other information as reasonably may be required by the enforcement officer or as required from the applicant under any part of these
regulations, including, but not limited, to evidence of compliance with FEMA regulations or guidelines for anchoring to prevent flotation and lateral
movement, the use of flood resistant materials and utility equipment and construction methods which minimize flood damage.
10. Floodplain Considerations In Granting Variances: The board of zoning adjustment and Clark County flood control district shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this subsection. In all situations, the board shall begin its consideration based on the
premise that variances are disfavored and should only be allowed upon a strong showing by the applicant that the circumstances dictate otherwise.
In passing upon such applications, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these regulations; and
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed land use to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed land use to the community;
e. The necessity to the proposed land use of a waterfront location, where applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed land use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed land use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed land use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-9-6: STREETS:
A. Generally:
1. Mitigating Measures: No development shall be approved if such development, at full occupancy, will result in or increase traffic on an arterial or
collector so that the street does not function at a level of service C or better as defined by the transportation research board, national research
council in the highway capacity manual. The applicant may propose and construct approved traffic mitigation measures to provide adequate roadway
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 495/565
capacity for the proposed development. The applicant for any development projected to generate more than five hundred (500) vehicle trips per day
shall submit a traffic impact analysis.
2. Level Of Service Definitions: In general, the various levels of services are defined as follows for uninterrupted flow facilities:
a. Level of service A represents free flow. Individual users are virtually unaffected by the presence of others in the traffic stream. Freedom to select
desired speeds and to maneuver within the traffic stream is extremely high. The general level of comfort and convenience provided to the motorist,
passenger or pedestrian is excellent.
b. Level of service B is in the range or stable flow, but the presence of other users in the traffic stream begins to be noticeable. Freedom to select
desired speeds is relatively unaffected, but there is a slight decline in the freedom to maneuver within the traffic stream from LOS A. The level of
comfort and convenience provided is somewhat less than at LOS A, because the presence of others in the traffic stream begins to affect individual
behavior.
c. Level of service C is in the range of stable flow, but marks the beginning of the range of flow in which the operation of individual users becomes
significantly affected by interactions with others in the traffic stream. The selection of speed is now affected by the presence of others, and
maneuvering within the traffic stream requires substantial vigilance on the part of the user. The general level of comfort and convenience declines
noticeably at this level.
d. Level of service D represents high density, but stable, flow. Speed and freedom to maneuver are severely restricted, and the driver or pedestrian
experiences a generally poor level of comfort and convenience. Small increases in traffic flow will generally cause operational problems at this
level.
e. Level of service E represents operating conditions at or near the capacity level. All speeds are reduced to a low, but relatively uniform value.
Freedom to maneuver within the traffic stream is extremely difficult, and it is generally accomplished by forcing a vehicle or pedestrian to "give
way" to accommodate such maneuvers. Comfort and convenience levels are extremely poor, and driver or pedestrian frustration is generally high.
Operations at this level are usually unstable,because small increases in flow or minor perturbations within the traffic stream will cause breakdowns.
f. Level of service F is used to define forced or breakdown flow. This condition exists wherever the amount of traffic approaching a point exceeds the
amount which can traverse the point. Queues form behind such locations. Operations within the queue are characterized by stop and go waves,
and they are extremely unstable. Vehicles may progress at reasonable speeds for several hundred feet or more, then be required to stop in a
cyclic fashion. Level of service F is used to describe the operating conditions within the queue, as well as the point of the breakdown. It should be
noted, however, that in many cases operating conditions of vehicles or pedestrians discharged from the queue may be quite good. Nevertheless, it
is the point at which arrival flow exceeds discharge flow which causes the queue to form, and level of service F is an appropriate designation for
such points.
B. Design:
1. Generally: The standards established by this section shall apply to all public and private roads in the city. The master plan shall serve as a guide for
the location and scale of future arterial and collector streets.
2. Classification: All city streets shall be classified as either an arterial, major collector, minor collector, local or residential roadway. Any street that is
not already classified in the master plan shall be classified by the director of public works, subject to confirmation by the city council. In classifying
roads, the city shall consider projected traffic demands after twenty (20) years of development.
3. Street Design Standards: All street improvements shall be designed according to standards adopted by the department of public works, included in
the Clark County uniform standard drawings for public works construction.
4. Alleys: Alleys will not be approved in residential districts except where justified by special conditions such as the continuation of an existing alley in
the same block.
5. Dead-End Alley: Dead-end alleys shall be avoided wherever possible. If unavoidable, dead-end alleys may be approved if adequate turnaround
facilities are provided at the closed end.
6. Cul-De-Sac Approaches: Cul-de-sac approaches shall have a minimum right of way radius of fifty one feet (51') for single-family and two-family use,
and sixty feet (60') for all other uses. The maximum length shall be no more than seven hundred fifty feet (750') from the nearest intersecting through
street. This depth limit applies to multiple streets having only one outlet to an arterial or collector. Development on cul-de-sacs longer than three
hundred feet(300') shall not generate more than one hundred (100) vehicle trips per day as projected using current data from the institute of
transportation engineers.
7. Cul-De-Sac Turnarounds: Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have an outside curb radius of fifty feet (50'), plus sufficient area to accommodate sidewalks
within the right of way, plus easements as needed for utilities, including drainage and mail service. Temporary turnarounds may be provided at the
end of streets that will be extended within three (3) years from the beginning of development activity on the cul-de-sac.
8. Temporary Cul-De-Sac: A street in a phased development may be constructed without a turnaround if it is constructed one lot in length. A street
constructed in a phased development which is longer than one lot shall have a temporary turnaround meeting the cul-de-sac dimensions. All
temporary cul-de-sacs shall be asphalt surfaced.
9. General Street Arrangement:
a. Adequate Traffic Circulation: Provisions shall be made for adequate traffic circulation. Local and residential streets shall be designed to limit
through traffic.
b. Lot Access: Every lot shall have access to a public right of way accepted by the appropriate governing body.
c. Multiple Intersections: No more than two (2) streets shall cross or intersect at the same point. Intersections, including intersections offset on
opposite sides of a street, shall be separated by at least two hundred fifty one feet (251') which shall be measured along the centerline of the
primary street from centerline to centerline of the intersecting streets.
d. Street Connections: Streets should connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions and provide for future connections
to adjoining unsubdivided tracts whenever possible.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 496/565
e. Street Names: New streets shall be named so as to provide continuity of name with existing streets and to prevent conflict or confusion with
identical or similar existing street names. If a street is a continuation of a named street or is in alignment with an existing street, as determined by
the zoning official and director of public works, the extension of the street shall bear the same name of the existing street.
10. Street Dedication And Maintenance:
a. No road or street shall be accepted by the city unless it meets the design standards established by these regulations and all other design
standards established by ordinance or law.
b. Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable development of a subdivision and in conformity with
all other requirements of these regulations, or where it is found that it will be impracticable to require dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided, or where it is necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation. Dedication of reserve strips shall not be approved.
C. Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines:
1. Purpose: Traffic impact studies have the ability to help the city of Mesquite in forecasting additional traffic stemming from a proposed development. It
is important to note that by requiring a traffic impact study, the city can protect the substantial investment it has in the transportation infrastructure.
These studies have potential to help decide what improvements if any need to be made to the surrounding transportation system with the addition of
the proposed project. The city may utilize these studies to determine effective land use planning and resource allocation, identify potential problems,
reduce negative impacts, and provide clear direction to city decision makers. The main purpose of the traffic impact analysis is to determine
reasonable traffic conditions and to mitigate issues, helping to maintain safety on the city's transportation system.
2. Implementation Statement: The city of Mesquite desires to operate a safe and efficient transportation system. The management of access to the
system in an effective manner is vital to maintaining the overall safety and efficiency of the system. Development of a site, whether new construction
or redevelopment of an existing site, has an effect on the surrounding area. These guidelines present a detailed process and set of requirements for
completing a traffic impact study with the goal of minimizing the potential negative effects of new development and to determine essential
modifications or improvements to be made to the existing and future transportation system within the city of Mesquite. The procedures outlined in
these guidelines present the minimum information required to conduct a traffic impact analysis (TIA). The preparer of the TIA shall contact the city of
Mesquite development manager to discuss the scope of analysis, methodology, and level of detail required for the project prior to beginning the
analysis.
3. Definitions: Certain words or phrases unique to this subsection C shall be construed as herein set out unless it is apparent from the context that they
have a different meaning:
ARTERIAL STREET: A road so designated in the TCIP which accommodates large volumes of through traffic. This traffic is comprised of local and
visitor trips. An arterial street is designed mainly for the movement of through traffic but also performs a secondary function of providing access to
abutting properties. Access, parking and loading on arterial streets may be restricted or prohibited to improve the capacity for moving traffic.
Signalization may occur at the intersection of some arterial streets and collector streets.
AVERAGE TRIP LENGTH: The average length of a vehicle trip, in miles, on the major road network.
CAPACITY: The maximum number of vehicles which have a reasonable expectation of passing through a given section of a street in one direction,
or in both directions of a road, during a given time period, under prevailing traffic conditions, expressed in terms of vehicles per hour. Capacity is
measured in this chapter at the P.M. peak hour.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The committee which is authorized by resolution, and pursuant to Nevada Revised
Statutes sections 278B.150 and 277.080 et seq., to undertake the following duties: to determine conformance of the land use assumptions, upon
which the TCIP and this chapter are based, with the city master plan; to review the TCIP; file annual reports concerning the progress of the city in
carrying out the TCIP; report to the city council perceived inequities in the implementation of the TCIP, and the imposition of the transportation
impact fee; and advise the city council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, TCIP and this subsection C.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, unless the term is used herein in conjunction with the term city council, in which case the term "city" is defined as the
city manager, his designee, or any other city department or employee performing administrative functions pursuant to this subsection C.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street so designated in the TCIP which functions as a connection between arterial streets as well as providing access to
abutting properties.
EXPANSION OF THE CAPACITY OF A STREET: Includes any widening, intersection improvement, signalization or other capital improvement
designed to increase the existing street's capacity to carry vehicles.
EXTERNAL TRIP: Any trip which either has its origins from or its destination to the development site, and which impacts the major road network.
GENERATION OF TRAFFIC: Includes both the production and attraction of traffic.
INTERNAL TRIP: A trip which has both its origin and destination within the land development site, does not leave the development site, and does
not impact the major road network.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS): A qualitative measure describing operational conditions, from A (best) to F (worst), within a traffic stream or at
intersections, which is quantified for street segments by determination of a volume to capacity ratio (V/C), which is a measurement of the amount
of capacity of a street which is being utilized by traffic, and which is quantified for signalized and unsignalized intersections in terms of vehicle
delay.
MAJOR ROAD NETWORK: All arterial streets and collector streets that traverse the boundaries of the city, including proposed arterial streets and
collector streets necessitated by projected future traffic generating land development activity as identified in the TCIP. Only streets indicated on the
arterial and collector street map adopted by the city council shall be considered a part of the major road network. The major road network is
designated in exhibit A, which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference.
NONSITE RELATED IMPROVEMENTS: Capital improvements and right of way dedications for street improvements to the arterial streets and
collector streets identified in the TCIP that are not site related improvements.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 497/565
PEAK HOUR: The single hour of a representative day when the traffic volume on the roadway represents the highest traffic volume.
PERCENT PRIMARY TRIPS: The percentage of average daily trips that a proposed use will generate that constitutes new or additional trips
added to the major road network. Those trips that do not represent additional trip ends shall not be counted as new or additional trips. Pass-by
trips and diverted trips do not constitute new trips.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, governmental agency or body, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons
having a joint or common interest, or any other entity.
ROADS: Arterials and collectors which traverse the city.
SERVICE AREA: The incorporated city limits.
SITE RELATED IMPROVEMENTS: Those street capital improvements and right of way dedications that provide direct access to the development.
Direct access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: a) driveways and streets leading to and from the development; b) right
and left turn lanes leading to those driveways and streets; c) traffic control measures for those driveways; and d) internal streets.
TRAFFIC GENERATING LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Land development designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain
or convert to more dwelling units or floor space than the then existing use of the land in a manner that increases the generation of vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC IMPACT: The effect of site traffic on street operations and safety.
TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS: A traffic engineering study which determines the potential traffic impacts of a proposed traffic generator. A complete
analysis includes an estimation of the proposed generator, analysis of the traffic impacts, and recommended roadway improvements which may be
necessary to accommodate the expected traffic.
TRAFFIC MITIGATION: The reduction of traffic impacts on roadways and/or intersections to an acceptable level of service by way of roadway
construction improvements, the upgrade of existing traffic control devices, or the modification of the site plan.
TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: Includes the transportation planning, preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land
surveys, alignment studies, right of way acquisition, engineering, permitting, and construction of all necessary features for any street construction
project on any arterial or collector street in the TCIP, undertaken to accommodate additional traffic resulting from new traffic generating land
development, including, but not limited to: a) construction of new through lanes; b) construction of new bridges; c) construction of new drainage
facilities in conjunction with new street construction; d) purchase and installation of traffic signals, including new and upgraded signalization; e)
construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, medians and shoulders; f) relocating utilities to accommodate new street construction; g) the construction
and reconstruction of intersections; h) the widening of existing streets; i) bus turnouts; j) acceleration and deceleration lanes; k) interchanges; and
l) traffic control devices.
TRIP: A one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (1 trip end) to a destination (the other trip end).
TRIP DISTRIBUTION: The allocation of site generated traffic among all possible approach and departure routes.
TRIP, DIVERTED: A trip that is already on a particular route for a different purpose that simply diverts travel to a particular land use.
TRIP GENERATION: The attraction or production of trips caused by a certain type of land development.
TRIP, PASS-BY: A trip that is already on a particular route for a different purpose that simply stops at another particular land use.
VEHICLE MILES OF TRAVEL: The combination of the number of vehicles traveling during a given time period and the distance (in miles) that they
travel. VMT is the service unit used in this subsection C and the TCIP to develop the impact fee schedule.
4. Requirements: Prior to the completion of any type of traffic impact study, discussion between the developer, the study consultant and the city should
take place to discuss the outline and requirements of the analysis. Depending upon the characteristics of a proposed site, the city may request an in
person meeting take place. The following requirements are guidelines for the completion of a traffic impact study and additional analysis may be
required by the city dependent upon the distinct qualities of a proposed development. Table 1 of this section presents the city's four (4) levels of
traffic impact study requirements ranging from no study being required to the completion of a regional traffic impact study.
TABLE 1
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY CATEGORIES
Study Category Trigger Threshold
No study required <50 peak hour vehicle trips generated
Category 1 =50, <200 peak hour vehicle trips generated
Category 2 =200, <1,500 peak hour vehicle trips generated
Category 3 =1,500 peak hour vehicle trips generated
a. No Traffic Impact Study Required: If a proposed development is anticipated to generate less than fifty (50) peak hour vehicle trips, a traffic impact
study will not be required, unless otherwise requested by the city.
b. Category 1 Traffic Impact Study: If a proposed development consisting of a single land use designation is anticipated to generate fifty (50) or more
peak hour vehicle trips but less than two hundred (200) peak hour vehicle trips to the adjacent street system, a category 1 study will be required.
Table 2 of this section illustrates several potential land uses along with their corresponding rates and number of units calculated to generate fifty
(50) peak hour vehicle trips to the adjacent street system. This study category is required to include the following components:
(1) Kickoff meeting with the city.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 498/565
(2) Review existing master plan policies and unified development code sections.
(3) Site plan including proposed driveway locations and widths.
(4) Existing traffic conditions and peak hour levels of service on adjacent roadways and intersections.
(5) Accident history for adjacent roadways and intersections.
(6) Number of units (dwelling units, square feet, etc.).
(7) Trip generation comparison to existing land use.
(8) Recommended traffic mitigation measures for any development which is projected to result in an LOS D or worse. Measures shall result in
projected LOS C or better.
(9) Other information as deemed necessary by the zoning official or director of public works to measure the impact of the project on the city.
c. Category 2 Traffic Impact Study: If a proposed development is anticipated to generate two hundred (200) or more peak hour vehicle trips but less
than one thousand five hundred (1,500) peak hour vehicle trips to the adjacent street system, a category 2 study will be required. Table 3 of this
section illustrates several potential land uses along with the rates and number of units calculated to generate two hundred (200) peak hour vehicle
trips to the adjacent street system. This study is required to include the following components:
(1) Kickoff meeting with the city.
(2) Review existing master plan policies and unified development code sections.
(3) Site plan including proposed driveway locations and widths.
(4) Existing traffic conditions and peak hour levels of service on adjacent roadways and intersections.
(5) Study area limits include all access driveways, adjacent roadways and adjacent major intersections, plus the first signalized intersection in each
direction up to one mile. Additional areas may be added based on development size and specific site or local issues and policy.
(6) Trip generation (daily and peak hour) and comparison to existing land use.
(7) Trip distribution and trip assignment.
(8) Accident history for adjacent roadways and intersections within prescribed study area.
(9) Existing and future A.M. and P.M. peak hour levels of service for all project roadways/intersections.
(10) Recommended traffic mitigation measures for any development which is projected to result in an LOS D or worse. Measures shall result in
projected LOS C or better.
(11) Traffic control device warrants (if requested).
(12) Turn lane lengths for warranted auxiliary lanes at all project intersections.
(13) Potential additional analysis requested by the city specific to proposed development.
(14) Other information as deemed necessary by the zoning official or director of public works to measure the impact of the project on the city.
The extent of the study will consist of all roadways and major intersections within one mile of the proposed project. The first major signalized
intersection should be included in the analysis if it is outside of the one mile range.
Analysis should be completed for the existing study year and for the proposed project opening year with existing conditions as well as proposed
lane configurations and traffic control.
Before beginning the completion of a category 2 traffic impact study, discussion between the developer, the study consultant and the city should
take place to discuss the outline and requirements of the analysis. Dependent upon the characteristics of a proposed project, additional analysis
may be required. Examples of potential additional analysis include an accident analysis or a traffic signal warrant analysis. If a development is
anticipated to generate more than five hundred (500) vehicle trips during the peak hour, the project area may be extended and analysis for
supplementary horizon years could be called for.
d. Category 3 Traffic Impact Study: If a proposed development is anticipated to generate one thousand five hundred (1,500) or more peak hour
vehicle trips to the adjacent street system, it is anticipated to have a regional effect and a category 3 study will be required. Table 4 of this section
illustrates several potential land uses along with the rates and number of units calculated to generate one thousand five hundred (1,500) peak hour
vehicle trips to the adjacent street system. The components required in a category 2 study will also be included in a category 3 traffic impact study,
however additional analysis may be necessary. For example, the project area may be extended and analysis for supplementary horizon years and
phases may be called for based upon the city's discretion specific to the proposed development. The study is required to include the following
components:
(1) Kickoff meeting with the city.
(2) Review existing master plan policies and unified development code sections.
(3) Site plan including proposed driveway locations and widths.
(4) Existing traffic conditions and peak hour levels of service on adjacent roadways and intersections.
(5) Study area limits include all access drives, adjacent roadways and adjacent major intersections, plus the first signalized intersection in each
direction up to a distance determined locally. Additional areas may be added based on development size and specific site or local issues and
policy.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 499/565
(6) Trip generation (daily and peak hour) and comparison to existing land use.
(7) Trip distribution and trip assignment.
(8) Accident history for adjacent roadways and intersections within prescribed study area.
(9) Existing and future A.M. and P.M. peak hour levels of service for all project roadways/intersections.
(10) Recommended traffic mitigation measures for any development which is projected to result in an LOS D or worse. Measures shall result in
projected LOS C or better.
(11) Traffic control device warrants (if requested).
(12) Turn lane lengths for warranted auxiliary lanes at all project intersections.
(13) Potential additional analysis requested by the city specific to proposed development.
(14) Other information as deemed necessary by the zoning official or director of public works to measure the impact of the project on the city.
TABLE 2
UNITS REQUIRED FOR 50 PEAK HOUR TRIPS THRESHOLD
Land Use
Code1 Land Use Description1 Unit1
Peak Hour
Rate1
Minimum Units Required (50 Peak Hour
Trips)
230 Condo/townhome Dwelling units 0.52 96 dwelling units
310 Hotel Rooms 0.70 71 rooms
240 Mobile home park Occupied dwelling
units
0.59 85 occupied dwelling units
320 Motel Rooms 0.47 106 rooms
220 Apartment Dwelling units 0.62 81 dwelling units
330 Resort hotel Rooms 0.42 119 rooms
210 Single-family detached Dwelling units 1.00 50 dwelling units
710 General office building 1,000 sq. ft. 1.56 32,051 sq. ft.
720 Medical/dental office 1,000 sq. ft. 3.57 14,006 sq. ft.
473 Casino gaming area 1,000 sq. ft. 13.43 3,723 sq. ft.
850 Supermarket 1,000 sq. ft. 9.48 5,274 sq. ft.
851 Convenience market (24 hour) 1,000 sq. ft. 67.03 746 sq. ft.
853 Convenience market with gas pumps 1,000 sq. ft. 50.92 982 sq. ft.
912 Drive-in bank 1,000 sq. ft. 24.30 2,058 sq. ft.
933 Fast food restaurant without drivethrough
1,000 sq. ft. 43.87 1,140 sq. ft.
934 Fast food restaurant with drivethrough
1,000 sq. ft. 45.42 1,101 sq. ft.
946 Gasoline/service/car wash/market Fueling stations 13.86 4 fueling stations
931 Quality restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 7.49 6,676 sq. ft.
932 High turnover (sit down) restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 10.81 4,625 sq. ft.
820 Shopping center 1,000 sq. ft. 3.71 13,477 sq. ft.
826 Specialty retail center 1,000 sq. ft. 2.71 18,450 sq. ft.
110 General light industrial 1,000 sq. ft. 0.97 51,546 sq. ft.
130 Industrial park 1,000 sq. ft. 0.85 58,824 sq. ft.
140 Manufacturing 1,000 sq. ft. 0.73 68,493 sq. ft.
151 Miniwarehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 0.26 192,308 sq. ft.
150 Warehousing 1,000 sq. ft. 0.32 156,250 sq. ft.
560 Church 1,000 sq. ft. 0.56 89,286 sq. ft.
565 Daycare center 1,000 sq. ft. 12.34 4,052 sq. ft.
610 Hospital 1,000 sq. ft. 0.95 52,632 sq. ft.
620 Nursing home 1,000 sq. ft. 0.74 67,568 sq. ft.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 500/565
630 Clinic 1,000 sq. ft. 5.18 9,653 sq. ft.
520 Elementary school 1,000 sq. ft. 1.21 41,322 sq. ft.
522 Middle school/junior high school 1,000 sq. ft. 1.19 42,017 sq. ft.
530 High school 1,000 sq. ft. 0.97 51,546 sq. ft.
493 Athletic club 1,000 sq. ft. 5.96 8,389 sq. ft.
430 Golf course Holes 2.92 17 holes
411 City park Acres 3.50 14 acres
488 Soccer complex Fields 17.70 3 fields
490 Tennis courts Courts 3.88 13 courts
Note:
1. "Trip Generation Manual", 9th edition, 2012.
TABLE 3
UNITS REQUIRED FOR 200 PEAK HOUR TRIPS THRESHOLD
Land Use
Code1 Land Use Description1 Unit1
Peak Hour
Rate1
Minimum Units Required (200 Peak Hour
Trips)
230 Condo/townhome Dwelling units 0.52 385 dwelling units
310 Hotel Rooms 0.70 286 rooms
240 Mobile home park Occupied dwelling
units
0.59 339 occupied dwelling units
320 Motel Rooms 0.47 426 rooms
220 Apartment Dwelling units 0.62 323 dwelling units
330 Resort hotel Rooms 0.42 476 rooms
210 Single-family detached Dwelling units 1.00 200 dwelling units
710 General office building 1,000 sq. ft. 1.56 128,205 sq. ft.
720 Medical/dental office 1,000 sq. ft. 3.57 56,022 sq. ft.
473 Casino gaming area 1,000 sq. ft. 13.43 14,892 sq. ft.
850 Supermarket 1,000 sq. ft. 9.48 21,097 sq. ft.
851 Convenience market (24 hour) 1,000 sq. ft. 67.03 2,984 sq. ft.
853 Convenience market with gas pumps
1,000 sq. ft. 50.92 3,928 sq. ft.
912 Drive-in bank 1,000 sq. ft. 24.30 8,230 sq. ft.
933 Fast food restaurant without drivethrough
1,000 sq. ft. 43.87 4,559 sq. ft.
934 Fast food restaurant with drivethrough
1,000 sq. ft. 45.42 4,403 sq. ft.
946 Gasoline/service/car wash/market Fueling stations 13.86 14 fueling stations
931 Quality restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 7.49 26,702 sq. ft.
932 High turnover (sit down) restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 10.81 18,501 sq. ft.
820 Shopping center 1,000 sq. ft. 3.71 53,908 sq. ft.
826 Specialty retail center 1,000 sq. ft. 2.71 73,801 sq. ft.
110 General light industrial 1,000 sq. ft. 0.97 206,186 sq. ft.
130 Industrial park 1,000 sq. ft. 0.85 235,294 sq. ft.
140 Manufacturing 1,000 sq. ft. 0.73 273,973 sq. ft.
151 Miniwarehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 0.26 769,231 sq. ft.
150 Warehousing 1,000 sq. ft. 0.32 625,000 sq. ft.
560 Church 1,000 sq. ft. 0.56 357,143 sq. ft.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 501/565
565 Daycare center 1,000 sq. ft. 12.34 16,207 sq. ft.
610 Hospital 1,000 sq. ft. 0.95 210,526 sq. ft.
620 Nursing home 1,000 sq. ft. 0.74 270,270 sq. ft.
630 Clinic 1,000 sq. ft. 5.18 38,610 sq. ft.
520 Elementary school 1,000 sq. ft. 1.21 165,289 sq. ft.
522 Middle school/junior high school 1,000 sq. ft. 1.19 168,067 sq. ft.
530 High school 1,000 sq. ft. 0.97 206,186 sq. ft.
493 Athletic club 1,000 sq. ft. 5.96 33,557 sq. ft.
430 Golf course Holes 2.92 68 holes
411 City park Acres 3.50 57 acres
488 Soccer complex Fields 17.70 11 fields
490 Tennis courts Courts 3.88 52 courts
Note:
1. "Trip Generation Manual", 9th edition, 2012.
TABLE 4
UNITS REQUIRED FOR 1,500 PEAK HOUR TRIPS THRESHOLD
Land Use
Code1 Land Use Description1 Unit1
Peak Hour
Rate1
Minimum Units Required (1,500 Peak Hour
Trips)
230 Condo/townhome Dwelling units 0.52 2,885 dwelling units
310 Hotel Rooms 0.70 2,143 rooms
240 Mobile home park Occupied dwelling
units
0.59 2,542 occupied dwelling units
320 Motel Rooms 0.47 3,191 rooms
220 Apartment Dwelling units 0.62 2,419 dwelling units
330 Resort hotel Rooms 0.42 3,571 rooms
210 Single-family detached Dwelling units 1.00 1,500 dwelling units
710 General office building 1,000 sq. ft. 1.56 961,538 sq. ft.
720 Medical/dental office 1,000 sq. ft. 3.57 420,168 sq. ft.
473 Casino gaming area 1,000 sq. ft. 13.43 111,690 sq. ft.
850 Supermarket 1,000 sq. ft. 9.48 158,228 sq. ft.
851 Convenience market (24 hour) 1,000 sq. ft. 67.03 22,378 sq. ft.
853 Convenience market with gas pumps
1,000 sq. ft. 50.92 29,458 sq. ft.
912 Drive-in bank 1,000 sq. ft. 24.30 61,728 sq. ft.
933 Fast food restaurant without drivethrough
1,000 sq. ft. 43.87 34,192 sq. ft.
934 Fast food restaurant with drivethrough
1,000 sq. ft. 45.42 33,025 sq. ft.
946 Gasoline/service/car wash/market Fueling stations 13.86 108 fueling stations
931 Quality restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 7.49 200,267 sq. ft.
932 High turnover (sit down) restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 10.81 138,760 sq. ft.
820 Shopping center 1,000 sq. ft. 3.71 404,313 sq. ft.
826 Specialty retail center 1,000 sq. ft. 2.71 553,506 sq. ft.
110 General light industrial 1,000 sq. ft. 0.97 1,546,392 sq. ft.
130 Industrial park 1,000 sq. ft. 0.85 1,764,706 sq. ft.
140 Manufacturing 1,000 sq. ft. 0.73 2,054,795 sq. ft.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 502/565
151 Miniwarehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 0.26 5,769,231 sq. ft.
150 Warehousing 1,000 sq. ft. 0.32 4,687,500 sq. ft.
560 Church 1,000 sq. ft. 0.56 2,678,571 sq. ft.
565 Daycare center 1,000 sq. ft. 12.34 121,556 sq. ft.
610 Hospital 1,000 sq. ft. 0.95 1,578,947 sq. ft.
620 Nursing home 1,000 sq. ft. 0.74 2,027,027 sq. ft.
630 Clinic 1,000 sq. ft. 5.18 289,575 sq. ft.
520 Elementary school 1,000 sq. ft. 1.21 1,239,669 sq. ft.
522 Middle school/junior high school 1,000 sq. ft. 1.19 1,260,504 sq. ft.
530 High school 1,000 sq. ft. 0.97 1,546,392 sq. ft.
493 Athletic club 1,000 sq. ft. 5.96 251,678 sq. ft.
430 Golf course Holes 2.92 514 holes
411 City park Acres 3.50 429 acres
488 Soccer complex Fields 17.70 85 fields
490 Tennis courts Courts 3.88 387 courts
Note:
1. "Trip Generation Manual", 9th edition, 2012.
5. Approach And Methods: The locations of the site access points and the existing roadways will determine the impact to the safety and operational
characteristics of the existing adjacent roadways and the surrounding transportation network. The site's internal circulation system should allow for
all vehicle circulation to take place on site and not spill over onto adjacent streets. Driveway width and type should accommodate all anticipated
types of vehicles, including large delivery trucks anticipated for the type of development. Circulation and access for fire trucks and emergency
vehicles should also be considered. For each driveway an LOS C should be the minimum anticipated during the weekday peak hour. Parking areas
should have enough capacity to meet site generated demands. Specific dimensions, parking angles, and parking ratio requirements should be
designed according to the latest edition of ITE's "Parking Generation". The method used as a basis for trip generator calculations for all traffic impact
studies can be found in the latest version of ITE's "Trip Generation Manual". Capacity analyses should be conducted using computer software such
as Highway Capacity Software (HCS), Synchro/Sim Traffic or VISSM based upon the methods presented in the latest edition of the "Highway
Capacity Manual".
a. Analysis Report Format:
(1) Executive Summary:
(A) Provide an overview of the purpose of the report and the overall findings of the analysis.
(2) Introduction/Project Description:
(A) Provide a description of the project including land use, size, location, and jurisdiction.
(3) Existing Conditions:
(A) Description of all surrounding project roadways and intersections including pedestrian and bicycle facilities, utilities, geometric features, lane
configurations, traffic control, etc.
(B) Existing land uses within the project area.
(4) Existing Traffic Data:
(A) Weekday A.M. and P.M. peak hour traffic volume counts should be taken at the existing project intersections.
(B) Weekday twenty four (24) hour bidirectional traffic volume counts along roadways or twenty four (24) hour intersection approach counts
should be taken by city's request.
(5) Trip Generation:
(A) Utilizing the land use codes and rates provided in the latest edition of the Institute Of Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual",
weekday daily and peak hour vehicle trips generated by the project should be presented.
(6) Trip Distribution:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 503/565
(A) Based upon existing conditions and/or city direction.
(B) Include clear explanation of distribution methods.
(7) Trip Assignment:
(A) Assignment of anticipated new trips to the project roadways/intersections.
(B) Any trip reduction values, including pass-by trip reduction factors, must be approved by the city prior to the completion of analysis.
(8) Accident Analysis:
(A) If required, provide analysis for the latest three (3) years of accident data available within the project corridor and at the project intersections.
(B) Analysis must be presented by collision type and injury severity.
(9) Projected Traffic Data:
(A) Traffic projections are to be calculated utilizing a compounded annual growth rate determined by review and analysis of past traffic data
along the surrounding street system unless otherwise provided by the city.
(B) Traffic projections along the surrounding roadway system without as well as within the proposed development shall be calculated and
presented in the study.
(10) Capacity Analysis:
(A) Weekday A.M. and P.M. peak hour levels of service shall be calculated for all project roadways and intersections for existing study year and
future study year(s) with existing conditions (no build) and proposed lane configurations/traffic control (build) based upon the methodology
presented in the most current version of the "Highway Capacity Manual".
(11) Turn Lane Analysis:
(A) Determine if right or left turn auxiliary lanes are required at the project study intersections with the inclusion of the proposed development
based upon table 5 of this section.
(B) If turn lanes are warranted, determine the turn lane length required with traffic from the proposed development based upon AASHTO
requirements as well as table 1-2 in the city of Mesquite master plan.
(12) All-Way Stop Analysis:
(A) If an all-way stop analysis is required/requested by the city, the need for an all-way stop controlled intersection shall be determined using the
methodology presented in the most current version of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
(13) Traffic Signal Warrant Analysis:
(A) If a traffic signal warrant analysis is required/requested by the city, the need for new traffic signals shall be determined using the
methodology presented in the most current version of MUTCD.
(B) Traffic signal warrants 1 and 2 should be performed unless otherwise stated.
(14) Mitigation:
(A) Recommended traffic mitigation measures for any development which is projected to result in a level of service D or worse as defined by the
Transportation Research Board's "Highway Capacity Manual". Said measures shall result in a projected level of service C or better.
(15) Conclusions/Recommendations:
(A) Present the findings of the analysis including transportation impacts and the need for potential improvements.
(16) Appendices:
(A) Include all data and generated reports, etc.
TABLE 5
ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS - ARTERIALS1
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 504/565
Access
Management
Control
Posted
Speeds
Signals
Per
Mile
Median Type Left From Major
Street? (Spacing
From Signal)
Left From Minor
Street Or
Driveway?
Right Decel
Lanes At
Driveways?
Driveway
Spacing2
High access
control
45-55
mph
2 or
less
Raised with channelized turn pockets Yes 750' minimum Only at signalized
locations
Yes3 250'/500'
Moderate
access
control
40-45
mph
3 or
less
Raised or painted with turn pockets Yes 500' minimum No, on 6 or 8 lane
roadways without
signal
Yes4 200'/300'
Low access
control
35-40
mph
5 or
less
Raised or painted with turn pockets or
undivided with painted turn pockets or
two-way left turn lane
Yes 350' minimum Yes No 150'/200'
Source: city of Mesquite master plan
Notes:
1. On street parking shall not be allowed on any new arterials. Elimination of existing on street parking shall be considered a priority for major and
minor arterials operation at or below the policy level of service.
2. Minimum spacing from signalized intersection/spacing from other driveways.
3. If there are more than 30 inbound right turn movements during the peak hour.
4. If there are more than 60 inbound right turn movements during the peak hour.
6. Figures To Be Included In The Report:
a. Vicinity map.
b. Site plan illustration.
c. Existing lane configurations and traffic control for study roadways and intersections.
d. Existing traffic volumes for study roadways and intersections.
e. Trip distribution percentages.
f. Trip assignment(s).
g. Projected traffic volumes for study roadways and intersections for all study years, without the proposed development.
h. Projected traffic volumes for study roadways and intersections for all study years, with the proposed development.
i. Recommended/proposed lane configurations and traffic control for study roadways and intersections.
7. Master Planned Community With Overall TIA: If there is master planned community with an overall TIA, another TIA will not be required for each
phase, unless some portion of the original TIA is no longer valid due to changes in the standards or community. Nevertheless, the city may request a
category 1 study for each phase if it has reason to think the target levels of service at driveways and intersections may be compromised. (Ord. 489,
1-27-2015)
D. Traffic Control: Traffic control devices shall be provided for new development pursuant to standards adopted by the department of public works.
E. Sidewalk Design Standards:
1. When Required: Sidewalks, or pedestrian crosswalks, may be required, upon a determination by the zoning official or director of public works, to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, community facilities or other locations with significant pedestrian traffic.
2. Standards: Sidewalks, where required pursuant to these regulations, shall be designed in compliance with the adopted standards of the city, which
standards shall be increased as required to comply with ADA requirements.
F. Access Standards:
1. Applicability: Proper access design and location are essential to the maintenance of safe, efficient traffic flow. Access standards shall apply to all
development to prevent the proliferation of poorly spaced driveways that can reduce the safety and carrying capacity of community streets.
2. Required: Every lot shall abut a street with adequate width for private driveways for the purpose of ingress and egress to the lot. Except as expressly
provided by the UDO, no building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel which does not abut a public street or an approved private street.
3. Standards And Specifications: All lots shall be provided with access by means of streets which have been constructed in conformance with the
standards and specifications of these regulations, and dedicated in accordance with these regulations. However, the city council may consider for
approval lots, parcels or tracts that are provided with the means of access by private streets so long as the private streets are a minimum of forty one
feet (41') in width and are constructed in conformance with standards and specifications prescribed for public roads in these regulations, and an
association or entity is responsible for maintenance of these streets.
4. Driveways; Width: Driveways providing access to single-family residential dwelling units, except in rural areas, shall be a minimum of sixteen feet
(16') in width and shall be paved with either asphalt or concrete. All multi-family development shall be accessed by at least one driveway, twenty four
feet (24') in width, that is paved with either asphalt or concrete.
5. Turning Lanes: Turning lanes may be required along arterial streets. When channelized right turn lanes are used, the zoning official or director of
public works shall determine the minimum spacing between the driveways and intersections based on AASHTO standards.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 505/565
6. Access From Specific Streets: No single-family or two-family lot shall be created which is accessed from an arterial street or a major collector street.
7. Variations: These standards are not intended to preclude access to existing lots. Where the city's standards would preclude access to a lot, the BZA
may vary the access standards, subject to the following guidelines:
a. Corner lots adjacent to streets of unequal classification shall access the street designed to carry a lower traffic volume;
b. Corner lots adjacent to streets of equal classification shall access the street with the greatest frontage.
8. Bond: A performance bond of an amount determined by completion of the city's bond estimate form shall be posted prior to construction of a
driveway.
9. Insurance: The director of public works shall establish minimum contractor insurance standards.
10. Site Distance Requirements: Driveways and subdivision entrances shall meet sight distance requirements set by the director of public works. The
director public works shall give special consideration to existing parcels and land platted before adoption of the UDO; provided, that the owner must
sign a waiver prior to the director public works's grant of exception.
11. Construction Details: Details of construction shall be designed and constructed as specified by the director public works. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996)
9-9-7: LOTS:
A. Dimensions, Generally: The lot standards provided in this chapter shall apply in each zoning district in which such uses are permitted. In the event that
standards identified in this chapter vary from those regulations specified in the zoning district text, the more restrictive standard shall govern.
B. Single-Family Lots:
1. District Standards, Compliance: Maximum height, as well as the minimum lot size, depth, width and building setbacks for single-family development
shall comply with the applicable zoning district standards.
2. Depth: Single-family lots shall be deeper than wide.
3. Cul-De-Sacs: For lots on cul-de-sacs or similar circumstances, the minimum width shall apply at all points between the front and rear setback lines.
Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of twenty five feet (25') at the street line.
4. Distance Between Structures: A minimum of fifteen feet (15') must be provided between structures and the street side property line of a corner lot.
5. Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements shall be increased to thirty feet (30') from any lot or parcel boundary which abuts an arterial or
collector street along the side or rear property line.
6. Principal Building; Number: Only one principal building is permitted on a lot, except within a planned development district.
C. Nonresidential Lots:
1. Canopies: Canopies connected to the main building shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property line.
2. Interior Side Yard: No interior side yard will be required on contiguous lots developed as a common project, except as required to comply with fire
codes or other provisions of this code.
3. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from all property lines, except in commercial districts and
except as otherwise permitted by these regulations.
4. Principal Building; Number: More than one principal building may be permitted on a lot pursuant to a planned district.
D. Corner Lots Sight Zones:
1. Width: Corner lots shall have extra widths where necessary to permit the establishment of sight area easements. On all corner lots, there shall be
provided and maintained a sight zone area as illustrated in exhibits 9-9:3.1 through 3 of this section. Within this area, no building, fence, earth bank,
vegetation or other obstruction shall be allowed which is more than thirty inches (30") in height above the elevation of the nearest travelway. The city
may request that the sight zone area be dedicated as part of the street right of way through the final map; however, the sight zone area may be
included in determining size of lot area, setbacks and density. The dedicated sight zone area must be improved with concrete sidewalk or, if within a
homeowners' association, landscaped and maintained by the association. No parking shall be allowed within the sight zone area and the city may
require that curbs at the area be painted red. Curbs adjacent to the site area easement shall be painted red.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 506/565
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 507/565
2. Access Driveway: Corner lots adjacent to streets of unequal classification shall have only one access driveway to be located on the lower
classification, based upon traffic volume, of the intersecting streets.
E. Through Lots: Through lots or double frontage lots, shall be avoided except where essential to separate residential development from traffic arteries or
to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. In such cases, access will be allowed only on the lower classification street.
F. Flag Lots: Flag lots are prohibited in the single-family and multi-family master plan categories. Flag lots or parcels may be permitted in the rural estates
and agricultural master plan categories under the following conditions:
1. The flag lot directly accesses a local or residential street;
2. The aggregate width of the pole, or poles for two (2) adjacent flag lots, is a minimum of forty feet (40') in width with minimum pole width of twenty
feet (20').
G. Lot Lines: All quadrangular lots and, so far as practical all other lots, shall have side lines at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street
lines. Unusual or odd shaped lots having boundary lines that intersect at extreme angles shall be avoided.
H. Lot Orientation: The lot line common to the street right ofway line shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar lot across the
street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot.
I. Lot Remnants: No lot or parcel shall be created which does not meet the minimum standards of the applicable zoning district and the UDO, except
pursuant to a planned district which provides for the perpetual maintenance of such remnants. Reserve strips are prohibited. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff.
10-31-1996; amd. Ord. 271, 7-29-2002)
9-9-8: BLOCKS:
The length and width of blocks shall be sufficient to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots with minimum standards specified by the applicable zoning district
and this chapter, except where a single row of lots back up to an arterial street. When reviewing proposed lot and block arrangements, the commission or
city council shall consider the following factors:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 508/565
A. Adequate Building Sites Required: Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of land use (residential, commercial or
other) proposed for development shall be provided, taking into consideration topographical and drainage features;
B. Minimum Lot Sizes Established: Minimum zoning district and lot requirements defining lot sizes and dimensions shall be accommodated without
creating unusable lot remnants;
C. Safe Access Required: Block layout shall enable development to meet UDO requirements for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
Chapter 10
SIGNS
9-10-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of sign regulations that will preserve the right of
free speech and expression, provide an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment, and avoid the visual clutter that is
potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. With these purposes in mind, it
is the intent of this chapter to authorize the use of signs that:
1. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of visitors and citizens of the city and preserve and enhance property values.
2. Encourage a positive business atmosphere.
3. Promote and accomplish the goals, policies and objectives of the city of Mesquite's master plan.
4. Promote aesthetically pleasing and compatible signage which implements the unified development ordinance of the city.
5. Provide for consistent and fair application and enforcement of the regulations pertaining to signs.
B. The regulations of this chapter shall apply on all public and private lands.
C. It is not the intent of this chapter to interfere or conflict with legally existing private restrictions, covenants, agreements or easements unless they are
less restrictive than required by this chapter. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
9-10-2: NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS AND MESSAGES:
In addition to the signage rights and rules defined by zone, signs displaying noncommercial messages, such as (by way of example, and not limitation)
opinions on matters of religion, politics, and social policy, may be displayed at any time and in any zone, subject to:
A. Commercial And Industrial Zones: In commercial and industrial zones, any sign that can be displayed under the provisions of this chapter may contain a
noncommercial message.
B. Agriculture And Residential Zones: In agriculture and residential zones, per residential unit, at all times:
1. Maximum area: Six (6) square feet per sign.
2. Maximum number of signs: Two (2).
3. Maximum height (if freestanding): Four feet (4').
4. Illumination: Not allowed.
5. For multi-family residential units, signs placed in landscaped, common, unimproved, parking or community areas are subject to permission of the
owner and may not exceed two (2) per parcel.
C. Building And Safety Codes Applied: If the sign structure is permanent in physical nature, then all applicable building and safety codes shall be met.
D. Temporary Increase In Noncommercial Message Signs: During the period beginning sixty (60) days before any primary, special or general election, and
ending fifteen (15) days thereafter, the amount of sign area used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased as follows:
1. In commercial and industrial zones: An additional thirty two (32) square feet of sign area;
2. In residential zones: An additional ten (10) square feet of sign area.
3. The additional signs or sign area used pursuant to this subsection must be removed within the fifteen (15) day period following the election.
E. Carrying Of Noncommercial Message Signs: Noncommercial message signs may be carried by a person at any time and in any zone. (Ord. 412, 10-28-
2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 509/565
9-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning is intended.
Please refer to section 9-10-6 of this chapter for prohibited (NP) signs in all zoning districts:
A-FRAME SIGN (NP): A freestanding, temporary and/or movable device usually constructed of two (2) separate wood or metal sign faces attached at or
near the top.
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign on a property which has been vacated or which remains unused for a period of time in excess of ninety (90) days. This also
includes signs advertising a former business or venture which still remain on the premises of a subsequent operating business.
ADVERTISING OR BUSINESS SIGN: Any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign or other device designed, used or intended to be used
to advertise products, goods, services or promote the sale of objects, or attract attention to a place, or lettering for the purpose of making anything known.
(See definition of Sign.) This also includes, but is not limited to, signs on automobiles, trailers, conveyances or vehicles.
ALTERATION: Changing or rearranging any structural part, sign face, enclosure, lighting, component, control, or location of a sign.
ANIMATION OR ANIMATED: (See definition of Reader Sign.) The movement or the optical illusion of movement of any part of the sign, sign structure,
design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity; the automatic changing of all or any part
of the facing of a sign. Time and temperature displays are not "animated signs" for the purposes of this section.
AREA: The portion of a sign used for display purposes and excludes the minimum frame and supports. Only one side of a double faced sign (covering the
same subject) shall be used for computing the sign area when the signs are parallel (no greater than 2 feet apart) or diverge from a common edge by an
angle not greater than thirty degrees (30°). For signs that do not have defined display areas, sign area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle, polygon
or square that will frame the display.
AWNING SIGN: A sign constructed of a framework that is mounted to a building or canopy. The framework may be covered with a light fabric which may
be translucent. The awning cover may contain advertising or identifying copy, graphics or design and may be backlighted. Awnings used strictly as
protective structures for windows and doors and having no sign copy or design are not signs and may display the building address only.
BACKLIGHTING: Illumination positioned inside or behind a sign face such as behind raised letters and awnings or inside sign cabinets, the lighting source
of which is not itself visible to the observer. This may also be called "internally lighted".
BANNER: A temporary sign intended to be hung on a frame, secured at the top and the bottom on all corners, applied to plastic, fabric or similar
lightweight material of any kind, excluding official flags and emblems. Banners may also be similarly secured or mounted to allow motion caused by the
atmosphere.
BILLBOARD (NP): A sign that is designed for changeable messages which advertise or direct attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises upon which the sign is located or to impart a public service message. The billboard sign is
usually larger than eight feet by four feet (8' x 4') in dimension and may be owned by a commercial company that leases or rents the billboard space for
advertising purposes.
BLINKING: A visual effect involving a sign, where images or lights shine intermittently or alternately dim and brighten (see definition of Animation Or
Animated).
BUILDING FACADE: Any exterior wall of a building including windows, doors, and mansard, but not including a pitched roof.
CANOPY: A structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as to extend outward from the building, providing a protective shield for doors,
windows and other openings, with supports extending to the ground as well as attached to the building.
CANOPY, DRIVE-THROUGH: "Drive-through canopy" means a freestanding roof structure over drive-through facilities such as a gasoline pump island.
CANOPY SIGN: A sign that is painted or otherwise made part of the canopy material. Signage is limited to the vertical portions of the canopy; the sides
and the front valance. No signage shall protrude beyond the vertical face.
CANOPY SIGN, DRIVE-THROUGH: "Drive-through canopy sign" means a flat sign that is painted or attached to a drive-through canopy which does not
extend above or below the canopy facade.
CHASING: A visual effect involving a sign, where images or lights follow themselves or move around the sign (see definition of Animation Or Animated).
CITY COUNCIL: The city council as provided by the Nevada Revised Statutes, the charter, and this code. At the time of this chapter, the city has not
formed a planning commission. If it does so in the future, then references in this chapter to "city council" will be deemed to include the planning
commission, to the extent the city council so provides.
CLEAR VISION ZONE: Clear vision zones and corner sight zone areas at intersecting streets and driveways in which unobstructed vision of motor vehicle
operators is maintained. The clear vision zone, also known as the corner sight zone, is defined in section 9-9-7 of this title.
CLEARANCE: The height of the lower edge of the face of a freestanding sign from the finished grade.
COMMON TENANCY SIGN: A pole, monument or flat sign used to identify a commercial development and individually lists or identifies two (2) or more
businesses located within the development.
COMMUNITY DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign with changeable panels directing residents or visitors to points of interest, including residential developments.
COMMUNITY EVENT SIGN: A sign which carries a message regarding a community event or activity which is of general interest to the community.
Community event signs (CES) are erected and maintained by the city of Mesquite. LED signs (reader signs) shall conform to the standards set forth in
subsection 9-10-5GG of this chapter, as well as the sign standards for the particular zone in which it is located.
CONFORMING SIGN: A sign that meets all provisions of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 510/565
CONSTRUCTION: The materials, architecture, assembly, and installation of a sign.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying the contractor, architect, designer or other affiliated organization responsible for the construction of a
new project.
DENSITY: The concentration of signs in a given area, frontage, district, or lot. "Density", as used in this chapter, will usually be defined in terms of numbers
of signs per lot or frontage.
DESIGN: The form, features, colors, and overall appearance of a sign structure.
DEVELOPMENT ENTRY SIGN: A permanent sign used to identify the main entrance of a PUD or a subdivision or development containing multiple lots
and/or multiple (principal) buildings.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign that usually designates the entrance or exit to a premises or provides other directional information.
DRIVEWAY SIGHT ZONE: Sight zone areas at driveways in which unobstructed vision of motor vehicle operation is maintained. The driveway sight zone
is defined in section 9-8-2 of this title.
EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS: A development or developments which have been approved, constructed and occupied.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Lighting which is mounted so as to illuminate a sign from a position outside of the sign structure. This may also be called
"externally lighted".
FLASHING (NP): A visual effect involving a sign, where images or lights either blink on and off randomly or in sequence, or have intermittent variation in
intensity or color.
FLAT SIGN: A sign either painted on or erected parallel to or attached to the outside wall of a building and extending not more than twenty four inches
(24") from such wall or building facade. Flat signs shall be constructed of low maintenance materials using flush mounted cabinets, individual pan channel
letters, or raised or flush mounted metal cutout letters.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign that is self-supported by poles, pylons, or other structural supports mounted in or upon the ground surface and not
attached to any building. Examples of freestanding signs are a monument sign and a pole sign.
FRONTAGE: A linear distance used in determining the allowable size and location of signs.
A. Building frontage: The linear distance which equals the horizontal length of any side of a building which faces and is parallel to the street frontage.
B. Street frontage: The linear distance along a single street (not internal driveways) measured between property lines of any parcel which abuts that
street.
C. Store frontage: That length of the total building frontage which is occupied by the front of any individual business.
HEIGHT: The vertical measurement from the top back of curb (at the nearest point of the sign) to the highest point of the sign structure.
ILLUMINATED OR LIGHTED SIGN: A sign equipped with artificial lighting devices for the purpose of improving the sign's visibility.
INFLATED SIGN: Any advertising device which is supported by heated or forced air or lighter than air gases and is attached to the ground or a structure.
LASER: A device that emits light in an intense narrow beam.
LETTER SIGN: A type of flat sign consisting of letters placed directly on the building face.
LOCATION: The position on a property where a sign is or will be placed. The sign location must comply with requirements of this title and with an
approved site plan.
LOGO SIGN PROGRAM: A program by the Nevada department of transportation (NDOT) placed along Interstate 15.
LOW MAINTENANCE: Sign materials which do not require frequent replacement, painting, or refurbishing as a result of exposure to the elements.
LOW PROFILE SIGN: A sign which does not exceed four feet (4') in height. A "low profile sign" may be mounted on a landscaped berm no higher than two
feet (2').
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 511/565
MARQUEE: A permanent structure other than a roof attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from the elements.
MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding identification, advertising or business sign which is supported by a pole(s) or base having a combined width(s) greater
than two feet (2') which is mounted permanently in the ground.
MOVABLE SIGN (NP): Any sign prominently displayed to identify, advertise, direct, or promote, any person, product, company, or entity of service, which is
movable in nature such as A-frames, pedestals, signs on vehicles, banners attached to freestanding poles, or similar signs that are not permanently
installed in the ground.
MURAL: A sign or other graphic consisting of an image painted directly to a wall.
NAMEPLATE SIGN: An on premises sign which indicates the identity of the owner or occupant of a parcel, structure or use.
NEW DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A temporary real estate sign used to identify a new development being constructed.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign or sign structure which lawfully existed at the time a zoning or land use ordinance became effective but which does not
presently conform to all the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
OFF PREMISES SIGN (NP): A sign indicating the availability of goods or services at a location other than the location of the sign.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign located on the property that it serves.
PEDESTAL SIGN (NP): A movable sign supported by a column or columns and a base.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT: The city of Mesquite planning and redevelopment department.
POLE SIGN: A freestanding sign which is supported by a pole(s) or base having a combined width(s) of two feet (2') or less and a minimum clearance of
six feet (6') which is mounted permanently in the ground.
PORTABLE READER SIGN: A reader sign that is mounted on a portable framework and intended for temporary use.
POSTER SIGN: A flat building sign on which temporary paper signs are mounted.
PREMISES: A lot or parcel with its appurtenances and buildings that function as a unit.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign attached to and projecting from the wall of a building and not in the same plane as the wall.
PROMOTIONAL SIGNAGE: Temporary devices such as banners, streamers, commercial flags, balloons, pennants, trailer signs and inflated signs.
PROPERTY SIGN: Property signs regulating the private use of property including "No Hunting", "No Dumping" or "No Trespassing" signs.
PYLON COVER: An enclosure for concealing and/or for decorating poles or other structural supports of a pylon sign.
PYLON SIGN: A freestanding sign with the support structure enclosed with a pole cover.
READER SIGN: Any sign that displays still images, scrolling images or moving images, utilizing a series or grid of lights that may be changed through
electronic means, including cathode ray, light emitting diode (LED) display, plasma screen, liquid crystal display (LCD), fiber optic or other electronic media
or technology. Any reader sign which changes the display more frequently than once every eight (8) seconds or which includes illuminated moving pictures
or television type signs shall be considered an animated sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign related to the property upon which it is located and offering such property for sale or for lease.
ROOF SIGN: A sign which is supported wholly or in part by and which projects over a roof.
ROTATING: A visual effect involving a sign, where images or lights move about a common axis or center (see definition of Animation Or Animated).
SCULPTURED SIGN: A freeform or three-dimensional sign that has a depth greater than two feet (2').
SEARCHLIGHT: An apparatus on a swivel or stationary which projects a beam of light in the night sky with the intent of attracting attention to the location
of the searchlight or light display.
SEPARATION: The horizontal distance between signs measured parallel with the street or curb.
SETBACK: The furthest horizontal distance between either the property line (front, side or rear), future right of way line, edge of pavement, back of curb, or
back of sidewalk and the closest point of projection of the display, sign or structure.
SIGN: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display designed to identify, announce, direct, or inform that is visible from a public
right of way. "Sign" shall also include the sign structure, supports, lighting system attachments, and other features. "Sign" does not mean flags, badges, or
ensigns of any government or governmental agency used for identification.
SIGN FACE: That part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, to advertise, to communicate information, or for visual representation which attracts the
attention of the public for any purpose. The term "sign face" includes any background or surrounding material, panel, trim or ornamentation, color and
direct or self-illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon or against which it is placed. The term
"sign face" does not include any portion of the support structure for the sign; provided, that no message, symbol or any of the previously described
elements of a sign face is placed on or designed as part of the support structure. See subsection 9-10-5Z of this chapter.
SIGN FACE AREA: The surface of the sign face.
SIGN PERMIT: An approval issued by the building department, or city council on appeal.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 512/565
SNIPE SIGN (NP): A sign for which a permit has not been obtained which is attached to a public utility pole, service pole, supports for another sign or
fences, trees, and other similar items.
STREET FRONTAGE: The linear distance along a single street (not internal driveways) measured between property lines of any parcel which abuts that
street.
SUPERGRAPHIC: A sign, consisting of an image printed or painted on vinyl, mesh or other material with or without written text, supported and attached to
a wall by an adhesive and/or by using stranded cable and eyebolts and/or other materials or methods.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any identification, advertising, directional, or promotional device which is not permanently constructed or attached and which must
be removed according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008; amd. Ord. 432, 12-8-2009, eff. 12-31-2009; Ord. 435, 2-23-
2010; Ord. 459, 8-14-2012)
9-10-4: SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: A sign permit shall be required prior to the construction, reconstruction, location, relocation, alteration, modification or use of any sign
except signs as described in subsection J of this section. Sign permits must be submitted to the building department. The planning department will
conduct a concurrent review of the permit request for compliance with this chapter. Should the sign permit request also require a building permit for
structural, electrical or footing components, the construction related details necessary for a building permit application must also be submitted. If the
sign is proposed within the central business district or the Mesquite technology and commerce center (MTCC), the sign must also be reviewed by the
architectural review committee for compliance with the district design standards.
B. Proposed Developments: A sign plan including sign criteria shall be submitted for review by the planning department for proposed developments at the
time of the site plan review. Sign permits will not be issued for proposed developments until the sign plan or criteria are approved. Sign requests made
subsequent to sign plan approval shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department for compliance with the approved plan.
C. Existing Developments: Sign permit applications for new or replacement signage which alters an existing sign shall be reviewed by the planning
department: 1) for compliance with this chapter; and 2) in compliance with the sign plan and criteria for the development as approved by the city
council. Sign permit requests that comply with this chapter and the sign plan criteria must be approved. If no sign plan or sign criteria were approved for
the development, the proposed signage must be approved by the planning department if such signage meets all provisions of this chapter. If a revised
sign plan or sign criteria is proposed for development, the property owner shall submit and obtain planning department approval based on the
provisions of this chapter for the amendment prior to the issuance of sign permits for new or replacement signs in the development. (Ord. 412, 10-28-
2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
D. Temporary Signs: Permits for temporary signs shall be submitted to, reviewed and issued by the planning department for compliance with this section
and this chapter. There is no fee for a temporary sign permit. (Ord. 432, 12-8-2009, eff. 12-31-2009)
E. Application Submittal: An application for a permanent sign shall be made by submitting the following information and other exhibits or details as the
applicant may deem appropriate or as needed in order to properly evaluate the sign proposal:
1. A sign permit application on a form supplied by the city building department, including sign structure details if the sign includes structural, electrical or
civil improvements requiring a building permit;
2. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing location of proposed signage, existing and future buildings, property lines, streets, sidewalks, landscaped areas,
parking areas, driveways, setbacks, utility poles and lines, building and sign separations or other features of the property;
3. Elevation plans showing height, clearance, dimensions, copy, graphics, colors, materials, exposed or internal lighting, assembly, attachment,
installation and other detail; and
4. Structural design criteria and calculations and other construction specifications that the building official may deem necessary for the issuance of the
building permit.
F. Other Review Criteria: All of the following findings shall be considered and satisfied prior to the issuance of a sign permit, variance, conditional use
permit or any administrative permit approval for any sign:
1. The proposed sign will comply with all provisions of this chapter and of the master plan goals and policies;
2. That the location and placement of the sign will not endanger motorists;
3. That the sign will not cover or blanket any prominent view of a structure or facade of historical or architectural significance;
4. That the sign will not obstruct views of users of adjacent buildings to side yards, front yards or to open space;
5. That the sign will not negatively impact the visual quality of a public open space such as a public recreation facility, square, plaza, or courtyard;
6. That the sign is compatible with building heights of the existing neighborhood and does not impose a foreign or inharmonious element to an existing
skyline; and
7. That the sign's lighting will not cause hazardous or unsafe driving conditions for motorists.
G. CC&R Compliance: All signs proposed in areas where CC&Rs are in effect must comply with the CC&Rs or this code, whichever is more restrictive.
H. Procedure: A complete sign permit application must be approved, approved with conditions, or denied with a written decision issued stating the reasons
for the denial within thirty (30) days of its filing. Should the sign application be denied, the applicant may: 1) make changes to reach compliance; 2)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 513/565
withdraw the application; or 3) appeal the decision.
I. Appeals: Denied applications may be appealed to the city council in accordance with subsection 9-4-9B of this title.
J. Signs That Do Not Require A Sign Permit: The following signs may be erected without a sign permit, subject to the regulations contained in this chapter,
including the most current version of the adopted building code:
1. Open House Signs: Temporary real estate directional (open house) signs are allowed to direct potential buyers to the location of an individual home
for sale or lease, other than first time sales of homes within new subdivisions; provided the signs:
a. Do not exceed four (4) square feet and include the words, "open house";
b. Have no riders, with the exception of the agent's name; no additions, tags, signs, streamers, balloons or other appurtenances may be added to the
standard real estate open house sign. Directional arrows must be incorporated into the design of the face of the sign and may not be added
appurtenant to the sign;
c. Are displayed for periods of no more than three (3) consecutive days, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.,
when the house is open to the public and a person is on the premises;
d. Must not exceed three (3) off site open house signs and no more than one per intersection. The standard real estate for sale sign posted at the
site is not included as part of the aggregate total of signs allowable per open house. Off site open house signs must include the real estate broker
or agent's name and telephone number, which may be on a business card taped to the sign, or if the property is for sale by owner, must include
the owner's name and telephone number;
e. Must not be placed within a five foot (5') radius of a hydrant, fire call box or mailbox, or within the median strip or center divider of a roadway or on
or within any other roadway island or traffic safety site area. Signs may be placed on private property with the permission of the property owner;
2. Property Signs: Property signs including "No Dumping" or "No Trespassing" signs, no larger than sixteen (16) square feet in area;
3. Nameplate Signs: A nameplate sign identifying the owner, occupant and address no larger than two (2) square feet attached to a building;
4. Directional Signs: Service or directional signs or signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area which serve to designate the location or direction to
any use or structure on the premises such as "Entrance", "Exit", "Parking", "Restrooms", "No Smoking", or "Delivery", and so forth;
5. Public Warning Signs: Public necessity or regulatory signs that warn or inform as required by law, if erected by or on behalf of public agencies; (Ord.
412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
6. Window Signs: Window signs, including posters, messages, or displays painted or mounted on the first floor level windows may be used to advertise
special promotions; provided, that no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window area is covered. Window signs covering more than fifty
percent (50%) of the first floor level windows are subject to the same sign area calculations and requirements as are flat signs; (Ord. 432, 12-8-2009,
eff. 12-31-2009)
7. Temporary Home Production, Garage Sale Signs: Temporary home production or garage sale signs no larger than four (4) square feet in area.
These signs cannot be displayed for more than two (2) days in a given week and no more than eight (8) days per year;
8. Noncommercial Signs: Flags, banners or pennants of governments, public agencies or institutions, religious or other noncommercial entities;
9. Holiday Decorations: Holiday decorations;
10. Temporary Civic Signs: Temporary civic signs that announce holiday or public interest events sponsored by nonprofit organizations;
11. Interior Signs: Interior signs or signs used within a building and not intentionally positioned so as to be visible from the outside;
12. Logo Signs: Logo signs located along Interstate 15 and approved by the Nevada department of transportation;
13. Sporting Arena Signs: Signs facing the interior of ball fields, rodeo arenas, or other sporting arenas located on public property. With the exception of
scoreboards, each individual sign cannot be larger than four feet by eight feet (4' x 8');
14. Graphics Integrated Into Machines: Any sign or graphic integrated into or on a coin operated machine, vending machine, gasoline pump,
newspaper rack, or telephone booth where the height or width of the equipment surface has not been altered exclusively for the purpose of
increasing the size or area of the sign;
15. Real Estate Sales, Rental Or Lease Signs: A person selling, renting or leasing real property may display real estate signs on the subject property
subject to the following limitations:
a. Improved or unimproved lots less than one-half (1/2) acre may have one realty sign no larger than twenty four inches by thirty inches (24" x 30").
b. Improved or unimproved lots or parcels of at least one-half (1/2) acre but no greater than five (5) acres may have one realty sign no larger than
four feet by four feet (4' x 4') per lot or parcel. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
c. Improved or unimproved lots or parcels of greater than five (5) acres may have one four foot by eight foot (4' x 8') sign which may require a
building permit from the city building department. (Ord. 432, 12-8-2009, eff. 12-31-2009)
d. In commercial and industrial zoning districts, banners may be used in lieu of other real estate signs, provided they do not exceed the size
requirements set forth above and are secured by all four (4) corners of the banner to a building facade.
K. Expiration Of Permit: Sign permits shall expire six (6) months following the date of issuance of the sign permit unless the sign is fully constructed
according to the plans submitted with the application for the sign permit. Sign permits so expiring shall be thereafter null and void and shall have no
rights or privileges whatsoever. To construct a sign under a permit so expiring requires the reapplication for the approval of the new sign permit, as
provided in this section. Sign permits issued by the building department will expire one year following the date of issuance. For sign permits requiring
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 514/565
approval by the city council, the date of issuance shall, for purposes of this subsection, be the date of the hearing when approval was granted for the
sign. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
9-10-5: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Nonapplicable: Nothing in this chapter shall apply to displays of the following kinds:
1. Official notices of any court, public body or officer;
2. Notices posted by utility or other quasi-public agent in the performance of a public duty or by any person giving due legal notice;
3. Directional, warning or informational signs or structures either required by law or established by local authority, institutional or group notices of a
public or semipublic nature;
4. Permanent lettering attached to a motor vehicle when indicating its primary purpose; or
5. Those signs or displays located within a building or on a parcel that will not be visible from any existing or proposed public road, street, highway or
alley, nor any approved private road.
B. Applicable Regulations: All signs erected in the city after adoption of this chapter that are not legal, nonconforming signs shall comply with the current
standards of the national electrical code, and adopted building code, all provisions of this chapter and any other applicable provisions of this title or
other applicable regulations.
C. Ownership Shown On Signs: The name of the sign owner and sign erector of all signs shall be in plain and public view. Signs not carrying such an
imprint will be presumed to be owned by the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
D. Clearance Between Sign And Ground: A minimum clearance of six feet (6') shall be provided between the ground and the bottom of any pole or
projecting sign.
E. Signs Not To Constitute A Traffic Hazard: No sign shall be erected along any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any
location where by reason of its position, shape, color or words, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device or block visibility for driveway ingress or egress. (See also subsection 9-9-7D of this title.)
F. Repair Of Building Facades: A building facade damaged as the result of the removal, repair, replacement or installation of any signs shall be repaired by
the property owner within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the damage.
G. Maintenance Of Signs: Every sign shall be kept in good maintenance and repair. The ground space within a radius of ten feet (10') from the base of any
freestanding sign shall be kept free and clear of all weeds, rubbish and flammable material.
H. Sign Removal: Signs identifying a discontinued use on the property shall be considered an abandoned sign and must be removed from the property by
either the sign owner or the property owner within ninety (90) calendar days of the time the use was discontinued.
I. Moving To A New Location: No sign erected before the adoption of this chapter shall be moved or enlarged or replaced unless it is made to comply with
provisions of this chapter.
J. Lights And Lighted Signs: No spotlight, floodlight or lighted sign shall be installed in any way which will permit the rays of such sign's light to penetrate
beyond the property on which such light or lighted sign is located in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance.
K. Height And Elevation Of Building Signs: The height and elevation of building signs shall conform with the following provisions:
1. Awning Signs: Awning signs shall not be located above the first floor level of the building.
2. Flat Signs: No portion of any flat sign shall project beyond the end or top of the wall to which the flat sign is attached.
3. Marquee And Canopy Signs: Marquee and canopy signs shall not be located above the main entry level of the premises.
4. Nameplates: Nameplates shall not be located above the first floor level of the building.
5. Projecting Building Signs: A projecting building sign shall not exceed the top of the vertical building wall on which it is located.
6. Projecting Business Storefront Signs: A projecting business storefront sign shall be located at the main pedestrian entry level of the building.
7. Window Signs: Window signs shall not be located above the first floor.
L. Extension Of Building Signs: The following building signs shall be allowed to extend beyond the face of buildings or structures in conformance with the
following provisions:
1. Flat Signs: A flat sign, with no copy visible from the sides, may extend a maximum of two feet (2') from the face of the building and may not encroach
into setbacks or yard areas.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 515/565
2. Projecting Building Signs: Projecting building signs may extend a maximum of six feet (6') from the face of the building but shall not extend over a
public right of way.
3. Awning/Canopy And Marquee Signs: As authorized in other sections of this chapter.
M. Freestanding Signs: The following standards apply to all freestanding signs:
1. Monument Signs: Monument signs may be placed upon a berm the height of which does not exceed two feet (2').
2. Monument Number And Density Of Freestanding Signs Allowed: One or more signs per parcel, however no freestanding on premises sign in excess
of twenty five feet (25') in height shall be constructed within a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250'), as measured in a straight line, from any other
sign in excess of twenty five feet (25') in height on the same parcel, unless the applicant has first obtained a conditional use permit from the city
council.
3. Setback: No freestanding display, sign or structure shall be located within ten feet (10') of the current or future right of way width. The side setback
shall be the same as the building side yard setback except that, if the adjacent lot or parcel is in a residential zone, the sign shall be set back at least
five feet (5') from the side property line. In no case shall a sign be located in such a way as to impact the thirty foot (30') sight zone at intersections
and driveways.
4. Height:
a. The minimum height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the horizontal surface of the ground to the lowest portion of horizontal
projection of the sign, and shall not be less than fourteen feet (14') where located in an area subject to vehicular traffic.
b. The maximum overall height for any pole sign shall not exceed the building height for the district in which the sign is erected. Any sign that
exceeds twenty five feet (25') in height, regardless of the building height for the district in which the sign is erected, must obtain approval of a
conditional use permit. Proposed signs greater than the building height for the district in which the sign is erected must additionally obtain approval
of a variance as provided for in section 9-10-11 of this chapter.
5. Landscaping: Every freestanding sign so located as to be subject to pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall have a Nevada division of transportation
standard "A" type concrete curb or equivalent at a minimum distance of four feet (4') from any portion of the sign which would interfere or obstruct
said traffic and the area within the curb shall be landscaped.
N. Awning Signs: The following standards apply to awning signs:
1. Area: The maximum allowable area of an awning shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the building facade on which the sign is to be placed.
Area to be used for copy or design shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the awning. Striping of not more than one color (including black and white)
and the background shall not be considered design space. Awnings placed on canopies or marquees are not exempted from the twenty five percent
(25%) limitation and may not exceed three feet (3') in vertical face height or cross section dimension and shall provide a minimum of eight feet (8')
clearance from the grade. Additionally, for awnings placed on canopies or marquees no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the awning shall be
used for copy or design.
2. Construction: Awnings shall be constructed of low maintenance materials and flush mounted against the wall or the canopy.
3. Illumination: External lighting may not be used with awning signs.
O. Common Tenancy Signs: Common tenancy signs are permitted in all commercial and industrial zoning districts and may be integrated as part of an
allowed monument, pole or flat sign display area.
P. Marquee Signs: A sign attached to any marquee shall not project below the marquee and shall not have more than fifty percent (50%) of the sign
projecting above the top of the marquee. The sign shall not under any conditions exceed the height of the wall to which the marquee is attached, and
no external bracing to the wall or top of the marquee shall be allowed. Signs attached to marquees shall maintain the minimum ten foot (10') clearance
required for the marquee. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
Q. Reader Signs: Reader signs (other than portable reader signs) shall be integrated into another approved freestanding sign and shall be included in the
overall maximum area for such signs, but not to exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the total area of the sign, unless otherwise provided for in this
chapter. Only internal illumination may be used with a reader sign. (Ord. 459, 8-14-2012)
R. New Development Signs: New development signs shall be permitted during construction through initial occupancy of ninety five percent (95%) of floor
space for a nonresidential development and through ninety five percent (95%) initial unit occupancy for a residential development. Banners may be
permitted for new development signs, provided they do not exceed the size requirements otherwise allowed, are kept in good repair, and all four (4)
corners of the banner are secured to a building facade. New development signs shall be removed upon two (2) years of use, regardless of the level of
occupancy but the permit may be renewed for additional periods of two (2) years through initial ninety five percent (95%) occupancy, as set forth
above.
S. Historical Monuments And Markers: Monuments or markers designating historic sites may be constructed in all zones with approval by the city council.
Historic monuments and markers shall be constructed of masonry or noncorrodible metal materials or other materials.
T. Murals And Supergraphics: Murals and supergraphics that are painted or appear to be painted on the walls of buildings may be permitted with the
approval of a conditional use permit in zoning districts which also allow flat signs. Murals and supergraphics are subject to the same sign area
calculations and requirements as are flat signs. Such signs shall use durable materials.
U. Sculptured Signs: Sculptured signs include scaled reproductions of products, an actual product, statuary or other devices intended to represent a
product, location or service. Sculptured signs are permitted with the approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 516/565
V. Vehicles As Promotional Devices: Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations, a vehicle or vehicles may be used as on premises
promotional devices, with associated signage, subject to the following conditions:
1. Such display shall be set back from any public right of way in accordance with the normal front setback for an on premises pole sign;
2. One such display shall be permitted within each five hundred feet (500') of frontage along any public right of way;
3. Any sign associated with such display shall not extend more than two feet (2') above or beyond the vehicle being displayed;
4. Identified as a permitted use within this chapter.
W. Parking Of Advertising Vehicles: No person shall park any inoperable or stationary vehicle or trailer on a public right of way, or public property, or on
private property so as to be visible from a public right of way, which has attached thereto or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the
purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity located on the same premises or any other premises. This
is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign attached to a bus or lettering on a motor vehicle. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-
27-2008)
X. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall comply with the following standards:
1. Required Setback: All temporary signs over thirty inches (30") in height shall be set back five feet (5') from all property lines and located outside the
sight distance zone, except where displayed as building signs on buildings set back less than five feet (5') or where the sign setback is otherwise
specified in this title.
2. Display Period And Removal: Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the standards set forth below for display period and removal,
unless specified otherwise in this title:
Sign Type Display Period Removal Required
Construction Duration of construction 3 days after receiving certificate of occupancy
Garage/yard sale 2 days in a given week, not more than 8 days per
year
End of sale
Public event banner (on public
property)
Per city guidelines Per city guidelines
Real estate Duration of listing Closing/lease commencement date
Temporary portable reader 14 days per calendar quarter, 30 days for grand
opening
End of fourteenth day, or end of thirtieth day for grand
opening
Promotional 30 days per calendar quarter, 60 days for grand
opening
Expiration of permit
Vacancy Duration of vacancy Date of lease or of purchase and sale contract
3. Temporary Directional Subdivision Signs:
a. Number Of Signs Allowed: Temporary directional subdivision signs will be allowed upon issuance of a permit as provided herein to advertise a
residential subdivision (containing at least 10 lots) during the construction of the subdivision and the number of signs must not exceed eight (8).
b. Area: The area of each sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet with dimensions of eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24").
c. Location: Temporary directional subdivision signs will be permitted inside and outside the boundary of the subdivision, except within twenty five
feet (25') of another off premises subdivision directional sign.
d. Maximum Sign Height: Four feet (4').
e. Minimum Setback From Street Right Of Way: Five feet (5').
f. Display Period: The development services department may issue a permit for temporary directional subdivision signs for up to six (6) months. The
permit application must include the number of signs including a location plan and evidence of permission from property owners where the signs
are proposed to be placed. The development services department, upon making affirmative findings consistent with subsection 9-10-4F of this
chapter shall issue the permit. At the end of the six (6) month display period, the applicant may request a renewal of the permit, provided the
property owner permission is still valid, and the sign plan is still current.
4. Temporary Portable Reader Signs:
a. Temporary Portable Reader Signs: Temporary portable reader signs may be temporarily located with or without wheels, as provided in this section.
b. Display Period: One temporary portable reader sign may be displayed on a lot for no longer than fourteen (14) days per calendar quarter and for
no longer than thirty (30) days during a grand opening. This provision applies to both single users and multiple users who share the same sign. A
portable reader sign may not be used as a substitute for a permanent freestanding sign.
c. Size: Temporary portable reader signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area.
d. Location: Temporary portable reader signs shall be located a minimum of eighteen inches (18") behind the front property line and five feet (5') from
the side property line. In no case shall a sign be located in such a way as to impact the thirty foot (30') sight zone at intersections and driveways.
Electrical cords may not be placed in the way of any pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 517/565
e. Illumination: Only internal illumination may be used with temporary portable reader signs.
f. Issuance: Temporary portable reader signs require a permit which is issued by the planning department. A permit seeking permission for a
temporary portable reader sign must set forth the days when the temporary portable reader sign will be displayed.
5. Promotional Signage:
a. Temporarily Allowed: Promotional signage, including, but not limited to, banners, pennants, streamers, flags and searchlights, but not including
prohibited movable signs, may be temporarily located as provided in this section.
b. Display Period: A temporary sign permit for promotional signage (i.e., banners, pennants, streamers, flags and searchlights) may be approved by
the planning department for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days per calendar quarter or no longer than sixty (60) consecutive days
during a grand opening. Alternatively, the applicant may elect to display promotional signage each week from Friday to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
on Monday morning on a continuous basis. If the business chooses this option, promotional signage will be removed each Monday morning and
not displayed again until the next Friday morning. If Monday morning is a legal holiday in the city, the promotional signage may be displayed until
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon Tuesday morning of that week.
c. Area: The total area of a banner may not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Attached pennants and streamers may not exceed forty (40) linear feet in
length. Flags are limited to a total of thirty (30) square feet.
d. Density: Only two (2) banner signs per business are allowed. A maximum of two (2) types of other promotional signs, per business, may be used
simultaneously.
e. Location: Banner signs may be placed on the principal building facade only. Other promotional signage shall not obstruct or be placed on any
public right of way or attached to any structure or appurtenance in the public right of way. Other promotional signage shall not be located in a clear
vision zone.
f. Searchlights: Searchlights shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the edge of any street pavement, shall be directed upward at an angle
of at least forty five degrees (45°) and shall be operated only between dusk and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Searchlights may be used in HT zone
only.
g. Inflated Sign Displays: Inflated signs shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height and must be tethered to a maximum overall height of one
hundred feet (100').
(1) Location: An inflated sign shall meet all minimum building setbacks of the zone in which it is used, or, if located adjacent to a more restrictive
zone, shall meet that zone's setback requirements. Such inflated signs shall be adequately tethered to the ground and shall be located so as not
to constitute a hazard.
(2) Safety: Inflated signs shall be adequately tethered and located so as not to extend into the airspace above the public right of way, regardless of
wind condition. Flammable gases shall not be utilized for inflated signs. Any inflated sign constituting a hazard shall be immediately removed.
h. Light Pole Banners: Light pole banners are only permitted on private property in conjunction with this temporary promotional signage permit.
i. Issuance: The planning department may issue a permit for promotional signage per the terms set forth in this section. (Ord. 474, 4-22-2014, eff. 5-
13-2014)
Y. Historic District Signs: The city council may authorize, as a conditional use permit, modification to an existing sign or the size or placement of a new sign
in a historic district or on a landmark site if the applicant can demonstrate that the location, size and/or design of the proposed sign is compatible with
the design period or theme of the historic structure or district and/or will cause less physical damage to the historically significant structure.
Z. Sign Area Determination: Sign face area square footage shall be determined as follows:
1. Flat signs (excluding letter signs and backlit awnings) and wall signs: The entire surface of the sign face shall be measured.
2. Backlit awnings and letter signs: A polygon, not to exceed eight (8) sides, shall be drawn around the copy area to enclose as nearly as possible the
space covered by the copy.
3. All signs: Words, symbols, letters, images, logos and all other designs that are intended to convey a message shall be included in calculating the
sign face area. Colors, stripes and other designs that are not intended to convey a message shall not be included.
AA. Federal Aviation Administration Limitations: No display, sign or structure as regulated by this section shall exceed public airport and vicinity limitations
and the sectional district maps for any airfield, nor create distractions or adversely effect the visibility of aircraft in such a way as to pose a hazard due
to height, size or lighting.
BB. Setback Measurements: All advertising display, sign and structure setback distances shall be the furthest distance determined from either the current
or future right of way line, back of curb or back of sidewalk and measured horizontally to the closest point of projection of the display, sign or structure.
CC. Revolving Signs: A sign that revolves shall not exceed eight (8) revolutions per minute and shall be permitted only in nonresidential zones.
DD. Community Directional Signs Permitted: Community directional signs and kiosks that are uniform and attractive in appearance are encouraged
throughout the city to guide residents and visitors to points of interest, including major resorts, public facilities, and private housing developments.
Ladder style directional signs to be shared by more than one development are not in violation of this code or the limitations of this section. Such
directional signs must be part of a community directional sign program with locations approved by the planning and redevelopment director as to
location, design and materials. If signs are located within a planned unit development (PUD), they must be approved by the city council at time of PUD
approval. The permission of a private landowner is required if the community directional sign is to be placed on private property. Community directional
signs may be placed on property of the city consistent with the provisions of this section and with the approval of a conditional use permit by the city
council.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 518/565
1. Type: Community directional signs and kiosks shall be either monument or ladder signs.
2. Height: Ladder style signs that are part of a public directional system or program shall not be more than one hundred twenty six inches (126") tall
measured from the elevation of the adjacent curb or sidewalk to the highest point of the sign, and may be placed in the public right of way upon
approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
a. Areas With Adopted Design Guidelines: In areas of the city with adopted design guidelines, a community directional sign may not exceed the
established sign height for that district. If a community directional sign is placed on or in a landscaped berm or natural slope, the maximum height
may be increased by up to two feet (2').
b. Central Business District: Community directional signs located in the central business district must not be taller than seventy two inches (72").
3. Display: Front entrance signs shall display the development name and subdivision name only. Off premises community directional signs shall display
the point of interest, such as the subdivision name, and a directional arrow only. Off premises community directional signs shall display a maximum
of seven (7) subdivision location sign panels.
4. Materials: Community directional signs shall be of uniform color and design throughout the city, and shall be constructed of a metal material. There
shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, attention getting devices or other appurtenances added to the community directional signs as approved.
5. Location: All community directional sign panels shall be located on a city approved community directional sign structure.
a. No community directional sign shall be located within two hundred feet (200') of another community directional sign unless there are unique
circumstances making such separation impractical. One sided community directional signs that are used to assist the public in high traffic areas
are exempt from this separation requirement. Other exemptions may be granted by the city via an administrative variance, upon review by the
department of planning and redevelopment in consultation with other city staff.
b. Community directional sign locations shall comply with minimum sight zones and distance requirements as outlined in subsections 9-8-2C6,
"Driveway Sight Zones", and 9-9-7D, "Corner Lots Sight Zones", of this title.
c. All signage proposed in center islands or in the right of way must obtain a permit from the public works director, prior to the sign being displayed.
6. Lettering: Lettering on monument signs shall be metal or low maintenance plastic materials. Ladder sign lettering shall be of low maintenance paint
or of metal material.
7. Illumination: No backlit signs will be allowed. No internal lighting may be used for signs in this section. Signs may be externally lit with concealed
lighting only. Exposed bulbs or neon tubes are not allowed.
8. Issuance: All signage shall be presented to the city council for approval at the same time of a conditional use permit application for either the new
community directional sign or when the planned unit development is presented for approval. Any sign proposal which varies from the above
mentioned requirements requires a modification to the approved conditional use permit.
EE. Development Entry Signs:
1. Main Entry: One development entry sign may be constructed at the main entrance of the PUD or a subdivision or development containing multiple
lots and/or multiple (principal) buildings. All development entry signs must be constructed as monument signs.
a. The development entry sign may be part of a wall, but neither the sign nor wall may exceed six feet (6') in height. The total sign area of the
monument may not exceed forty (40) square feet, or if only the name of the development is represented, letters must not exceed twenty inches
(20") in height. The monument entry sign may be placed upon a landscaped berm that does not exceed two feet (2') in height.
b. Other architectural features, fountains, sculptures or public art may be included with the entry sign monument; provided that the height of any
feature does not exceed twenty five feet (25') above the adjacent curb or sidewalk.
c. All applicable corner sight zones must remain clear of obstruction (see subsection 9-9-7D of this title).
d. Development entry sign monuments are permitted on both sides of the main entrance to a PUD or subdivision. If a monument is desired on both
sides of the entrance, the standards for a secondary entry monument, found in subsection EE2 of this section, shall apply, unless the PUD or
subdivision is larger than six hundred forty (640) acres in size.
2. Secondary Entry: Additional monument signs may be placed at other, secondary entrances of the PUD or subdivision. These standards shall also
apply for entry monuments to apartment or condominium complexes within a PUD.
a. The monument sign may be part of a wall, but neither the sign nor wall may exceed six feet (6') in height. The total sign area may not exceed
twenty (20) square feet, or if only the name of the development is represented, letters must not exceed twelve inches (12") in height. The
monument entry sign may be placed upon a berm that does not exceed two feet (2') in height.
b. Other architectural features, fountains, sculptures or public art may be included with the monument; provided that the height of any feature does
not exceed fourteen feet (14') above the adjacent curb or sidewalk.
c. All applicable corner and driveway sight zones must remain clear of obstruction (see subsection 9-9-7D of this title).
FF. Flags:
1. The regulations in this section regarding flags apply to all zones in the city.
2. The maximum size of any one flag of the United States, state of Nevada, or other flag or insignia of a governmental entity shall be thirty (30) square
feet if visible from a public right of way. The maximum size of any other flag shall be twelve (12) square feet if visible from a public right of way.
3. Flagpoles may not exceed the maximum height of the nearest building or thirty five feet (35') measured from the natural or final grade, whichever is
less.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 519/565
4. No more than three (3) freestanding flagpoles per property may be shown at any time if these flags are visible from a public right of way. Properties
with right of way frontage greater than one hundred (100) yards may be allowed an additional three (3) flags per additional one hundred (100) yards
of street frontage. No more than one flag may be attached to a pole.
5. No more than eight (8) building mounted flags per parcel may be shown at any time if visible from a public right of way.
6. Freestanding flagpoles shall not be placed in the setback area in the zone in which they are located.
7. All flags which contain the name or logo of an establishment or advertising copy shall be considered signs for purposes of this chapter. The flag of
the United States, the state of Nevada, and other flags or insignia of governmental entities are not considered signs for purposes of calculating total
sign area, but are subject to the restrictions of this section.
8. Flagpoles shall be black, brown, dark green, silver or bronze.
9. Flags shall be maintained and must be removed or replaced when torn, tattered or dirty.
10. Flags and flagpoles erected prior to the adoption of this chapter are considered legal, nonconforming uses, and are subject to the requirements of
section 9-10-12 of this chapter, with these additional requirements:
a. When such flags and flagpoles are installed in a residential subdivision, PUD or multi-family residential project, they must be removed when the
development or the phase thereof in which the flags are located is occupied. For purposes of this subsection, "occupied" means that ninety
percent (90%) of the residences have been sold or are available for lease.
(1) Except for flags of the United States or the state of Nevada, or other official or noncommercial flags, flags and flagpoles situated on a parcel
contiguous with an occupied dwelling must be removed, unless the flags and flagpoles are on a parcel held in common ownership, in which case
they must be removed when they are within fifty feet (50') of an occupied dwelling.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, flags erected within public right of way or within any area planned or offered for dedication are not considered
legal nonconforming uses, and are subject to removal under the provisions of this chapter.
11. Any PUD, residential subdivision or commercial subdivision approved following adoption of this chapter will include standards, locations and
regulations for flags in its sign plan and criteria. It may not prohibit display of the flag of the United States or the state of Nevada. The plan will include
regulations for maintenance of flags, and removal of flags when residences are occupied, as provided herein. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-
2008)
GG. Light Emitting Diode (LED) Signs:
1. Location: Electronic reader boards must not be permitted if the proposed sign location is within two hundred feet (200') measured in any direction
from a residential zoning district.
2. Conformance To Regulations: A standard sign must not be changed to an LED sign unless it conforms to all applicable regulations, including
subsection Q, "Reader Signs", of this section.
3. Restrictions: Electronic reader boards are subject to the following restrictions on sign programming:
a. Messages advertising on premises business services and products may be displayed. Messages with noncommercial advertising for community
activities and events may also be displayed. Off premises commercial messages are not permitted.
b. No chasing, blinking, rotating or flashing shall be employed in displaying a message or image, or during the change from one message or image to
another.
c. Text messages that are longer than the display area and do not contain any nontext graphics must scroll in a consistent and predictable manner.
d. Light intensity (brightness) must be limited as follows:
(1) Lighting Levels: Lighting levels must not increase by more than 0.3 foot-candle (over ambient light levels) as measured using a foot-candle
meter at a preset distance.
(2) Measurement Distance: The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: The square root of the product of the sign
area and one hundred (100).
Example using an eighty (80) square foot sign:
Measurement distance = ..(80 sq. ft. x 100) = 89 feet
(3) Brightness Control: Each display must have a light sensing device or photocell that will adjust the brightness as ambient light conditions
change.
(4) Enforcement: These standards must be enforced as follows:
(A) At least thirty (30) minutes past sunset, use a foot-candle meter to record the ambient light reading for the area. This is done while the digital
display is off or displaying all black copy.
(B) The reading must be taken with the meter aimed directly at the digital sign at the appropriate preset distance.
(C) Turn on the digital display to full white copy and take another reading.
(D) If the difference between the readings is 0.3 foot-candle or less, the brightness is properly adjusted.
Note: These lighting standards will drop the nighttime brightness of the sign to approximately four (4) to fifteen percent (15%) of its capable
output. The light output spread is due to the variation in the ambient lighting level of each location. The daytime brightness will operate near
maximum output, which is required to overcome full sunlight. (Ord. 459, 8-14-2012)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 520/565
9-10-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Prohibited Types:
1. Movable or portable signs and signs not permanently installed in the ground or on a pole or building such as "A-frame", pedestal, or similar sign
devices, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter;
2. Off premises signs, including billboards per ordinance 309, except as otherwise provided in this title;
3. Signs located on public property or attached to any structure or appurtenance on public property except public necessity signs or as otherwise
provided in this chapter. These signs may be removed by the city or other public agencies owning the public property;
4. Bench signs located on private property within forty feet (40') of the public right of way or on public property;
5. Home occupation signs;
6. Signs which create a nuisance or hazard to the public safety;
7. Obsolete or abandoned signs or messages which identify services no longer provided on the premises;
8. Flashing or strobelike lighting effects;
9. Sound emitting devices;
10. Signs which project more than twenty four inches (24") from a wall;
11. Snipe signs;
12. New and relocated billboards and outdoor advertising, except under conditions described in section 9-10-12 of this chapter;
13. Signs for unlicensed businesses, or unlicensed or unauthorized activities required to obtain or hold licenses or other permits; any sign or signs
promoting unlawful activity; or
14. Any other sign not complying with the provisions of this chapter, or any prior ordinance.
B. Prohibited Locations: No advertising display shall be placed in any of the following locations:
1. Within the right of way of any highway, road or other public easement, or within a future right of way, except as expressly authorized in this chapter;
2. Within any stream or drainage channel;
3. In any location that would prevent a traveler of a highway, street or driveway from obtaining a clear view of approaching traffic for a distance of not
less than five hundred feet (500');
4. So as to interfere with, mislead, obstruct the view of or be confused with any directional, warning, danger, signal or informational sign or structure,
either required by law or established by local authority; or
5. Above a canopy or marquee, or upon a roof, except that the following may be permitted:
a. A mansard roof may be treated as a wall for sign purposes when such roof is more nearly vertical than horizontal, subject to the provisions of
these regulations; or
b. A sign upon a parapet if such a parapet is continuous along the entire top of the wall upon which it is constructed and is constructed and is of the
same surface appearance as the wall.
C. Prohibited Displays: Displays or signs of the following nature are prohibited:
1. Imitations or simulations of any directional, warning, danger or informational signs;
2. Illumination of such brilliance and/or position as to blind or dazzle the vision of travelers;
3. Displays containing statements, words or suggestions or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character;
4. Misleading, erroneous or false information and advertising;
5. Those that emit any sound as part of the advertising message; or
6. Portable or mobile signs which are placed upon, affixed to or hung from a portable, natural or contrived appliance, structure, trailer, flatbed, vehicle
or thing, susceptible or capable of being used for advertising, except as provided in subsection 9-10-5X of this chapter. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff.
11-27-2008)
9-10-7: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply to signs permitted in the residential districts. Except as otherwise provided by this title, any sign not expressly
permitted by these district regulations is prohibited.
A. Sign Regulations For The RE-1, RE-2, RE-3, And SF Districts:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 521/565
1. Purpose: Signage in the Single-Family Residential Districts shall be limited to signage appropriate for uses typically accessory to rural estate and
single-family residential land uses that do not impact neighboring residences. The sign regulations of these districts are intended to limit the type,
number, size and duration of signage permitted in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and impacts on use and enjoyment of surrounding
residential properties.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-7A of this section shall apply to all lots within the RE-1, RE-2, RE-3, and SF Districts.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the RE-1, RE-2, RE-3, and SF Districts:
TABLE 9-10-7A
Types Of Signs Permitted1
Maximum Area Per
Sign Face
Maximum Height
Of Signs
Minimum
Setback
Number Of Signs Permitted
Per Sign Type
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Development entry4 40 sq. ft. 6 ft. 10 ft. 1 per entrance
Flat or monument, for permitted and conditional
nonresidential uses
16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Garage sale2 4 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Nameplate 2 sq. ft. n/a n/a 1 per dwelling
New development 96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per development
Noncommercial message 6 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 2 per premises5
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate3 See note 3 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Notes:
1. Except for development entry signs, illumination of signs in these zones is prohibited.
2. Garage sale signs allowed cannot be displayed for more than 2 days in a given week and no more than 8 days per year.
3. For parcels up to 1/2 acre in size, 24 inch x 30 inch sign. For parcels 1/2 acre to 5 acres in size, 16 square foot sign. For parcels greater than 5
acres, up to 32 square foot sign. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for real estate sign requirements. 32 square foot sign requires a building
permit.
4. See subsection 9-10-5EE of this chapter for specific requirements.
5. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, owners/occupants of residential
property may exhibit as many political signs as desired, but may not exhibit more than 1 political sign for each candidate, political party or ballot
question.
B. Sign Regulations For The MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4, And MH Districts:
1. Purpose: Signage in the Multi-Family Residential Districts shall be limited to signage appropriate for uses typically accessory to multi-family and
manufactured housing land uses and do not impact neighboring residences. The sign regulations of these districts are intended to limit the type,
number, size and duration of signage permitted in order to prevent the creation of nuisances and impacts on use and enjoyment of surrounding
residential properties.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-7B of this section shall apply to all lots within the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4, and MH Districts.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4, and MH Districts:
TABLE 9-10-7B
Types Of Signs Permitted1
Maximum Area Per
Sign Face
Maximum Height
Of Signs
Minimum
Setback
Number Of Signs Permitted
Per Sign Type
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Development entry4 40 sq. ft. 6 ft. 10 ft. 1 per entrance
Flat or monument, for permitted and conditional
nonresidential uses
16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Garage sale2 4 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Nameplate 2 sq. ft. n/a n/a 1 per dwelling
New development 96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per development
Noncommercial message 6 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 2 per premises5
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 2 per street frontage
Real estate3 See note 3 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 522/565
Notes:
1. Except for development entry signs, illumination of signs in these zones is prohibited.
2. Garage sale signs allowed cannot be displayed for more than 2 days in a given week and no more than 8 days per year.
3. For parcels up to 1/2 acre in size, 18 inch x 30 inch sign. For parcels 1/2 acre to 5 acres in size, 16 square foot sign. For parcels greater than 5
acres, up to 32 square foot sign. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for real estate sign requirements. 32 square foot sign requires a building
permit.
4. See subsection 9-10-5EE of this chapter for specific requirements.
5. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, owners/occupants of residential
property may exhibit as many political signs as desired, but may not exhibit more than 1 political sign for each candidate, political party or ballot
question.
(Ord. 511, 2-28-2017, eff. 3-22-2017)
9-10-8: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply to signs permitted in the CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, CR-4, CR-H, HT, and the PB Districts. Except as otherwise provided in
this title, any sign not expressly permitted by these regulations is prohibited.
A. Sign Regulations For The CR-1, CR-4, CR-H Districts:
1. Purpose: Signage in the CR-1, CR-4, CR-H Districts shall be limited to signage appropriate for neighborhood commercial, new automotive
dealerships and hospital land uses.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-8A of this section shall apply to all lots within the CR-1, CR-4, and CR-H Districts.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table and applicable notes for the CR-1, CR-4, and CR-H Districts:
TABLE 9-10-8A
Types Of
Signs
Permitted Maximum Area Per Sign Face
Maximum
Height Of
Signs
Minimum
Setback Number Of Signs Permitted Per Sign Type
Canopy, drivethrough
40% of each canopy face See note 1 n/a 1 per canopy face
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1 15% of each building facade for all flat signs
combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more per business or storefront, subject to
building facade area limitations
Marquee 15% of each building facade for all flat signs and
marquee signs combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more signs per business or storefront,
subject to building facade area limitations
Monument2,3,4
32 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 or more per parcel
New
development
96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Noncommercial
message6
See note 6 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Pole2,4,7 1/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of widest street frontage 25 ft. 15 ft. 1 or more per street frontage
Poster 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for storefront flat sign
First floor only n/a 1 per business or storefront
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate5 See note 5 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Window 50% of the total window area n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure. Monument sign may be placed on a maximum 2 foot high
landscaped berm without penalty for height.
4. The total combined area of both monument and pole signs cannot exceed 1/2 square foot per linear foot of street frontage.
5. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
6. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 523/565
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
7. See subsection 9-10-5M of this chapter regarding pole sign heights.
B. Sign Regulations For The CR-2 District:
1. Purpose: Signage in the CR-2 District shall be limited to signage appropriate for general commercial land uses.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-8B of this section shall apply to all lots within the CR-2 District.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the CR-2 District:
TABLE 9-10-8B
Types Of
Signs
Permitted Maximum Area Per Sign Face
Maximum
Height Of
Signs
Minimum
Setback Number Of Signs Permitted Per Sign Type
Awning/
canopy5
50% of awning area See note 1 n/a 1 per first floor door or window
Canopy, drivethrough
40% of canopy face See note 1 n/a 1 per canopy face
Community
event
Same as monument. See note 3 10 ft. May be in
ROW
1 per parcel
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1 15% of each building facade for all flat signs
combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more per business or storefront, subject to
building facade area limitations
Marquee 15% of each building facade for all flat signs and
marquee signs combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more signs per business or storefront,
subject to building facade area limitations
Monument2,3,4
See note 3 10 ft. 5 ft. 1 or more per parcel
New
development
96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Noncommercial
message6
See note 6 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Pole2,4,9 1/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage 25 ft. 15 ft. 1 or more per street frontage
Poster 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for storefront flat sign
See note 1 n/a 1 per business or storefront
Promotional See note 8 See note 8 See note
8
See note 8
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Reader2,4 75% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for freestanding sign
25 ft. 15 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate7 See note 7 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Temporary
portable reader
See note 8 See note 8 See note
8
1 per street frontage
Window 50% of the total window area n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure. Monument signs may be up to 32 square feet for buildings
=10,000 square feet in gross floor area, and may be increased up to 60 square feet for buildings >10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Monument signs may be placed on a maximum 2 foot high landscaped berm without penalty for height.
4. The total combined area of both monument and pole signs cannot exceed 1/2 square foot per linear foot of street frontage.
5. Awnings and canopies must also comply with subsection 9-10-5N of this chapter.
6. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
7. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
8. See subsection 9-10-5X of this chapter for specific requirements for temporary signs.
9. See subsection 9-10-5M of this chapter regarding pole sign heights.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 524/565
C. Sign Regulations For The CR-3 District:
1. Purpose: Signage in the CR-3 District shall be limited to signage appropriate for Commercial Central Business District land uses. The Downtown
Redevelopment and Central Business District is a special district that is zoned CR-3. No pole signs or internally illuminated "box" or "cabinet" flat
signs are allowed in this district. In this district, the only permitted freestanding signs are monument signs.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-8C of this section shall apply to all lots within the CR-3 District.
3. Special Review Required: All signs in the Downtown Central Business District must be reviewed first by the Architectural Review Committee for
compliance with the design standards for the Downtown Central Business District, and the provisions of this section, with final review by the Planning
Department.
4. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table and applicable notes for the CR-3 District:
TABLE 9-10-8C
Types Of Signs
Permitted5 Maximum Area Per Sign Face
Maximum
Height Of Signs
Minimum
Setback
Number Of
Signs Permitted
Per Sign Type
Community
event
Same as monument. See note 3 10 ft. May be in
ROW
1 per parcel
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1,4 15% of the building facade for all flat signs
combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more signs per business or storefront,
subject to building facade limitations
Monument2,3 See note 3 10 ft. 5 ft. 1 per parcel, when separated by at least 250 ft.
between signs3
New
development
96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Noncommercial
message6
See note 6 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Poster 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for storefront flat sign
First floor only n/a 1 per business or storefront
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate See note 7 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Window 50% of the total window area n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure. In order to receive approval to place a monument sign on a
parcel, the monument sign on the parcel and adjacent parcels must be separated by a minimum distance of at least 250 feet as measured in a
straight line, unless separated by a public street or a conditional use permit is issued. Monument signs may be up to 60 square feet of copy area
for buildings =10,000 square feet in gross floor area, and may be increased up to 100 square feet of copy area for buildings >10,000 square feet of
gross floor area. Monument signs may be placed on a 2 foot high maximum landscaped berm without penalty for height. Monument signs may be
illuminated by neon lighting, external lighting fixtures, or by providing backlighting behind individually mounted letters and symbols, and by
internally illuminating individual sign letters and symbols. Internally illuminated box or cabinet signs (signs where the sign background, letters, and
symbols are illuminated) are also permitted on monument signs.
4. Flat signs shall be designed in compliance with the design standards for the Downtown Central Business District. 1 plaque sign suspended from
a covered walkway may be permitted in front of each business. Flat signs may be illuminated by neon lighting, external lighting fixtures, or by
providing backlighting behind individually mounted letters and symbols, and by internally illuminating individual sign letters and symbols. Internally
illuminated box or cabinet signs (signs where the sign background, letters, and symbols are illuminated) are prohibited on buildings.
5. No pole signs are allowed in this district. Any existing, legal nonconforming pole signs must comply with section 9-10-12 of this chapter.
6. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
7. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
D. Sign Regulations For The HT District:
1. Purpose: Signage in the HT District shall be limited to signage appropriate for tourist hotel resort land uses.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-8D of this section shall apply to all lots within the HT District.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the HT District:
TABLE 9-10-8D
Types Of Maximum Area Per Sign Face Maximum Minimum Number Of Signs Permitted Per Sign Type
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 525/565
Signs
Permitted
Height Of
Signs
Setback
Awning/
canopy5
50% of the awning area See note 1 n/a 1 per first floor door or window
Canopy, drivethrough
40% of each canopy See note 1 n/a 1 per canopy face
Community
event
Same as monument. See note 3 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per parcel
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1 15% of each building facade for all flat signs
combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more per business or storefront, subject to
building facade area limitations
Marquee 15% of each building facade for all flat signs and
marquee signs combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more signs per business or storefront,
subject to building facade area limitations
Monument2,3,4
See note 3 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 or more per parcel
New
development
96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Noncommercial
message8
See note 8 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Pole2,4,6,11 5 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage 25 ft. 15 ft. 1 or more per street frontage6
Poster 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for storefront flat sign
See note 1 n/a 1 per business or storefront
Promotional7,10
See notes 7,10 See notes 7,10
See notes
7,10
See notes 7,10
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Reader2,4,6 75% of the allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for freestanding sign
25 ft. 15 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate9 See note 9 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Temporary
portable
reader10
See note 10 See note 10 See note
10
1 per street frontage
Window 50% of the total window area n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure. Monument signs may be up to 32 square feet for buildings
=10,000 square feet in gross floor area, and may be increased up to 60 square feet for buildings >10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Monument signs may be placed on a 2 foot high maximum landscaped berm without penalty for height.
4. The total combined area of both monument and pole signs cannot exceed 5 square feet per linear foot of street frontage.
5. Awnings and canopies must also comply with subsection 9-10-5N of this chapter.
6. It is understood that various businesses may operate on a resort property in addition to the gaming and hotel functions. All signage shall comply
with requirements of this title, and shall not have more than 1 sign larger than 25 feet in height per resort property no matter how many businesses
operate on the resort property. Other businesses in the HT District, including those that operate on a hotel resort property, are not eligible for a sign
over 25 feet in height under any circumstances. Incidental business shall not have outside signage except restaurants, bars, retail sales, and
health spas. Outside signage for restaurants, bars, retail sales and health spas must be integrated as part of a permitted sign that principally
advertises the use of the hotel, resort hotel, inn or motel. Pole mounted reader signs may be animated in the HT Zoning District.
7. Vehicles may be used as promotional devices consistent with subsection 9-10-5V of this chapter.
8. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
9. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
10. See subsection 9-10-5X of this chapter for specific requirements for temporary signs.
11. See subsection 9-10-5M of this chapter regarding pole sign heights.
E. Sign Regulations For The PB District:
1. Purpose: Signage in the PB District shall be limited to signage appropriate for office uses in an area which is predominantly residential but because
of traffic and other factors is no longer suitable for the continuation of low density residential uses.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-8E of this section shall apply to all lots within the PB District.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the PB District:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 526/565
TABLE 9-10-8E
Types Of
Signs
Permitted Maximum Area Per Sign Face
Maximum
Height Of
Signs
Minimum
Setback Number Of Signs Permitted Per Sign Type
Awning/
canopy5
50% of the awning area See note 1 n/a 1 per first floor door or window
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1 15% of each building facade for all flat signs
combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more per business or storefront, subject to
building facade area limitations
Marquee 15% of each building facade for all flat signs and
marquee signs combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more signs per business or storefront,
subject to building facade area limitations
Monument2,3,4
32 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 or more per parcel
Noncommercial
message8
See note 8 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Pole2,4,9 1/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage 25 ft. 15 ft. 1 or more per street frontage
Poster 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for storefront flat sign
First floor only n/a 1 per business or storefront
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Reader2,4 25% of allowable area (but in addition to)
available for freestanding sign
25 ft. 15 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate6 See note 6 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Temporary
portable
reader7
See note 7 See note 7 See note
7
1 per street frontage
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure.
4. The total combined area of both monument and pole signs cannot exceed 1/2 square foot per linear foot of street frontage.
5. Awnings and canopies must also comply with subsection 9-10-5N of this chapter.
6. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
7. See subsection 9-10-5X of this chapter for specific requirements for temporary signs.
8. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
9. See subsection 9-10-5M of this chapter regarding pole sign heights.
(Ord. 511, 2-28-2017, eff. 3-22-2017)
9-10-9: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply to signs permitted in the IR-1 and IR-2 Districts. Except as otherwise provided in this title, any sign not expressly
permitted by these regulations is prohibited.
A. Sign Regulations For The IR-1 District:
1. Purpose: Signage in the IR-1 District shall be limited to signage appropriate for light manufacturing land uses.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-9A of this section shall apply to all lots within the IR-1 District.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the IR-1 District:
TABLE 9-10-9A
Types Of
Signs
Permitted Maximum Area Per Sign Face
Maximum
Height Of
Signs
Minimum
Setback Number Of Signs Permitted Per Sign Type
Awning/
canopy5
50% of the awning area See note 1 n/a 1 per first floor door or window
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 527/565
Canopy, drivethrough
40% of canopy face See note 1 n/a 1 per canopy face
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1 15% of each building facade for all flat signs
combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more per business or storefront, subject to
building facade area limitations
Marquee 15% of each building facade for all flat signs and
marquee signs combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more signs per business or storefront,
subject to building facade area limitations
Monument2,3,4
See note 3 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 or more per parcel
New
development
96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Noncommercial
message
See note 7 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Pole2,4,6,10 1/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage 25 ft. 15 ft. 1 or more per street frontage
Poster 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for storefront flat sign
First floor only n/a 1 per business or storefront
Promotional See note 9 See note 9 See note
9
See note 9
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Reader2,5,6 25% of allowable area (but not in addition to)
available for freestanding sign
25 ft. 15 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate8 See note 8 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Temporary
portable
reader9
See note 9 See note 9 See note
9
1 per street frontage
Window 50% of the total window area n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure. Monument signs may be up to 32 square feet for buildings
=10,000 square feet in gross floor area, and may be increased up to 60 square feet for buildings >10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Monument signs may be placed on a 2 foot high maximum landscaped berm without penalty for height.
4. The total combined area of both monument and pole signs cannot exceed 1/2 square foot per linear foot of street frontage.
5. Awnings and canopies must also comply with subsection 9-10-5N of this chapter.
6. Pole mounted reader signs may be animated in the IR-1 Zoning District.
7. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
8. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
9. See subsection 9-10-5X of this chapter for specific requirements for temporary signs.
10. See subsection 9-10-5M of this chapter regarding pole sign heights.
B. Sign Regulations For The IR-2 District:
1. Purpose: Signage in the IR-2 District shall be limited to signage appropriate for heavy manufacturing land uses.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-9B of this section shall apply to all lots within the IR-2 District.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the IR-2 District:
TABLE 9-10-9B
Types Of Signs
Permitted Maximum Area Per Sign Face
Maximum
Height Of Signs
Minimum
Setback Number Of Signs Permitted Per Sign Type
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat1 15% of each building facade for all flat
signs combined on that facade
See note 1 n/a 1 or more per business or storefront, subject to
building facade area limitations
Monument2,3,4 32 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 or more per parcel
New 96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 528/565
development
Noncommercial
message
See note 6 4 ft. 5 ft. 2, in addition to any existing commercial signs
Pole2,4,5,8 1/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage 25 ft. 15 ft. 1 or more per street frontage
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate7 See note 7 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Window 50% of the total window area n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
1. For height limits on building signs, see subsection 9-10-5K of this chapter.
2. If a building fronts on more than 1 street, then only 1 of the street frontages (widest) will be allowed in computing the area shown above. Square
footage shall be measured on only 1 side of a 2 sided sign, and on 2 sides of a 3 sided or 4 sided sign.
3. Monument signs must have a 5 foot setback, unless integrated into a wall structure. Monument signs may be placed on a 2 foot high maximum
landscaped berm without penalty for height.
4. The total combined area of both monument and pole signs cannot exceed 1/2 square foot per linear foot of street frontage.
5. Pole mounted reader signs may be animated in the IR-2 Zoning District.
6. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 32 square feet of sign area. See section 9-10-2 of this chapter.
7. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for details on sign sizes.
8. See subsection 9-10-5M of this chapter regarding pole sign heights.
(Ord. 511, 2-28-2017, eff. 3-22-2017)
9-10-10: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply to signs permitted in the special districts, including the Agricultural and Open Space Districts, Planned Unit
Development Districts, Public Facilities Districts, and other special districts. Except as otherwise provided by this title, any sign not expressly permitted by
these district regulations is prohibited.
A. Sign Regulations For The Agriculture District:
1. Purpose: Signage in this district is intended to minimize conflicts between agricultural uses and adjacent development.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-10A of this section shall apply to all lots within the A District.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the A District:
TABLE 9-10-10A
Types Of Signs Permitted1
Maximum Area Per
Sign Face
Maximum Height
Of Signs
Minimum
Setback
Number Of Signs Permitted
Per Sign Type
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat or monument, for permitted and conditional
nonresidential uses
16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 10 ft. 1 per premises
Garage sale2 4 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Nameplate 2 sq. ft. n/a n/a 1 per dwelling
New development 96 sq. ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 1 per development
Noncommercial message3 6 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 2 per premises
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate See note 4 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Notes:
1. Illumination of signs in these zones is prohibited.
2. Garage sale signs allowed cannot be displayed for more than 2 days in a given week and no more than 8 days per year.
3. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 10 square feet of signs area.
4. For parcels up to 1/2 acre in size, 24 inch x 30 inch sign. For parcels 1/2 acre to 5 acres in size, 16 square foot sign. For parcels greater than 5
acres, up to 32 square foot sign. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for real estate sign requirements. 32 square foot sign requires a building
permit.
B. Sign Regulations For The PF, PROS, And LR Districts:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 529/565
1. Purpose: Signage in this district is intended to minimize conflicts between public and open space uses and adjacent development.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-10B of this section shall apply to all lots within the PF, PROS and LR districts.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the PF, PROS and LR districts: (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
TABLE 9-10-10B
Types Of Signs Permitted1
Maximum Area Per
Sign Face
Maximum Height
Of Signs
Minimum
Setback
Number Of Signs Permitted
Per Sign Type
Community event 64 sq. ft. 10 ft. May be in
ROW
1 per parcel
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Flat or monument, for permitted and conditional
nonresidential uses
64 sq. ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 1 per parcel
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Note:
1. With the exception of community event signs, illumination of all signs in these zones is prohibited.
(Ord. 459, 8-14-2012)
C. Sign Regulations For The RV And M-H Districts:
1. Purpose: Signage in this district is intended to minimize conflicts between RV park and mobile home park uses and adjacent development.
2. Regulations: Regulations on table 9-10-10C of this section shall apply to all lots within the RV and M-H districts.
3. Sign Standards: Sign type, size and height standards table for the RV and M-H districts:
TABLE 9-10-10C
Types Of Signs Permitted1
Maximum Area Per
Sign Face
Maximum Height
Of Signs
Minimum
Setback
Number Of Signs Permitted
Per Sign Type
Construction 16 sq. ft. 8 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Noncommercial message2 6 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 2 per premises
Pole or monument, for permitted and conditional
nonresidential uses
100 sq. ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 1 per parcel
Property 16 sq. ft. 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per street frontage
Real estate3 See note 3 4 ft. 5 ft. 1 per premises
Notes:
1. Illumination of all signs in these zones is prohibited.
2. During the period beginning 60 days before any primary, special or general election, and ending 15 days thereafter, the amount of sign area
used for noncommercial speech messages may be increased by an additional 10 square feet of signs area.
3. For parcels up to 1/2 acre in size, 24 inch x 30 inch sign. For parcels 1/2 acre to 5 acres in size, 16 square foot sign. For parcels greater than 5
acres, up to 32 square foot sign. See subsection 9-10-4J15 of this chapter for real estate sign requirements. 32 square foot sign requires a building
permit.
D. Sign Regulations For Planned Unit Developments:
1. Purpose: Planned unit developments (PUD) have common design elements that can be complemented and enhanced through the use of special
signage. Planned unit development districts can allow for the creation of special sign regulations to meet the needs of these situations.
2. Applicability: These regulations apply to all planned unit developments.
3. Submission Of PUD Regulations: In order to give effect to the purpose set forth in subsection A of this section, special sign regulations may be
proposed as part of a PUD application.
4. Community Directional Sign: All requests for a PUD are required to comply with this chapter's requirements for development entry signs and
community directional sign program pursuant to subsections 9-10-5DD and 9-10-5EE of this chapter. Additionally, the following requirements
specifically apply to PUD applications:
a. Height: Community directional ladder signs and kiosks within a planned unit development shall not be more than seventy two inches (72") tall,
measured from the high point on the sign to ground level. Monument signs within a planned unit development shall not be taller than seventy two
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 530/565
inches (72") in height, unless it is a main entrance sign for the planned unit development. Development entry signs must be approved as part of a
planned unit development by the city council.
b. Monument Signs: Monument signs and development entry signs shall be constructed of either cement products, or of rock, marble, brick or metal
material. Treated wood or clay tiles may be used as accent features.
c. Display: Development entry signs shall display the development name and subdivision name only.
5. Effect Of PUD Approval: If a PUD's special sign regulations are approved by the city council, then the sign standards and limitations established
within that PUD shall govern to the extent that they depart from the otherwise applicable sign regulations.
6. Application Procedure: Persons seeking to establish a PUD with special sign regulations pursuant to this section shall submit the proposed
regulations, including a sign plan and criteria, to the planning department. To the extent that the proposed PUD sign regulations depart from the
existing sign ordinance regulations otherwise applicable to the project site, the supporting documentation must specifically list and identify any
change or modification to the existing sign ordinance, and make all of the required findings per subsection 9-10-4F of this chapter for the proposed
modifications to the sign regulations. This shall be considered an amendment to this title and zoning map and review and approval shall follow
normal PUD procedures pursuant to this title. Following adoption of the planned unit development rezoning by the city council, the regulations of the
district shall apply uniformly to all properties located within the boundaries of the district.
7. Changes To Approved PUD Sign Standards: A PUD which has been properly established may be amended or modified only upon submission and
approval of an amendment application pursuant to this title. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
9-10-11: VARIANCES:
A. Variance Authorized: The city council may grant variances from the regulations contained in this chapter:
1. To permit a setback for a sign that is up to twenty five percent (25%) less than the required setback, and
2. To permit the area or height of a sign to be increased by up to twenty five percent (25%) more than the maximum height or area allowed.
B. Approval Standards: The city council may grant a variance authorized by this section if it finds the variance requested is required by special or unique
hardship because of:
1. Exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of the premises on which a sign is located; or
2. Exceptional topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting the premises on which a sign is located.
A showing that the display of a sign would be more profitable or the sign would be more valuable is not a special or unique hardship as required by
this section.
C. Additional Requirements: The city council shall grant a variance only if it also finds that the variance is consistent with the master plan and there are no
other reasonable alternatives for displaying a sign permitted by this chapter if the variance is not granted. The city council shall not grant a variance
solely because the display of a sign would be more profitable if the variance were granted. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
9-10-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. As used in this section, a "lawful nonconforming sign" is any sign which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter but which was in
compliance with the requirements of the sign ordinance in effect immediately prior to the adoption of this chapter or was characterized as a lawful
nonconforming sign under such previous ordinance. As used in this section, an "unlawful nonconforming sign" is any sign which does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter and which was not in compliance with the requirements of the sign ordinance in effect immediately prior to the
adoption of this chapter or was not characterized as a lawful nonconforming sign under such previous ordinance.
B. A lawful nonconforming sign may be maintained and repaired, even though such repair will not bring the sign into compliance with this chapter. If a
lawful nonconforming sign is damaged or allowed to deteriorate in an amount in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its then replacement cost, the sign
shall not be repaired except as to bring the sign in compliance with this chapter. Repair or restoration of a lawful nonconforming sign requires the
obtaining of a sign permit and the payment of the requisite fee therefor; the permit shall not be denied nor shall special procedural requirements
(including city council review) be invoked merely because of the nonconforming status of the sign. The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed to
restrict the changing of copy on lawful nonconforming signs.
C. Signs not lawfully existing upon the date the ordinance adopting this chapter becomes effective are not thus rendered lawful by the adoption of the
provisions of this chapter and the corresponding repeal of previous provisions, unless by the express provision of this chapter such previously
nonconforming sign is permitted under this chapter.
D. The copy of a nonconforming sign may be altered or restored or the sign face of a nonconforming sign may be replaced after obtaining a sign permit.
Any such changes shall not include reconstruction or relocation of any part of the sign or modification of the sign's architecture, unless the sign is
brought into complete compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A conversion of the sign face to an electronic reader sign may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit, subject to the following standards:
1. Location: Reader sign conversions shall only be permitted on nonconforming billboards within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the I-15 travelway.
Electronic reader boards must not be permitted if the proposed sign location is within five hundred feet (500') measured in any direction from a
residential zoning district.
2. Size: Reader sign conversions shall only be permitted on billboards that do not exceed six hundred seventy two (672) square feet in size.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 531/565
3. Automatic Dimming: Such signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct
correlation with ambient light conditions.
4. Brightness: No electronic reader sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot-candle above ambient light as measured using a foot-candle (lux)
meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: The square root of the
product of the sign area and one hundred (100).
Example using a six hundred seventy two (672) square foot sign:
Measurement distance = ..(672 sq. ft. x 100) = 259 feet
5. Findings: Finding by the city council that:
a. The conditional use application is not in violation of or in conflict with any NDOT or federal highway regulations.
b. The proposed conditional use will not be detrimental to the safety and welfare, and will not materially damage, or negatively impact other property
in the vicinity.
c. The proposed conditional use is compatible with existing uses or uses permitted by right in the zoning district.
All signs in the downtown central business district or Mesquite technology and commerce center (MTCC) must be reviewed by the architectural
review committee, prior to issuance of a sign permit.
E. A lawful nonconforming sign may be redesigned and remodeled without losing its lawful status so long as the original supports and superstructure of the
sign are maintained and the square footage of the sign is not increased by the design change. Any redesign of an existing lawful nonconforming sign
must be approved by the building department.
F. The reconstruction of a lawfully constructed nonconforming structure, including a billboard or off premises sign, is permitted if a governmental entity or
public utility required the structure to be relocated from its previously approved location due to the construction of a public improvement and then only if
the reconstruction occurs on the same parcel and the applicant applies for permits within ninety (90) days of receiving notice of completion of the
improvements from the city. Any such relocated billboard sign or outdoor advertising structure must comply with the requirements listed in subsections
G3 and G4 of this section.
G. Except under conditions defined in subsection F of this section, a billboard or outdoor advertising structure that is destroyed or damaged to more than
fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost by an act of God, war, natural catastrophe or criminal act such as terrorism, may be reconstructed or
repaired on the same parcel if it meets the following standards:
1. The structure is in the form of a pylon sign rather than a pole sign, meaning that the supports for the sign are concealed within the architectural
features.
2. The structure supports only one sign of no more than fifteen feet (15') high and twenty five feet (25') wide, rectangular in shape with no tags,
extensions, moving or rotating parts, neon or other lights as part of the display, excessive or internal illumination, or flashing lights.
3. The bottom edge of the sign face is placed no more than ten feet (10') above the crown of the adjacent roadway or interstate highway, and the height
of the sign is no more than forty feet (40') above grade (ground level at the base of the sign's structure to the top of the sign face). If the bottom edge
of the sign face must be placed less than fourteen feet (14') above grade to meet these standards, additional landscaping or public safety features
may be required by the city council.
4. If the sign has two (2) faces, they must be parallel to each other, and the sign face(s) must be perpendicular to the flow of traffic on the adjacent
roadway or interstate highway.
5. The location of the sign is at least five hundred feet (500') from any existing residence or residential housing district, except for an on site manager's
residence in a nonresidential development.
6. The sign structure, including supports and sign faces or copy areas, must remain at least ten feet (10') from any other structure, building or property
boundary. (Ord. 460, 8-14-2012)
9-10-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months,
for any person, user, installer or owner to:
A. Install, erect or change a sign for which a permit is required without first obtaining a sign permit or for any violation of any other provisions of this
chapter or for any person, user, installer or owner to install or use a prohibited sign;
B. Install or use a prohibited sign; or
C. Violate any provision of this chapter or to fail to conform to approved plans. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
Chapter 11
NONCONFORMITIES
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 532/565
9-11-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Within the districts established by these regulations or amendments that may later be adopted there may exist lots, structures, uses of land and
structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before these regulations were passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of these regulations or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they
are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
B. Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be compatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure and
land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of these regulations by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs
intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
C. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations and upon which construction is
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation, demolition or
removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be deemed to be
actual construction; provided, that work shall be carried on diligently. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-2: LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot
of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This
provision shall apply even though such lots fail to meet the requirements for area, width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that
yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the city council. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-3: USES OF LAND OR LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY:
Where at the time of passage of these regulations lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by these regulations,
and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
A. Greater Area Occupancy: Such nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations;
B. Moving: Such nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations;
C. Cessation: If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by these regulations for the district in which such land is located;
D. Additional Structures: No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of these regulations shall be erected in connection with such
nonconforming use of land. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-4: STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations that could not be built under the terms of these
regulations by reason of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. Increase In Nonconformity: Such nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure
or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity;
B. Destruction: Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations;
C. Moving: Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which
it is located after it is moved. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-5: USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION:
If lawful use involving incidental structures with a replacement cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or of structure and premises in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of these
regulations, the unallowed use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 533/565
A. Alteration: No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by these regulations in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
B. Extensions: Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, but such use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
C. Changes: If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be
changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that the city council, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, finds that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the city council
may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of these regulations;
D. Cessation: Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is removed, or ceases, or is superseded by a
permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
E. Discontinuance; Abandonment: When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for
six (6) consecutive months (except when government action impeded access to the premises), the structure or structure and premises in combination
shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
F. Removal Or Destruction: Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. "Destruction", for the purpose of this subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of more than
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-6: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Ordinary Repairs: On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve
(12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding
ten percent (10%) of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be;
provided, that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.
B. Unsafe Or Unlawful: If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to
lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical conditions, it shall not
thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Strengthening Or Restoring: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-7: USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING:
Any use which is permitted as a special exception or conditional use in a district under the terms of these regulations (other than through city council action
from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without
further action be considered a conforming use. (Ord. 172, 9-24-1996, eff. 10-31-1996)
9-11-8: ADVERTISING DISPLAYS, SIGNS AND STRUCTURES:
Nonconforming advertising displays, signs or structures are governed by section 9-10-12 of this title. (Ord. 412, 10-28-2008, eff. 11-27-2008)
Chapter 12
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
9-12-1: SHORT TITLE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION:
A. Short Title: This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE.
B. Authority: The city council has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to the Nevada constitution and Nevada Revised Statutes, including, but not
limited to, chapters 277, 278 and 278B.
C. Application: This chapter shall apply to all lands within the boundaries of the city, as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 534/565
A. Intent: This chapter is intended to implement and be consistent with the transportation impact fee capital improvements plan (hereinafter "TCIP") and
the master plan of the city.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive, citywide system for the imposition of transportation impact fees to assure new
development contributes its proportionate share to the cost of road capital improvements identified as needed to be built in the TCIP. (Ord. 208, 5-26-
1998)
9-12-3: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. Definitions: Certain words or phrases unique to this chapter shall be construed as herein set out unless it is apparent from the context that they have a
different meaning:
ARTERIAL STREET: A road so designated in the TCIP which accommodates large volumes of through traffic. This traffic is comprised of local and
visitor trips. An arterial street is designed mainly for the movement of through traffic but also performs a secondary function of providing access to
abutting properties. Access, parking and loading on arterial streets may be restricted or prohibited to improve the capacity for moving traffic.
Signalization may occur at the intersection of some arterial streets and collector streets.
AVERAGE TRIP LENGTH: The average length of a vehicle trip, in miles, on the major road network.
BUILDING PERMIT: That development permit issued by the city department before any building or construction activity can be initiated on a parcel of
land. "Building permit" does not include any permits for demolition, grading or the construction of a foundation.
CAPACITY: The maximum number of vehicles which have a reasonable expectation of passing through a given section of a street in one direction, or
in both directions of a road, during a given time period, under prevailing traffic conditions, expressed in terms of vehicles per hour. Capacity is
measured in this chapter at the P.M. peak hour.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The committee which is authorized by resolution, and pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
sections 278B.150 and 277.080 et seq., to undertake the following duties: to determine conformance of the land use assumptions, upon which the
TCIP and this chapter are based, with the city master plan; to review the TCIP; file annual reports concerning the progress of the city in carrying out the
TCIP; report to the city council perceived inequities in the implementation of the TCIP, and the imposition of the transportation impact fee; and advise
the city council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, TCIP and this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: The document issued by the city authorizing the owner to formally occupy a building or portion of a building for which
building permits have been issued.
CITY: The city of Mesquite, unless the term is used herein in conjunction with the term city council, in which case the term "city" is defined as the city
manager, his designee, or any other city department or employee performing administrative functions pursuant to this chapter.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street so designated in the TCIP which functions as a connection between arterial streets as well as providing access to
abutting properties.
COMMENCEMENT OF LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Occurs upon the issuance of a building permit.
EXISTING LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: The most intense use of land within the twelve (12) months prior to the time of commencing land
development activity.
EXPANSION OF THE CAPACITY OF A STREET: Includes any widening, intersection improvement, signalization or other capital improvement
designed to increase the existing street's capacity to carry vehicles.
EXTERNAL TRIP: Any trip which either has its origins from or its destination to the development site, and which impacts the major road network.
FEE PAYER: A person commencing traffic generating land development activity who is obligated to pay an impact fee in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
GENERATION OF TRAFFIC: Includes both the production and attraction of traffic.
INTERNAL TRIP: A trip which has both its origin and destination within the land development site, does not leave the development site, and does not
impact the major road network.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS): A qualitative measure describing operational conditions, from A (best) to F (worst), within a traffic stream or at
intersections, which is quantified for street segments by determination of a volume to capacity ratio (V/C), which is a measurement of the amount of
capacity of a street which is being utilized by traffic, and which is quantified for signalized and unsignalized intersections in terms of vehicle delay. The
V/C for LOS "A" through "F" for street segments are:
Level Of Service Maximum V/C Ratio Hourly Vehicles/
Lane Mile
Major Arterial Collector
LOS A 0.60 435 360
LOS B 0.70 507 420
LOS C 0.80 580 480
LOS D 0.90 653 540
LOS E 1.00 725 600
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 535/565
LOS F >100%
Intersection level of service shall be measured in terms of vehicle delay as follows:
Level Of Service Delay (Seconds)
Signalized Unsignalized
LOS A 5.0 5.0
LOS B 5.1 - 15.0 5.1 - 10
LOS C 15.1 - 25.0 10.1 - 20
LOS D 25.1 - 40.0 20.1 - 30
LOS E 40.1 - 60.0 30.1 - 45
LOS F >60.1 >45.1
MAJOR ROAD NETWORK: All arterial streets and collector streets that traverse the boundaries of the city, including proposed arterial streets and collector
streets necessitated by projected future traffic generating land development activity as identified in the TCIP. Only streets indicated on the arterial and
collector street map adopted by the city council shall be considered a part of the major road network. The major road network is designated in exhibit A,
which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
NONSITE RELATED IMPROVEMENTS: Capital improvements and right of way dedications for street improvements to the arterial streets and collector
streets identified in the TCIP that are not site related improvements.
PERCENT PRIMARY TRIPS: The percentage of average daily trips that a proposed use will generate that constitutes new or additional trips added to the
major road network. Those trips that do not represent additional trip ends shall not be counted as new or additional trips. Pass by trips and diverted trips
do not constitute new trips.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, governmental agency or body, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having
a joint or common interest, or any other entity.
ROADS: Arterials and collectors which traverse the city.
SERVICE AREA: The incorporated city limits.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge which is attributable to an individual unit of development calculated
for a particular category or capital improvements or facility expansions. The service unit used in this chapter and the TCIP is vehicle miles of travel (VMT)
during the P.M. peak hour of an average weekday.
SITE RELATED IMPROVEMENTS: Those street capital improvements and right of way dedications that provide direct access to the development. Direct
access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 1) driveways and streets leading to and from the development; 2) right and left turn
lanes leading to those driveways and streets; 3) traffic control measures for those driveways; and 4) internal streets.
TRAFFIC GENERATING LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Land development designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain or
convert to more dwelling units or floor space than the then existing use of the land in a manner that increases the generation of vehicular traffic.
TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: Includes the transportation planning of, preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land
surveys, alignment studies, right-of-way acquisition, engineering, permitting, and construction of all necessary features for any street construction project
on any arterial or collector street in the TCIP, undertaken to accommodate additional traffic resulting from new traffic generating land development,
including, but not limited to: 1) construction of new through lanes; 2) construction of new bridges; 3) construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction
with new street construction; 4) purchase and installation of traffic signals, including new and upgraded signalization; 5) construction of curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, medians and shoulders; 6) relocating utilities to accommodate new street construction; 7) the construction and reconstruction of intersections;
8) the widening of existing streets; 9) bus turnouts; 10) acceleration and deceleration lanes; 11) interchanges; and 12) traffic control devices.
TRIP: A one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (1 trip end) to a destination (the other trip end).
TRIP, DIVERTED: A trip that is already on a particular route for a different purpose that simply diverts travel to a particular land use.
TRIP GENERATION: The attraction or production of trips caused by a certain type of land development.
TRIP, PASS BY: A trip that is already on a particular route for a different purpose that simply stops at another particular land use. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998;
amd. Ord. 554, 11-13-2018, eff. 12-4-2018)
B. Rules Of Construction: In the construction of this chapter, the rules set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction is inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the City. The rules of construction set out here shall not be applied to any section of this chapter which contains any express
provisions excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or content of such section would be inconsistent with this section.
1. Generally: All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this chapter shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the City may be fully carried out. Terms used in this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed
by the Statutes of this State for the same terms.
2. Text: In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any figure, the text shall control.
3. Gender: Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter.
4. Month: The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 536/565
5. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
6. Number: A word importing the singular number only, may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing.
7. Shall, May: The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
8. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present.
9. Written Or In Writing: The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letter or figures whether by printing
or otherwise. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-4: LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARD:
The City Council has determined that arterial and collector roads within the City shall operate at a level of service C. Arterial and collector roads shall be
identified by the arterial and collector road map adopted by the City Council. These arterial and collector roads shall be referred to as the major road
network, a copy of which is indicated in section 9-12-11, exhibit A of this chapter. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-5: FEE TO BE IMPOSED ON TRAFFIC GENERATING LAND DEVELOPMENT:
A. Fee Obligation, Determination; Payment Of Fees:
1. Upon enactment of this chapter, any person or government body who commences any traffic generating land development activity shall be obligated
to pay a transportation impact fee, pursuant to the terms of this chapter. If any credits are due pursuant to section 9-12-7, "Credits", of this chapter,
they shall also be determined at that time. The fee shall be determined at the time of issuance of a building permit for the development and paid prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The fee shall be computed separately for the amount of development covered by the permit, if the
building permit is for less than the entire development. If the fee is imposed for a traffic generating land development activity that increases traffic
impact because of a change in use, the fee shall be determined by computing the difference in the fee schedule between the new traffic generating
land development activity and the existing traffic generating land development activity. The obligation to pay the impact fee shall run with the land.
2. Any person who, prior to the effective date of this chapter, agreed as a condition of development approval to pay transportation impact fees, shall be
responsible for the payment of the fees under the terms of any such agreement, and the payment of such fees by the developer will be offset against
any impact fees due pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
B. Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter. An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer at the time of application for
a building permit:
1. All development exempted by Nevada Revised Statutes section 278B.010 et seq.
2. Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed, and where no additional
vehicular trips will be produced over and above that produced by the existing use.
3. The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not produce additional vehicular trips over and above that produced by the principal
building or use of the land.
4. The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use; provided, that
no additional trips will be produced over and above that produced by the original use of the land.
C. Establishment Of Fee Schedule:
1. Any person who initiates any new traffic generating land development activity, except those persons preparing an independent fee calculation study
pursuant to section 9-12-6, "Independent Fee Calculation Study", of this chapter, shall pay an impact fee in accordance with the fee schedule set
forth herein, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. An expanded list of specific land uses, to be used in conjunction with the impact fee
schedule, is provided in section 9-12-11, exhibit B of this chapter.
2. If a building permit is requested for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined according to the fee schedule by apportioning the space committed
to uses specified on the fee schedule.
3. If the type of traffic generating land development activity for which a building permit is requested is not specified on the fee schedule or in the
expanded land uses provided in section 9-12-11, exhibit B of this chapter, the City shall determine the fee on the basis of the fee applicable to the
most nearly comparable type of land use on the fee schedule. The City shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type of land use by:
a. Using trip generation rates contained in the most current edition of the report titled "Trip Generation: An Informational Report" prepared by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), articles or reports appearing in the ITE Journal, or studies or reports done by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, Nevada Department of Transportation, or the Regional Transportation Commission of Clark County, and applying the formula set
forth in subsection 9-12-6B of this chapter; or
b. Computing the fee by use of an independent fee calculation study as provided in section 9-12-6, "Independent Fee Calculation Study", of this
chapter. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998; amd. Ord. 289, 7-17-2003)
TABLE 7
IMPACT FEE COST PER UNIT
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 537/565
Residential:
Assisted living/nursing home 1,000 sq. ft. 254 0.68 $ 133.71
Condo/townhome Dwelling units 270 0.51 101.54
Mobile home Dwelling units 240 0.59 116.80
Multifamily housing (mid-rise) Dwelling units 221 0.67 132.03
Senior adult housing (detached) Dwelling units 251 0.30 59.40
Single family detached Dwelling units 210 1 198.00
Office:
General office building 1,000 sq. ft. 710 0.62 123.57
Medical office building 1,000 sq. ft. 720 1.86 368.96
Retail:
Shopping center 1,000 sq. ft. 820 0.59 116.80
Specialty retail 1,000 sq. ft. 890 0.79 155.70
Services:
Automobile care center 1,000 sq. ft. 942 1.86 368.96
Car wash Wash bays 947 2.37 469.70
Casino gaming area 1,000 sq. ft. 473 5.62 1,111.93
Convenience market 1,000 sq. ft. 851 2.41 477.27
Convenience market with gas pumps Pump stations 945 0.53 104.95
Drive-in bank 1,000 sq. ft. 912 5.14 1,017.16
Fast food 1,000 sq. ft. 934 4.34 859.73
Quality restaurant 1,000 sq. ft. 931 1.99 394.36
Tire store 1,000 sq. ft. 848 1.62 321.57
Industrial:
General light industrial 1,000 sq. ft. 110 0.96 189.55
Industrial park 1,000 sq. ft. 130 0.76 150.65
Manufacturing 1,000 sq. ft. 140 0.71 140.48
Mini-warehouse 1,000 sq. ft. 151 0.27 52.47
Warehousing 1,000 sq. ft. 150 0.58 115.08
Institutional:
Church 1,000 sq. ft. 560 1.32 262.33
Day care 1,000 sq. ft. 565 3.28 649.88
Hospital 1,000 sq. ft. 610 1.51 299.58
Library 1,000 sq. ft. 590 0.00 0.00
Private school (K - 8) Students 534 0.94 186.18
Private school (K - 12) Students 536 0.47 93.09
Schools:
Elementary school Students 520 0.47 93.09
Middle/junior school Students 522 0.47 93.09
High school Students 530 0.47 93.09
Recreation:
Arena 1,000 sq. ft. 460 0.25 49.11
Athletic club 1,000 sq. ft. 493 2.73 539.88
Land Use Unit
Applicable
ITE Code(s)
Demand Index
(Single Family
Equivalent)
Impact Fee
Cost Per Unit
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 538/565
Golf course Hole 430 1.66 328.34
Soccer complex Field 488 9.10 1,802.43
Tennis courts Court 490 1.62 321.57
Lodging:
Hotel Occupied rooms 310 0.31 60.93
Motel Occupied rooms 320 0.29 57.56
Resort hotel Occupied rooms 330 0.25 49.11
(Ord. 554, 11-13-2018, eff. 12-4-2018)
D. Predevelopment Review Impact Fee Calculation: Any person contemplating establishing a traffic generating land development activity may request a
preliminary determination of the impact fees due from such development. A person requesting a predevelopment review impact fee calculation shall
complete and submit to the City a proper application form and the applicable application fee. Using the information regarding the proposed traffic
generating land development activity as submitted on the application, the City will provide, within fifteen (15) days of the date of submittal of the
completed application and payment of the applicable fee, a preliminary calculation of the transportation impact fees due for the proposed traffic
generating land development activity. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998; amd. Ord. 289, 7-17-2003)
9-12-6: INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATION STUDY:
A. General:
1. The impact fee may be computed by the use of an independent fee calculation study at the election of the fee payer or upon the request of the City.
2. The preparation of the independent fee calculation study shall be the responsibility of the electing party.
3. Any person who requests to perform an independent fee calculation study shall pay an application fee for administrative costs associated with the
review and decision on such independent fee calculation study.
B. Formula:
1. The independent fee calculation study for the regional road impact fee shall be calculated by the use of the following formula:
Impact fee/Unit = Land use units x Demand index x NC ($198/unit)
Where:
Demand index = ITE trip rate for the land use x primary trip adjustment
2. The fee calculation shall be based on data, information, or assumptions contained in this chapter or independent sources; provided, that:
a. The independent source is an accepted standard source of transportation engineering or planning data or information; or
b. The independent source is a local study on trip characteristics carried out under the direction of a registered engineer in the State pursuant to an
accepted methodology of transportation planning or engineering; or
c. The percent primary trips factor used in the independent fee calculation study is based on actual surveys prepared by the City.
C. Procedure:
1. The City shall determine the sufficiency and completeness of an application for an independent fee calculation study.
2. After receipt of a sufficient and complete application for an independent fee calculation study, the City shall, pursuant to the standards in subsection
D of this section, determine the amount of the impact fee to be paid.
D. Standards: If on the basis of generally recognized principles of impact analysis it is determined the data, information and assumptions used by the fee
payer to calculate the independent fee calculation study satisfies the requirements of this section, the fee determined in the independent fee calculation
study shall be deemed the fee assessed for the proposed traffic generating land development activity. If the independent fee calculation study fails to
satisfy the requirements of this section, the fee applied shall be that fee established for the traffic generating land development activity in subsection 9-
12-5C of this chapter.
E. Appeal Of Independent Fee Calculation Study Decision:
1. A fee payer affected by the administrative decision of the City on an independent fee calculation study may appeal such decision to the City Council,
by filing a written notice of appeal with the City within ten (10) days of the date of the written decision, and a written statement specifying the basis of
the appeal. The City shall place any properly noticed appeal on the agenda of the next regular City Council meeting after the date the appeal is filed
with the City, so long as that does not violate the notice requirements of Nevada Open Meeting Law or any other notice statute or rule, in which case
the appeal will be agendized so as not to violate any notice requirements of statute or rule.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 539/565
2. At the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the City. In making its decision, the City
Council shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and apply the standards in subsection D of this section. If the City Council modifies
or reverses the decision of the City, it shall direct the City to recalculate the fee in accordance with its findings. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998; amd. Ord. 237,
5-9-2000, eff. 6-16-2000; Ord. 289, 7-17-2003; Ord. 340, 5-23-2006, eff. 6-15-2006; Ord. 427, 5-26-2009, eff. 6-18-2009; Ord. 478, 12-10-2013, eff.
12-31-2013; Ord. 554, 11-13-2018, eff. 12-4-2018)
9-12-7: CREDITS:
A. General Standards:
1. Any person initiating traffic generating land development activity may apply for credit against transportation impact fees otherwise due, up to but not
exceeding the full obligation for impact fees proposed to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, for any contributions, construction, or
dedication of land accepted or received by the City for nonsite related road capital improvements that are identified on the TCIP.
2. Credits for contributions, construction or dedication of land for nonsite related capital improvements included on the TCIP shall be transferable within
the same development, but shall not be paid for other public facilities. The credit shall not exceed the amount of the impact fees due and payable for
the proposed traffic generating land development activity, unless specifically provided in a capital contribution front ending agreement.
3. The City may enter into a capital contribution front ending agreement with any person initiating traffic generating land development activity who
proposes to construct nonsite related road capital improvements that are identified in the TCIP. To the extent that the fair market value of the
construction of these road capital improvements exceeds the obligation to pay impact fees for which a credit is provided pursuant to this section, the
capital contribution front ending agreement shall provide for credits that can be applied against impact fees that would otherwise be due on other
projects, subject to such limitations as may be spelled out in the agreement.
B. Credit Against Fees: Credit shall be in an amount equal to fair market value of the land dedicated for right-of-way at the time of dedication, the fair
market value of the construction at the time of its completion, or the value of the contribution or payment at the time it is made to the City. Transferable
credits created pursuant to a capital contribution front ending agreement shall be expressed in terms of service units.
C. Procedure For Credit Review:
1. The determination of credit shall be by application submitted to the City Administrator.
2. If the proposed application involves a credit for any contribution, the following documentation must be provided:
a. A certified copy of the development approval in which the contribution was agreed;
b. If payment has been made, proof of payment; or
c. If payment has not been made, the proposed method of payment.
3. After receipt of a sufficient and complete application for credit, the City shall, pursuant to the standards in subsection A of this section, determine if
any credit is due, and its amount.
D. Appeal Of Credit Decision: A fee payer affected by the decision of the City regarding credits may appeal such decision to the City Council in the same
manner and subject to the same appeal procedures and requirements as provided in subsection 9-12-6E1 of this chapter. At the conclusion of the
appeal hearing, the City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the City based on the standards in subsection A of this section. If the City
Council modifies or reverses the decision of the City, it shall direct the City to readjust the credit in accordance with its findings. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-8: SERVICE AREA:
The area encompassed within the boundaries of the City is hereby designated as the service area for the imposition of transportation impact fees and the
collection and expenditure of funds under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-9: USE OF FUNDS:
A. Establishment Of Fund: There is hereby established the transportation impact fee fund (hereinafter "fund") for the purpose of ensuring that fee payers
receive sufficient benefit for transportation impact fees paid.
B. Deposit In Fund/General Requirements For Fund:
1. All transportation impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be immediately deposited in the fund.
2. Any proceeds in the fund not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested in an interest bearing account. All income derived from these
investments shall be retained in the fund until transferred for expenditure. Records of the fund accounts shall be available for public inspection in the
city clerk's office, during normal business hours.
C. Limitations On Expenditures: The expenditure of funds shall be recommended by the capital improvements advisory committee on an annual basis and
shall be approved by the city council. The expenditure of impact fee funds shall be limited to those capital improvement projects included in the TCIP.
For the purpose of determining whether impact fee funds have been spent or encumbered, the first fees collected shall be considered the first monies
spent or encumbered. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-10: REFUND OF FEES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 540/565
A. Failure To Expend Fees Within Appropriate Time: Upon application to the city by an owner of record of land for which an impact fee has been collected
pursuant to this chapter, the city shall refund the applicable fee paid, and any interest and income earned on the fee by the city, if:
1. The city did not begin construction of the capital improvement or facility expansion within five (5) years of collecting the fee; or
2. The city did not spend the fee, or any portion thereof, for the purpose for which it was collected within ten (10) years after the date it was collected.
B. Completion Of Capital Improvements:
1. The city shall, upon the completion of the capital improvement or facility expansion identified in the TCIP, or upon expenditure of fees collected from
a development, recalculate the impact fee for that development by using the actual costs of the capital improvement or facility expansion or the
actual costs of those capital improvements or facility expansions completed and engineering estimates of those capital improvements or facility
expansions to be completed within the service area.
2. If the impact fee based on the cost or recalculated cost is less than the impact fee paid, the local government shall refund the difference, and any
interest and income earned by the city, if the actual costs are known, or, if estimates are used, the difference, and any interest and income earned by
the city, if it exceeds the imposed impact fee by more than ten percent (10%).
C. Procedure For Refund Of Fees: A written impact fee refund application must be submitted to the city within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
completion of the project. Upon receipt of a written refund application, the city will review the refund application and issue a written decision concerning
the application in accordance with the provisions of this section and this chapter.
D. Appeal Of Refund Decision: A fee payer affected by the administrative decision regarding refunds may appeal such decision to the city council in the
same manner and subject to the same procedures and requirements as provided in subsection 9-12-6E1 of this chapter. At the conclusion of the
appeal hearing, the city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city based on the standards in this section. If the city council modifies
or reverses the decision of the city, it shall direct the city to readjust the refund in accordance with its findings. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
9-12-11: REVIEW EVERY THREE YEARS:
The TCIP and this chapter shall be reviewed and evaluated at least every three (3) years, to determine if any modifications need to be made to the TCIP
and/or this chapter. This review shall be conducted by the city and the capital improvements advisory committee and submitted to the city council. Before
any modifications of the TCIP or this chapter are final, they shall be approved by the city council. The city council may, at its discretion, direct the city and
capital improvements advisory committee to review or consider modifications to the TCIP and this chapter at any time. (Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
Exhibit A
REGIONAL ROAD IMPACT FEE SERVICE AREA
Exhibit B
EXPANDED LIST OF LAND USES BY LAND USE CATEGORY
RESIDENTIAL
Single-family detached
Mobile home on individual lot
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 541/565
Mobile home subdivision
One or two (2) detached dwelling units on individual lot
Multi-family
Two (2) or more attached dwelling units, including:
Boarding house
Condominium
Duplex
Townhouse
Mobile home
Mobile home park
Hotel/motel
Casino hotel
Hotel
Motel
OFFICE
General Office
General offices and office buildings including:
Accounting offices
Architect
Financial offices
Government offices
Insurance office
Laboratories
Law offices
Public utility office
Real estate
Recording studio
Medical office
Dentist office
Medical clinic
Urgent care
Veterinary clinic
COMMERCIAL
General Commercial
Shopping centers and freestanding commercial buildings, including:
Adult entertainment
Amusement park
Auto, truck, mobile home and/or RV sale/rental
Bakery
Bar/cocktail lounge
Barbershop
Beauty salon
Bowling alley
Car wash (coin operated)
Car wash (operator)
Clothing store
Drive-in theater
Drug/variety store
Dry cleaning
Electronics sales and service
Fitness center
Freestanding automated teller machine
Furniture store
Grocery store
Heavy equipment sales/service
Ice cream parlor
Jeweler
Kennel
Laundromat (coin operated)
Massage, tattoo, body painting, etc.
Office supplies
Parking structure
Pawnshop
Pet grooming
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 542/565
Pet store
Plant nursery
Pool/billiard parlor
Record store
Restaurant (sit down)
Savings and loan
Service station
Shoe repair
Shopping center
Skating rink
Tailor
Taxidermy
Video arcade
Video rental
Walk-in bank
Walk-in theater
Drive-in bank
Bank with drive-through window
Convenience store
Convenience store with or without pumps
Service station with convenience market
Fast food restaurant
Restaurant (fast food and/or drive-through)
INDUSTRIAL
General industry (light)
Abattoir and packing plant
Auto body
Auto painting
Auto repair
Equipment rental
Heavy equipment repair/service
Industrial laundry
Material testing labs
Power stations
Publishing or publishing and printing
Tire repair and sales
Truck terminal
Manufacturing
Chemical processing/manufacturing
Dairy products
Furniture manufacturer
Lumber mill
Textile mill
Warehousing
Distribution warehouse
Outdoor storage
Storage warehouse
Wrecking/salvage yard
Miniwarehouse
Ministorage warehouse development
INSTITUTIONAL
Daycare center
Childcare center
Daycare center
Kindergarten
Hospital/clinic
Hospital
Mental institution
Psychiatric hospital
Nursing home
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 543/565
Convalescent center
Nursing home
Church
Church
Synagogue
RECREATIONAL
Golf course
Golf course
Park
Public park
Public swimming pool
(Ord. 208, 5-26-1998)
Chapter 13
ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF LAND COMPRISING
THE 1996 MESQUITE LAND ACT AND THE 1999 MESQUITE LAND ACT
9-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
In order to comply with applicable provisions of the United States endangered species act of 1973, as amended, as enforced by the United States fish and
wildlife service (the "FWS"), the city hereby adopts certain standards and conditions concerning development of lands within the 1996 mesquite land act
and the 1999 mesquite land act as such development might affect certain federally listed species in and around the Virgin River. Specifically, the FWS is
concerned the development of the subject property may jeopardize the continued existence of the Virgin River chub (Gila seminuda) and the woundfin
minnow (Plagopterus argentissimus), both of which are federally listed as endangered species, or result in adverse modification of their designated critical
habitats and that such development may adversely affect the endangered southwestern willow flycatcher (Empidonax trailli extimus), the endangered
Yuma clapper rail (Rallus longirostris yumanesis), and the yellow billed cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus) a candidate for listing under the ESA, collectively
referred to as "the Virgin river species". (Ord. 270, 7-29-2002)
9-13-2: ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED:
The developer of any land within the 1996 mesquite land act and the 1999 mesquite land act ("the subject property"), is required to enter into an
environmental development plan ("EDP") with the city to ensure adverse affects of construction and occupancy on the Virgin River species have been
considered and resolved prior to construction proceeding on such land. Any such environmental development plan will address the following concerns:
A. Any taking of the Virgin River species in and around the Virgin River will only be incidental to otherwise lawful activities and subject to a lawful permit
issued by the FWS;
B. The developer of any land within the subject property will, to the maximum extent possible, minimize and mitigate the impacts of any construction and
development upon the Virgin River species in and around the Virgin River;
C. The developer of any land within the subject property and other persons holding a valid permit from the FWS will ensure that any incidental taking of
any of the Virgin River species in and around the Virgin River will not appreciably reduce the likelihood of the survival and recovery of the Virgin River
species in the wild; and
D. The developer of any land within the subject property will comply with all applicable requirements of the Clark County multiple species habitat
conservation plan ("CCMSHCP") or, alternatively, with all applicable requirements of a habitat conservation plan ("HCP"), in cooperation with and
approved by the FWS as being necessary for the purposes of protection of the Virgin River species. (Ord. 270, 7-29-2002)
9-13-3: AMENDMENT OF CURRENT HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN OR, ALTERNATIVELY, ADOPTION OF NEW HABITAT
CONSERVATION PLAN FOR THE SUBJECT PROPERTY:
Within ninety (90) days of the city obtaining title to the subject property, the city will pursue an amendment of the current CCMSHCP to add the Virgin River
species or, alternatively, if an amendment of the CCMSHCP is denied as to the Virgin River species, the city will assist the FWS under the ESA to protect
the Virgin River species in the pursuit of a HCP for the subject property under issuance criteria outlined in section 10 of the ESA to cover the Virgin River
species. (Ord. 270, 7-29-2002)
9-13-4: REQUIREMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH CODES, COVENANTS AND RESTRICTIONS IN THE SUBJECT PROPERTY:
When developed and occupied, residents within the subject property are required to adhere to all applicable codes, covenants and restrictions imposed by
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 544/565
the developer and/or the city and the CCMSHCP (or HCP) to avoid, minimize and mitigate the adverse affects of development within the subject property
on the Virgin River species. (Ord. 270, 7-29-2002)
9-13-5: AGREEMENT BY CITY OF MESQUITE TO ASSIST FWS IN PROTECTING ENDANGERED SPECIES IN AND AROUND
THE VIRGIN RIVER SUBJECT TO AVAILABILITY OF FEDERAL OR OTHER FUNDING:
The city will carry out its legal responsibilities under section 10 of the endangered species act and will, accordingly, assist the FWS in the recovery of the
Virgin River species in and around the Virgin River, subject to the availability of adequate federal or other noncity funding to accomplish such assistance.
In furtherance of its pledge of assistance to FWS, the city agrees to:
A. Seek the designation for use of the sale proceeds set forth in the technical amendment to the mesquite lands act 2001 for recovery of the Virgin River
species set forth herein affecting the Virgin River within the state of Nevada through and adjacent to the corporate limits of the city as it now exists and
as it will exist in the future;
B. Seek proceeds of any applicable fees associated with development of the subject property payable under the CCMSHCP for the EDP; and
C. Pursue other available funds for accomplishing the purposes of this chapter including, but not limited to, funds available within the CCMSHCP process.
(Ord. 270, 7-29-2002)
9-13-6: CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ISSUANCE OF GRADING OR BUILDING PERMITS IN THE SUBJECT
PROPERTY; CITY PARTICIPATION IN HYDROLOGIC MONITORING AND MITIGATION PLAN:
City issued permits to grade or build a building within the subject property must include all relevant requirements of the CCMSHCP as to the Virgin River
species. The city will participate in a hydrologic monitoring and mitigation plan for the Lower Virgin River basin. (Ord. 270, 7-29-2002)
Chapter 14
REAL ESTATE APPRAISALS FOR SALE OR LEASE OF CITY PROPERTY
9-14-1: CREATING LIST OF QUALIFIED APPRAISERS:
Staff is directed to:
A. Obtain a current list of all Nevada certified general appraisers licensed or certified to appraise real estate in Clark County, and identify those on active
status.
B. Send a letter to all appraisers listed above requesting the appraisers:
1. Express their interest in providing appraisal services for the sale or lease of real property owned by the city of Mesquite according to their area(s) of
practice by sending a letter to the economic development director of the city of Mesquite;
2. Indicate what qualifying licenses they possess (certified general, certified residential, etc.);
3. Provide a listing of recent appraisals they have performed in and near the city of Mesquite; and
4. Indicate approximate time frames they would require for the completion of appraisals on various size parcels. (Ord. 355, 9-26-2006, eff. 10-19-2006)
C. Compile the list of appraisers responding to the letter and organize it at random. (Ord. 335, 2-28-2006)
9-14-2: AMENDING LIST:
A. Staff is directed to annually, or at other times deemed necessary: (Ord. 335, 2-28-2006)
1. Review the list to identify changes, additions or deletions of those Nevada certified general appraisers on active status. (Ord. 335, 2-28-2006; amd.
Ord. 355, 9-26-2006, eff. 10-19-2006)
2. Send a letter to all new appraisers listed above requesting they express their interest in providing appraisal services for the sale or lease of real
property owned by the cityaccording to their areas of practice.
3. Compile the list of appraisers responding to the letter and organize it at random.
B. A name may be removed from the list at any time upon written request by that appraiser, or upon information received from the real estate division that
they are no longer active. (Ord. 335, 2-28-2006)
9-14-3: ROTATING LIST:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 545/565
A. Select the first two (2) or more names from the random list of appraisers, based on their area of practice for a particular assignment. Request proposals
and disclosure statements as required by the revisions.
B. The city will select two (2) or more appraisers from those submitting proposals, based on the city's needs for a particular appraisal assignment.
C. Until such time as the list is amended, for each assignment, the names of those appraisers selected to submit proposals are then moved to the bottom
of the list. (Ord. 335, 2-28-2006)
Chapter 15
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
9-15-1: SHORT TITLE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION:
A. Short Title: This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT ORDINANCE.
B. Authority: The City Council has the authority to adopt this chapter pursuant to the Nevada Constitution and Nevada Revised Statutes, including, but not
limited to, Nevada Revised Statutes 278, 453A.350, and 453D.
C. Application: This chapter shall apply to all lands within the boundaries of the City, as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. Intent: The intent of this chapter is to establish the zoning, land use and development requirements applicable to medical and non-medical marijuana
uses, as authorized under chapter 453A and 453D of Nevada Revised Statutes.
B. Purpose: Pursuant to its general authority to regulate the cultivation, production, dispensing, distribution, testing and sale of medical and non-medical
marijuana, the City Council declares that the public health, safety and general welfare of the City are best promoted and protected by requiring the
zoning regulations and standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
A. Definitions: Certain words or phrases unique to this chapter shall be construed as herein set out unless it is apparent from the context that they have a
different meaning.
COMMUNITY FACILITY: Any of the following: a facility that provides daycare to children, a public park, a playground, a public swimming pool, a center
or facility which provides recreational opportunities or services to children or adolescents, a church, synagogue, or other building, structure or place
used for religious worship or other religious purposes.
CULTIVATION FACILITY: A business that acquires, possesses, cultivates, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, or sells marijuana or related
supplies to marijuana dispensaries, facilities for the production of edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products, or other cultivation facilities.
DEPARTMENT: Department means the Department of Taxation.
DIVISION: Division means the Division of Public and Behavioral Health of the Department of Health and Human Services.
EDIBLE MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Products that contain marijuana or an extract thereof, are intended for human consumption by oral ingestion, and
are presented in the form of foodstuffs, extracts, oils, tinctures and other similar products.
FACILITY FOR THE PRODUCTION OF EDIBLE MARIJUANA PRODUCTS OR MARIJUANA INFUSED PRODUCTS: A business that acquires,
possesses, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, or sells edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products to medical marijuana
dispensaries and marijuana retail stores.
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY: A private, independent testing laboratory wherein marijuana, edible marijuana products, and marijuana
infused products that are to be sold in the State of Nevada are tested to determine: 1) the concentration of THC and cannabidiol; 2) whether the tested
material is organic or nonorganic; 3) the presence and identification of molds and fungus; and 4) the presence and concentration of fertilizers and other
nutrients.
MARIJUANA: Marijuana has the meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030.
MARIJUANA DISTRIBUTOR: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D.030 and means an entity licensed to
transport marijuana from a retail establishment to another retail marijuana establishment.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: A "marijuana establishment" means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product
manufacturing facility, a marijuana distributor, a medical marijuana dispensary, or a retail marijuana store.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453D and means products that are infused with
marijuana or an extract thereof; and are intended for use or consumption by humans through means other than inhalation or oral ingestion. The term
includes, without limitation, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 546/565
MARIJUANA RETAIL STORE: A business that acquires, possesses, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, sells, or dispenses marijuana, or related
supplies.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA: Medical marijuana means the possession, delivery, production or use of marijuana pursuant to Nevada Revised Statutes
453A.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: A business that acquires, possesses, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, sells, or dispenses medical
marijuana, or related supplies and educational materials to the holder of a valid Nevada registry identification card, or his/her caregiver.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: A "medical marijuana establishment" means a medical marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing
facility, a medical marijuana product manufacturing facility, a marijuana distributor, or a medical marijuana dispensary.
PARAPHERNALIA1: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.125. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-4: MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Allowed Zones: Medical and non-medical marijuana establishments shall be allowed within the Industrial-Light (IR-1) and Industrial-Heavy (IR-2) Zones,
subject to compliance with the distance separation requirements contained herein and upon the approval of a conditional use permit.
B. Limit On Medical And Non-Medical Marijuana Dispensary Permits: There shall be allowed no more than one medical and non-medical marijuana
dispensary for each twenty five thousand (25,000) in population for the combined population of the City of Mesquite and the Town of Bunkerville, as
determined and reported by the State of Nevada Department of Taxation, pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 360.283, and as
certified by the Governor, pursuant to the provisions of Nevada Revised Statutes 360.285. If properly licensed and registered with the Nevada State
Department of Taxation for both medical and non-medical marijuana, one marijuana establishment may dispense and sell both products.
C. Permanent Building: The business shall be located in a permanent building, with an engineered foundation that meets City of Mesquite Building Code,
and not located in a mobile home, trailer, cargo container, motor vehicle, or similar personal property. A medical and non-medical marijuana
establishment may be located in a completely enclosed, stand alone building, or one or more establishments under the same ownership may be
located together in the same building. A separate business license must be obtained, however, for each dispensary, cultivation facility, or production
facility.
D. Access: The proposed marijuana establishment (medical and nonmedical) will have direct access (both ingress and egress) from a public street. Only
one secured exterior doorway shall be allowed for the purpose of ingress or egress to a marijuana dispensary, and such doorway shall be visible from
the street or parking lot. Any existing doorways beyond this allowance shall be permanently closed by removing the door and frame and filling in the
opening with permanent construction to match the exterior wall.
E. Circulation: No drive-through facilities shall be permitted in conjunction with a medical marijuana dispensary, or retail marijuana store.
F. Outside Storage: No outside storage shall be permitted for medical and non-medical marijuana establishments, including the use of shipping containers
for onsite storage.
G. Size: The minimum size of a medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retail store shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet, and the size and design
must provide sufficient interior space to provide for adequate customer waiting areas, customer queuing, and transaction space.
1. The maximum size tenant space for a medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retail store shall be limited to the square footage dedicated for
such use with one exit (3,000 square feet).
2. The minimum size of a medical marijuana or marijuana cultivation facility shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
3. The minimum size of a medical marijuana or marijuana production facility shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
H. Accessory Uses: No accessory uses are permitted in association with a medical marijuana dispensary, or marijuana retail store, except for the retail
sale of clothing, novelties, and marijuana paraphernalia as defined in Nevada Revised Statutes 453A.125.
I. Signs: Signage for the establishment shall conform to the standards found in section 9-10-9, "Sign Regulations For Industrial Districts", of this title; and if
located in the Mesquite Technology and Commerce Center (MTCC), signs shall meet the MTCC design standards, and shall be reviewed and
approved by the City's Architectural Review Committee.
1. Shall not place an advertisement:
a. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of a public or private school, playground, public park or library, but may maintain such an advertisement if it was
initially placed before the school, playground, public park or library was located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the location of the
advertisement;
(1) However, this distance limitation does not apply to any school or community facility whose owners/operators sign a disclosure statement
acknowledging that they are moving to a location within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing marijuana establishment.
b. On or inside of a motor vehicle used for public transportation or any shelter for public transportation; or
c. At a sports or entertainment event to which persons who are less than twenty one (21) years of age are allowed entry.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 547/565
d. Off-site temporary directional signs may be permitted by the City, subject to applicable codes, and provided that the temporary signs only contain
the name of the marijuana business and a directional arrow.
J. Expiration Of Permit: The conditional use permit shall be void without further action if:
1. The use ceases for a period exceeding ninety (90) days.
2. Substantial progress toward commencement of the business is not made within ninety (90) days of conditional use permit approval.
a. For purposes of this section, "substantial progress" shall mean obtaining a license from the State Department of Taxation, and/or, obtaining an
occupancy permit or building permit for the proposed facility.
K. State Approval: Medical marijuana and marijuana establishments shall obtain approval from the State of Nevada to operate such facilities prior to the
conditional use permit being exercised.
L. Off Street Parking: Marijuana establishments shall provide off street parking facilities in conformance with section 9-8-5, "Off Street Parking And
Loading", of this title. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-5: REQUIREMENT TO OBTAIN CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Medical marijuana and marijuana dispensaries, cultivation facilities, independent testing laboratories, and facilities for the production of edible marijuana
products or marijuana infused products, shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-6: APPLICATION:
In addition to the general application requirements detailed elsewhere in this title, an applicant for a conditional use permit to allow for the operation of a
medical marijuana dispensary, marijuana retail store, marijuana cultivation facility, an independent testing laboratory, or a facility for the production of
edible marijuana products or marijuana infused products shall complete a supplemental application which includes all of the following information:
A. A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed building on the lot; property lines; adjoining streets; driveway locations; parking layout;
landscaping; walls/fences; solid waste enclosures; and easements.
B. Elevation drawings or photographs of the proposed building which demonstrate that the building is consistent with the traditional style of pharmacies
and medical offices in the community.
C. Rendering of proposed signage showing that the proposed signs are consistent with chapter 10 of this title. Evidence shall be submitted that the
division to regulate medical and non-medical marijuana has approved the name, logo, sign(s) and advertisement of the establishment.
D. The City of Mesquite regulatory zone for the parcel.
E. Name of the medical marijuana or marijuana establishment.
F. Site address and assessor's parcel number.
G. A statement describing what activity will occur at the site - marijuana cultivation facility, facility for the production of edible marijuana products or
marijuana infused products, marijuana independent testing laboratory, marijuana dispensary, marijuana retail store, or a combination of the above.
H. The name and physical address of any other marijuana establishment within Clark County in which any owner, officer, manager, or director of the
applicant has an ownership interest in, or contractual relationship or is otherwise associated with.
I. The name and location of the off-site marijuana cultivation facility providing the marijuana or medical marijuana, if applicable. The name and location of
the marijuana independent testing laboratory providing laboratory service, if applicable.
J. A description of all toxic, flammable or other materials regulated by a Federal, State or local government with authority over the business that will be
used or kept at the marijuana establishment, the location of such materials, how such materials will be stored, and how such materials will be used.
The City of Mesquite Fire Marshal shall review the application submission, as applicable, for compliance with local, State and Federal regulations.
K. A plan that complies with existing Southern Nevada Health District regulations governing air quality for the medical and non-medical marijuana
establishment that prevents or controls any dust, fumes, vapors, or odor of marijuana off the premises of the establishment. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff.
10-18-2017)
9-15-7: MANDATORY CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
All conditional use permit applications for medical and non-medical marijuana establishments must abide by the following conditions of approval. The City
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 548/565
Council may impose conditions of approval that are more restrictive than those required by this section. The approval of all conditional use permits
authorizing the operation of a medical or non-medical marijuana establishment must contain at a minimum the following conditions:
A. The conditional use permit grantee must provide to the City of Mesquite Development Services Department a copy of the registration certificate issued
by the State of Nevada prior to commencing operations.
B. The establishment must continue to meet all requirements for a medical or non-medical marijuana establishment to qualify for and maintain its
certificate of registration as set forth by State law.
C. The establishment must comply with all operating procedures required by State law.
D. The establishment must prohibit anyone from consuming marijuana on the premises.
E. If the establishment has signage, the signage shall conform to the requirements of subsection 9-15-4I of this chapter.
F. The establishment must prohibit anyone under the age of twenty one (21) years on the premises unless the person holds a valid registry identification
card or is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
G. The establishment must prohibit medical or non-medical marijuana activities including, without limitation, cultivating, growing, processing, displaying,
selling or storage from being conducted outdoors.
H. All cultivation or production of marijuana that a cultivation facility carries out or causes to be carried out must take place in an enclosed facility.
I. The establishment must prevent medical or non-medical marijuana or paraphernalia from being displayed or kept in a manner that is visible from outside
the facility.
J. The establishment must post a legible sign inside the facility stating that:
1. The use or distribution of marijuana is a violation of Federal law.
2. Consumption of marijuana on the premises is prohibited.
3. No one under the age of twenty one (21) years is permitted on the premises.
K. The conditional use permit grantee shall submit (on a form provided by the City) a notarized affidavit in which the grantee acknowledges that the
operation of a medical or non-medical marijuana establishment is a violation of Federal law.
L. The conditional use permit grantee shall submit a notarized statement in which the grantee agrees to hold the City of Mesquite harmless against any
Federal law enforcement actions that may result from the activities of the medical or non-medical marijuana establishment that is the subject of the
conditional use permit.
M. The facility must employ security and surveillance systems as outlined in section 9-15-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-8: MEDICAL AND NON-MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. All medical and non-medical marijuana establishments must be located a distance of at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any of the following
existing land uses:
1. Public or private schools (grades K - 12).
2. Community facilities as defined in this chapter.
3. This distance limitation does not apply to any school or community facility whose owners/operators sign a disclosure statement acknowledging that
they are moving to a location within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing medical or non-medical marijuana establishment.
B. All medical marijuana dispensaries or marijuana retail stores must be located a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') from the closest residential
dwelling. The foregoing distance requirement may be waived through the conditional use permit only if it can be shown by clear and convincing
evidence by the applicant that a waiver of such distance requirements will not compromise the general intent of this Code to protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
C. These separation requirements in subsections A and B of this section shall be measured by a straight line in all directions, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the entry door of the prospective medical or non-medical marijuana establishment to the closest point of the property line of
the nearest church, school, community facility, and residential dwelling. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-9: SECURITY AND SCREENING:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 549/565
A. The establishment must install security surveillance cameras that monitor all entrances, along with the interior and exterior of the premises. Recordings
from these cameras must be maintained in a retrievable manner for at least thirty (30) days from the date recorded. All entrances must be illuminated
with dusk till dawn lighting, and dispensary entrances shall be visible from a public street or parking lot.
B. The establishment must install and maintain in good working condition robbery and burglary alarm systems. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-2017)
9-15-10: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to smoke or otherwise consume marijuana in a public place. Marijuana, and marijuana infused products may only be
consumed in the privacy of one's home or private yard, unless otherwise provided for in Nevada Revised Statutes. (Ord. 525, 9-26-2017, eff. 10-18-
2017)
Title 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS
10-1-1: INTERPRETATION:
Except as specifically defined herein or where it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, all words and phrases in this title
shall have their customary dictionary definitions. All words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular. Each gender shall
include the other; and tense shall include all other tenses. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-
2010)
10-1-2: TERMS DEFINED:
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION OR ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATION: A decision or determination by an official pursuant to this title, not resulting in a
citation.
ANIMAL: Every living creature, except members of the human race.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person employed by the City of Mesquite and responsible for the enforcement of this title and State Statutes
pertaining to animals.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any place designated by the City Manager for the confinement of animals in the custody of the City pursuant to the provisions of this
title.
AT LARGE: Any animal off the property of the owner not confined or contained by the owner, caretaker or responsible party's property or under the control
of a leash.
BITE: A puncture or tear of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
CAT: Any domestic cat (Felis sylvestris catus).
CITY: Those areas within the boundaries of the incorporated City of Mesquite.
DOG: Any male or female dog (Canis familiaris).
FERRET: Any domestic ferret (Mustela furo).
FOWL: Any live member of the category of birds typically kept for the production of eggs, meat or feathers, whether or not that individual member is itself
actually kept for the production of eggs, meat or feathers. This definition shall explicitly include, but is not limited to, all chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
peacocks, ostriches and emus.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Chief Health Officer of the Southern Nevada Health District or his or her designee.
LEASH: Leash means any rope, leather strap, chain, retractable leash or other material not exceeding six feet (6') in length, being held in the hand of a
person capable of controlling and actually controlling the animal to which it is attached. Electronically operated devices and retractable leashes extended
beyond six feet (6') are not recognized as a leash.
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having care, custody and control over any animal.
POLICE CHIEF: The chief law enforcement officer of the City of Mesquite or his or her designee.
RESTRAINT OR RESTRAINED: An animal secured by a leash, cable, cord, chain or similar device or restrained within the property limits of its owner or
keeper by way of a fence, cage or other device.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal not restrained by a leash, cable, cord, chain or similar device or restrained within the property limits of its owner or keeper by
way of a fence, cage, or other device.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 550/565
TORTURE AND CRUELTY: Every act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused to an animal.
VETERINARIAN: A licensed graduate doctor of veterinary medicine. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010; amd. Ord. 532, 1-9-2018, eff. 1-31-2018)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ANIMAL CONTROL CODE. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-2-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city's animal control officers and police officers have the authority to enforce the provisions of this title and state law related to animals and pursuant to
such authority may:
A. Issue citations, tickets, summons and any other legal notices;
B. Investigate suspected or alleged violations thereof;
C. Perform such other duties reasonably necessary to the above or as the city council may provide. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-2-3: RESISTING AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL UNLAWFUL:
No person shall oppose, resist or interfere with any official engaged in the performance of any duties related to the enforcement of this title. (Ord. 433, 1-
26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-2-4: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
A. Review By City Manager: Where it is alleged that there is error in any decision or determination made by an administrative official pursuant to
administrative authority granted pursuant to this title, an appeal of such determination shall first be made to the city manager by delivering a written
document entitled "request for review of administrative decision" to the office of the city manager. Appeals to the city manager must be made within
fifteen (15) days of the date of the administrative decision or determination.
The city manager shall conduct a recorded hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the "request for review of administrative decision" and shall
consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the city of Mesquite. The city manager must base his/her decision on the preponderance of
the evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within fifteen (15) days after the date of the hearing. The decision or determination
shall affirm, reverse, or modify the administrative decision or determination.
B. Appeal To City Council: Any person aggrieved by the decision or determination of the city manager may appeal that decision or determination to the city
council by delivering a written document entitled "notice of appeal" to the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after receiving the decision of
the city manager. The city council may consider the record of the prior appeal to the city manager and may take additional testimony. The city council
must render a decision or determination on the preponderance of the evidence and shall render a decision within sixty (60) days after receiving the
appeal. The decision or determination shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision or determination of the city manager.
C. Stay Of Action: Filing of an appeal stays any action by the city related to the administrative decision or determination until the city manager and/or city
council have rendered a decision. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-2-5: VIOLATIONS, CITATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Forms And Records Of Citations: The police chief or his/her designee shall provide books of citation forms for violation of the provisions of this title for
notifying alleged violators to appear and answer to the violation charged in the municipal court of the city. The books shall include serially numbered
sets of citations in triplicate in the form prescribed and approved by the city attorney. The police chief or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
issuance of the books of citation forms to the animal control officers or any other person authorized to enforce the provisions of this title, and shall
maintain a record of every book so issued and shall require a receipt for each book.
B. Hearing: Whenever a person is arrested for a violation of this title, the arrested person shall immediately, or as soon as court time permits, be given a
hearing, in any of the following cases:
1. When the person arrested demands an immediate hearing; or
2. When the person arrested refuses to give his written promise to appear as hereinafter provided.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 551/565
C. Notice To Appear:
1. Whenever a person is cited for a violation of this title and such person is not immediately taken before a court, the officer shall prepare in triplicate
written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place when and where
such person shall appear in court.
2. The time specified in said notice must be at least five (5) days after such citation is issued unless the person cited shall demand an earlier hearing.
3. In order to secure a release as provided in this title, said person must give his written promise to appear in court by signing at least one copy of the
written notice to be prepared by the officer. The officer shall deliver a copy of the notice to the person promising to appear. Thereupon, the officer
shall forthwith release the person.
D. Failure To Obey Citation:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to appear in court given to an officer upon the issuance of a citation regardless of the
disposition of the charge for which such citation was originally issued.
2. In the event any person fails to comply with the citation given to such person and fails to appear at the time and place indicated, the police chief or
any of his or her officers shall secure a warrant for his or her arrest. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-2-6: VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who violates any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-3-1: DOGS AND CATS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Any person owning or possessing a dog or cat over the age of six (6) months must obtain, and thereafter continuously maintain for the life of the animal,
a license issued by the city or its designee.
B. The annual fees for such licenses shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in section 10-3-17 of this chapter.
C. Proof of vaccination as required by this title must be provided prior to the issuance of the license.
D. The owner of any dog or cat required to be licensed shall securely fasten about the neck of the animal a license tag provided by the city or its designee.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Remove a license tag from any dog or cat not owned or lawfully possessed by such person.
2. Place on any dog or cat any license tag that does not relate to that particular animal.
3. Place on any dog or cat any counterfeit or imitation license tag.
E. In the event that a license tag is lost, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure a replacement tag from the city, or its designee, and pay the fee for a
replacement tag set forth in section 10-3-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
F. The licensing functions and duties shall be performed by the department of business licensing, other city personnel as directed by the city manager, and
any licensed veterinarian authorized by the city manager. A veterinarian authorized by the city manager to assist with animal licensing may retain one
dollar ($1.00) per license from the license fees that the veterinarian collects. All other animal licensing fees collected by an authorized veterinarian shall
be remitted to the city department of business licensing along with documentation of fees collected, the name of the licensee(s), the date of license
issuance, the date of license expiration, a description of the licensed animal, the number of the tag issued, and the date of rabies vaccination. (Ord.
447, 9-13-2011, eff. 10-15-2011)
G. The city shall keep a register of all licenses issued, showing the name of the licensee, date of issuance, date of expiration, description of the animal, the
number of the tag, and the date of rabies vaccination. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-2: DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS; RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED:
A. Any person owning or possessing a dog, cat or ferret over the age of six (6) months shall cause the same to be vaccinated for rabies within thirty (30)
days of ownership or possession. Any person owning or possessing a dog, cat or ferret less than six (6) months of age shall have the same vaccinated
for rabies by the time the animal is six (6) months in age.
B. At the time of vaccination, a vaccination tag shall be issued to the owner that shall be worn at all times by the animal to which it relates. (Ord. 433, 1-26-
2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 552/565
10-3-3: DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS; LIMITS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall keep more than three (3) dogs over the age of three (3) months at any one location or residence.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall keep more than three (3) cats over the age of three (3) months at any one location or residence.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall keep more than three (3) ferrets over the age of three (3) months at any one location or residence.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, and except as otherwise provided herein, no person having a combination of dogs, cats, and/or ferrets shall keep a
combined total of more than five (5) dogs, cats, and/or ferrets over the age of three (3) months at any one location or residence1.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person meeting one or more of the above listed limitations may participate in an animal foster care program administered
by an animal shelter or a nonprofit animal welfare or rescue organization with 26 USC section 501(c)(3) status. A person meeting one or more of the
above listed limitations and participating in such a program may provide foster care at any one location or residence for up to two (2) additional animals for
a period not to exceed ninety (90) days per animal. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-4: DOG FANCIER PERMIT:
A. A person may keep up to six (6) dogs at one location or residence provided that such person:
1. Keeps such dogs for the purpose of showing them in recognized dog shows, obedience or field trials, for working or hunting, or for improving the
variety of breed for exhibition in shows or trials;
2. Obtains a dog fancier's permit; and
3. Pays the annual dog fancier permit fee set forth in section 10-3-17 of this chapter.
B. A person with a cat fancier permit shall not be eligible for a dog fancier permit.
C. Subject to the foregoing, the granting of a dog fancier permit is at the discretion of the animal control officer for the purposes described above and may
be conditioned to address health and safety concerns or to prevent the dogs from becoming a nuisance. Dog fancier permits are site specific and
nontransferable. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-5: CAT FANCIER PERMIT:
A. A person may keep up to six (6) cats at one location or residence provided that such person:
1. Keeps such cats for the purpose of showing them in recognized cat shows or for improving the variety of breed for exhibition in shows or trials;
2. Obtains a cat fancier's permit; and
3. Pays the annual cat fancier permit fee set forth in section 10-3-17 of this chapter.
B. A person with a dog fancier permit shall not be eligible for a cat fancier permit.
C. Subject to the foregoing, the granting of a cat fancier permit is at the discretion of the animal control officer for the purposes described above and may
be conditioned to address health and safety concerns or to prevent the cats from becoming a nuisance. Cat fancier permits are site specific and
nontransferable. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-6: RESTRAINING ANIMALS:
Every person who is the owner of any animal, or keeps the same upon his/her premises or under his/her care, custody or control, shall keep the animal
restrained by a fence, cage, coop, chain, leash or other adequate means so that said animal shall not leave or escape from the premises upon which it
shall be kept. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-7: RUNNING AT LARGE:
A. It is unlawful for any person owning or possessing any animal to permit the same to run at large or trespass on any public or private property without
being confined or contained on the owner, caretaker or responsible party's property or under the control of a leash.
B. Any animal running at large or not restrained under the control of a leash as required by this title shall be impounded and kept at an animal shelter for a
period of at least seventy two (72) hours. Nothing in this section shall prevent the release of the animal sooner if so directed by the animal control
officer. (Ord. 532, 1-9-2018, eff. 1-31-2018)
C. Any animal impounded pursuant to this section may be reclaimed within seventy two (72) hours upon:
1. Proof of ownership or lawful possession, and
2. Payment of applicable impound and boarding fees as set forth in section 10-3-17 of this chapter.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 553/565
3. Compliance with this title and other law related to animals.
D. When a seriously injured, sick or suffering animal is taken into custody of an animal control officer, the animal may be taken to a veterinarian for an
examination. If in the opinion of the animal control officer, it is in the best interests of the animal that the animal be destroyed, the animal control officer
may promptly authorize humane euthanasia of the animal. The cost of any veterinary care or veterinary consultation, ordered by the animal control
officer, shall be an obligation of the owner of the animal.
E. After seventy two (72) hours, any animal impounded pursuant to this section is considered abandoned and may be made available for adoption or
destroyed. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-8: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. An animal may be impounded by an animal control officer or police officer when such officers have probable cause to believe that the owner or person
possessing such animal is in violation of this title or other law related to animals.
B. Any animal impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to its owner or person lawfully possessing it upon final disposition of all criminal
charges or citations relating to the impoundment, unless otherwise ordered by a court of law. Nothing in this section shall prevent the release of the
animal sooner if so directed by the animal control officer. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-9: RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A. No animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be released until the owner or person lawfully possessing such animal is in
compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this title and pays any and all outstanding fines/fees.
B. Prior to the release of any animal impounded for over twenty four (24) hours pursuant to the provisions of this title, the location where the animal resides
may be subject to inspection to ensure that the animal is properly restrained and cared for. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF REPORTING PERSONS BITTEN BY ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of anyone with knowledge that an animal has bitten a person to report the same to an animal control officer, Health Officer, or police
officer and to provide all pertinent information requested by them. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-11: SUSPICION OF RABIES BY ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER OR HEALTH OFFICER:
If an animal control officer or Health Officer suspects an animal has rabies, the officer may impound such animal for examination by a veterinarian. For
purposes of this section an animal will be suspected of having rabies whenever it bites another animal or person. If the animal is afflicted with rabies, it
shall be confined for such time or disposed of as the animal control officer directs. Any confinement, quarantine or disposal pursuant to this section will be
at the owner's expense. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-12: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER TO QUARANTINE ANIMAL SUSPECTED OF RABIES:
A person that knows or has reason to know that an animal is infected with rabies, has been exposed to rabies, or has been bitten by another animal
infected with rabies shall immediately notify an animal control officer, and, if such person is the owner or has lawful possession of the animal, shall
surrender the animal to such officer. For purposes of this section an animal will be suspected of having rabies whenever it bites another animal or person.
In the event an animal taken into custody pursuant to this section is afflicted with rabies, the animal shall be confined for such time or disposed of as the
animal control officer directs. Any confinement, quarantine or disposal of an animal pursuant to this section shall be at the owner's expense. (Ord. 433, 1-
26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-13: DISPOSAL OF RABID ANIMALS:
Disposal of a rabid animal shall be in such manner as to preserve intact the head. Such head shall promptly and without delay be properly removed and
packaged for shipment for laboratory analysis as prescribed by the Health Officer. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-14: RECORDS AND REPORTS OF RABIES:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer(s) to keep an accurate record of all reports of nonhuman mammal bites, including the time of report, person
making the report and disposition of the case. Each such case shall be investigated and the animal properly quarantined or impounded in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-15: REPORTING OF FOUND ANIMALS:
Any person who takes custody of any lost or abandoned animal, or any unknown animal running at large, shall report the animal as such to an animal
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 554/565
control officer within twenty four (24) hours after taking custody thereof. A person taking custody of a known animal running at large, shall report the animal
to an animal control officer if said person is unable to return the animal to its owner within forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-16: ANIMAL WASTE, ODOR AND NOISE:
A. No person having, owning or possessing an animal shall permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care, such animal to excrete any solid
waste upon any public or private property (unless such private property is under the ownership or control of said person). No violation of this section
shall occur if the owner or person having custody of the offending animal properly and voluntarily removes and properly disposes of the solid waste.
B. No person shall permit any animal related odors to permeate from property such person owns or possesses which is injurious to the public health,
indecent or offensive to the senses of a reasonable person, or which constitutes an unreasonable intrusion into the quiet enjoyment of another's
property.
C. No person owning or possessing an animal shall permit such animal to bark, yelp, bray or make other noises in such a manner that, because of the
duration or repetition of the noise, a reasonable person would consider an unreasonable intrusion into the quiet enjoyment of their property. Barking,
yelping, braying or other noise from an animal that continues in duration or repetition for over thirty (30) minutes shall be deemed to be per se
unreasonable. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-17: FEE SCHEDULE:
The following fees shall apply to the following services:
Service/License/Permit Fee
Adoptions:
Cats or ferrets (includes annual cat license fee for first year) $ 40.00
Dogs (includes annual dog license fee for first year) 60.00
Gerbils, hamsters, rabbits 15.00
Return to owner:
1st impound None
2nd impound 50.00
3rd impound 75.00
4th impound 100.00
All additional impounds 125.00
Board per day after the first 24 hours 10.00
Euthanasia 10.00
Disposal 10.00
Inspection:
Dangerous animal 100.00
Nondangerous animal:
Initial 25.00
Follow up 15.00
Annual license fee:
For sterilized cats, dogs 6.00
For unsterilized cats, dogs 20.00
License tag replacement 5.00
Cat fancier permit 25.00
Dog fancier permit 25.00
(Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-3-18: PIGEON CONTROL:
A. Public Nuisance Declared: The roosting or lingering of feral pigeons poses a health hazard in addition to offending the aesthetic senses by pigeon
contamination. Such roosting or lingering of feral pigeons is declared to be a public nuisance.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 555/565
B. Unlawful Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person to encourage the lingering, roosting and/or congregating of feral pigeons by providing food,
including, but not limited to: grain, seeds, greens, breadcrumbs and miscellaneous food scraps intended for pigeon ingestion on public or residential
property.
C. Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the following penalties:
1. A maximum fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on a misdemeanor or a period of confinement in the city jail not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 486, 8-12-2014, eff. 9-1-2014)
10-3-19: LICENSED PET SHOPS:
A. No pet shop shall display, sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, broker or otherwise transfer or dispose of a dog, cat, or potbelly pig
except for a dog, cat or potbelly pig obtained from an animal shelter, nonprofit humane society or nonprofit animal rescue organization.
B. Each pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source of each dog, cat and potbelly pig the pet shop acquires, for at least one year
following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available, immediately upon request, to law enforcement officers and other city
employees charged with enforcement of this title.
C. Violation of any part of this section shall be punishable as follows:
1. For a first offense, a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
2. For a second offense, revocation of business license, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and up to six (6) months in jail. (Ord. 501, 5-24-
2016, eff. 6-15-2016)
Chapter 4
EXOTIC ANIMALS, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS, SERVICE ANIMALS
10-4-1: RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING OF PIGS AND HOGS:
A. Area Requirement: No person shall keep any hogs or pigs on any parcel of land which is less than five (5) acres in area or within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of any residence other than his/her own.
B. Number Maintained: No person, without a conditional use permit first obtained from the city council, shall own or maintain more than three (3) hogs or
pigs on any parcel of land less than twenty five (25) acres in the agriculture (A) zoning district or within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any residence
other than his own; provided, that litters from hogs or pigs shall not be considered until they reach the age of weaning. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-
2010)
10-4-2: RESTRICTIONS ON THE KEEPING OF POTBELLIED PIGS:
A. The restrictions of section 10-4-1 of this chapter do not apply to potbellied pigs kept at a detached single-family residence in accordance with this
section.
B. Potbellied pigs kept at a detached single-family residence must have a minimum lot size of no less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet for one
potbellied pig and a minimum lot size of one-half (1/2) acre for two (2) potbellied pigs. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-3: RESTRICTIONS ON THE KEEPING OF BIRDS AND FOWL:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person may keep, or permit to be kept on premises over which such person has control:
A. Any rooster or the male of any species of fowl over the age of three (3) months.
B. Any fowl within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any dwelling owned by another person unless such other person shall have filed with the animal control
officer a written unrevoked consent authorizing the keeping of such fowl or bird within two hundred fifty feet (250') of said dwelling. Any homing pigeons
within one hundred feet (100') from any dwelling owned by another person unless such other person shall have filed with the animal control officer a
written unrevoked consent authorizing the keeping of said pigeons within one hundred feet (100') of said dwelling in which case the number of pigeons
shall be limited to five (5) pairs.
C. Any fowl or bird that is not at all times confined within a suitable enclosure or coop.
D. Any fowl in any basement, subbasement, or cellar.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 556/565
E. Any fowl or bird in any enclosure or coop that is not kept clean and free of offensive odors.
No fowl or bird shall be kept in violation of the planning and zoning ordinances of the city. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-4: KEEPING OR EXHIBITING OF WILD ANIMALS:
A. No person may exhibit in public or keep on public or private property any wild animal.
B. For purposes of this section and this title, "wild animal" means an animal that traditionally has not lived in a state of dependence upon humans or has
not traditionally been kept as a household pet. Such animals include, but are not limited to, raccoons, monkeys, skunks, lions, tigers, bobcats, coyotes,
deer, bears, opossums, beavers, bats, etc. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-5: DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMAL DECLARATION:
A. Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section:
1. An animal may be declared dangerous by an animal control officer if it constitutes a physical threat to human beings or to other animals and, on one
or more occasions within eighteen (18) months:
a. It behaves menacingly to a degree that would lead a reasonable person to defend himself/herself against substantial bodily harm; or
b. It bites a person, but without causing substantial bodily harm.
2. An animal may be declared dangerous by an animal control officer if it constitutes a physical threat to human beings or to other animals and, without
regard to any previous behavior:
a. It is used in the commission of a crime by its owner or keeper;
b. While either at large or restrained, it causes serious injury or death to another animal that is not at large or is not otherwise in violation of this title;
or
c. It exhibits a condition or behavior which causes the animal control officer to believe the animal is a threat to public safety.
3. An animal may be declared vicious by an animal control officer if it constitutes a physical threat to human beings or to other animals and:
a. It has killed or inflicted substantial harm upon a human being or other animal; or
b. After having previously been declared dangerous, with notice of the declaration having been provided to the owner or keeper, it continues to
exhibit the same type of behavior which resulted in the declaration, or is in violation of the provisions of this section.
B. An animal may not be declared dangerous pursuant to this section for constituting a physical threat:
1. To another animal which, or person who, provoked the animal as a result of and to the extent of the provocation;
2. To another animal which, or person who, was unlawfully upon premises owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal constituting the
threat;
3. To another animal which was running at large or otherwise in violation of this title; or
4. In connection with its use by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties.
C. An animal may not be declared vicious pursuant to this section for constituting a physical threat:
1. To another animal which, or person who, provoked the animal, as a result of and to the extent of the provocation;
2. To another animal which, or person who, was unlawfully upon premises owned or occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal constituting the
threat; or
3. In connection with its use by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-6: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS; OWNERSHIP UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for:
A. Any person to knowingly possess, house, shelter, quarter, own or in any other way have under his control, or to transfer ownership of, a vicious or
dangerous animal within the city, except as provided in this chapter; or
B. The owner, or any person having possession, custody or control, of a dangerous or vicious animal to permit the animal to be at large. (Ord. 433, 1-26-
2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-7: DANGEROUS ANIMALS; OWNERSHIP PERMITTED IN LIMITED CIRCUMSTANCES:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 557/565
Any animal which is declared to be dangerous by an animal control officer may be kept within the city, provided that:
A. Within fourteen (14) days after the owner or keeper is notified of the declaration, the area in which the owner or keeper intends to keep the animal must
pass an inspection by an animal control officer, and the owner or keeper must obtain from an animal control officer a permit to keep the animal, based
upon such terms and conditions as the animal control officer deems appropriate. A nonrefundable dangerous animal inspection fee will be charged the
owner or keeper in the amount set forth in section 10-3-17 of this title. For purposes of this subsection, notice of the declaration shall be deemed
complete if it is served personally, or upon mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the owner or keeper.
B. The animal shall be kept, confined or housed within an enclosure deemed adequate by the animal control officer that:
1. Will ensure the animal's retention and comfort, is of a size to permit the animal to stand upright, and is of a dimension deemed adequate by the
animal control officer; and
2. That is secure enough so that the animal cannot bite, harm or injure anyone by overreaching the top of the fence or other enclosure.
C. At no time shall the animal be allowed to leave the private property confines of the owner or person in charge of the animal unless it is muzzled,
leashed and under the effective control of an adult.
D. The private property shall be adequately and properly posted with conspicuous warning signs.
E. The animal must be sterilized by a veterinarian. The owner or keeper shall maintain all sterilization records, including the type of animal sterilized, the
name of the veterinarian performing the procedure, and the date the sterilization was performed.
F. The animal must at all times wear a distinctive, durable, secure, striped collar, provided by an animal control officer.
G. The owner or keeper shall obtain and maintain in effect a policy of liability insurance in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) insuring against possible injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal. The liability insurance shall be maintained in effect as long as the
owner or keeper maintains possession of the dangerous animal.
H. The owner of a dangerous animal may not sell, relocate or give away the animal without first obtaining prior written approval from an animal control
officer. If such a transaction is approved, the owner or transferee shall pay a nonrefundable dangerous animal inspection fee in the amount set forth in
section 10-3-17 of this title for inspection of the new location for the animal. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-8: PERMIT REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
A. Any permit issued pursuant to section 10-4-7 of this chapter shall be revoked if the animal, without provocation, bites or attempts to bite any person or
animal lawfully upon the permit holder's property or upon any other property.
B. Any person who keeps a dangerous animal after his permit has been revoked or any person who keeps, houses, quarters, or in any way has under his
care or custody a dangerous animal without first obtaining a permit as set forth in section 10-4-7 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 433,
1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-9: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
A. The owner or keeper of any animal declared vicious by an animal control officer shall be notified by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, sent to the last known address of the owner or keeper. Within seven (7) days after such notice has been served the owner or keeper shall
voluntarily transfer possession of the animal to the animal control officer and do one of the following:
1. Voluntarily relinquish ownership of the animal for euthanasia;
2. Provide written proof to the animal control officer that the animal has been euthanized by a properly licensed veterinary clinic; or
3. Be prosecuted in municipal court for violation of this title (owning a vicious animal) and abide by ruling of the court on the disposition of said animal.
The owner or keeper may not maintain possession of the animal during the court process.
B. If a person is found guilty of violating this chapter, the court may order the destruction of the animal as part of the sentence. If a person is found
innocent of violating this chapter, the court may:
1. Recommend that the owner or keeper obtain a dangerous animal permit, if appropriate; or
2. Take such other action as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-10: SERVICE ANIMALS:
A. The regulatory provisions of this title, such as, but not limited to, licensing and permit requirements, may be waived at the discretion of the animal
control officer for "service animals" for purposes of compliance with state or federal law, such as, but not limited to, the Americans with disabilities act.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 558/565
B. For purposes of this section, "service animal" has the meaning set forth in Nevada Revised Statutes 426.097, as may be amended from time to time, or
as otherwise defined by any applicable provision of state or federal law. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-4-11: DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS OR WILD ANIMALS TO PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY OR GENERAL
WELFARE:
Nothing herein set forth shall require the impounding of any dangerous, vicious, or wild animal or prevent the destruction of any dangerous, vicious, or wild
animal in order to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
Chapter 5
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
10-5-1: ANIMAL FIGHTING; PIGEON SHOOTS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or use, or be in any manner connected with or interested in the management of, or receive money or other things of
value for the admission of any person to, a house, apartment, pit or place for the baiting and fighting of birds or animals, and it is unlawful for any owner or
occupant of a house, apartment, pit or place to wilfully procure or permit the same to be used or occupied for such baiting or fighting, or to instigate,
promote, arrange or carry on, or do any act as assistant, umpire, principal, spectator or otherwise, in aid of or calculated to encourage or further any fight
between birds, dogs or other animals. It is unlawful for any person to provide or use pigeons or other birds, or to fire upon the same, in connection with any
"shoot" which may result in the killing or injuring of any pigeons and such other birds. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-2: CRUELTY:
A. It is unlawful for any person to overdrive, overload, overcrowd, torture or cruelly beat, or unjustifiably injure, maim, mutilate or kill any animal, whether
belonging to himself or to another, or deprive any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter, or wilfully instigate, engage in, or in any way
further an act of cruelty to any animal, or any act to produce such cruelty.
B. It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive a horse while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drug.
C. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally trip or fell any equine or bovine animal by the legs or by any means whatsoever for the purposes of, but
without limitation hereto, sport or entertainment. However, this provision shall not be construed to prohibit or interfere with rodeo activities conducted in
accordance with Professional Rodeo Cowboy Association rules or other commensurate rules.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the animal control officer or code or law enforcement officer in the exercise and
performance of the powers and duties in this title set forth as to them, and any properly conducted scientific experiments or investigations performed
only under the authority and direction of the faculty of any regularly incorporated medical college or university of the State of Nevada. (Ord. 433, 1-26-
2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-3: ABANDONING ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing or having the care, custody and control of an animal, whether injured or not, to abandon the same, or
leave it to die in a public street, road, alley, or other public place, or upon the private property of himself or another, more than one hour after he receives
notice that it is left disabled. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-4: POISONING:
It is unlawful for any person to unjustifiably administer any poisonous drug or substance to any animal, or unjustifiably expose any such drug or substance
with intent that the same shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal be the property of himself or another. Nothing in this section or chapter shall be
construed to:
A. Prevent or restrict an animal control officer, police officer, Health Officer or similar official in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of
such officers;
B. Prevent the eradication by poisoning of animals commonly considered pests which are harmful or destructive to man, other animals or property;
C. Prevent the eradication by poisoning of "vertebrate pests" as that term is defined by Nevada Revised Statutes 555.005;
D. Prevent scientific experiments or investigations on animals performed by an accredited medical college or research institution. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010,
eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-5: ENDANGERING ANIMALS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 559/565
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drop or place upon any road or public or private right-of-way any material, substance or device intended to wound,
disable or injure an animal. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-6: TRANSPORTING OF ANIMALS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to carry or enclose, or cause to be carried or enclosed, in or upon any vehicle, device, or otherwise, any animal in a cruel or
inhumane or dangerous manner, or so as to produce torture.
B. It is unlawful for any person to confine an animal in a motor vehicle under conditions or for such period of time as may endanger the health of such
animal due to heat, cold, lack of food or water or other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff.
3-1-2010)
10-5-7: ARTIFICIALLY COLORED OR DYED ANIMALS OR BIRDS:
It is unlawful for any person to dye, color or artificially treat any baby chick, rabbit, duckling, fowl or any other animal. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-8: GIVING AWAY; UNUSUAL USES:
A. Giving Away Of Animals, Fish, Reptiles And Fowl: It is unlawful for any person in connection with any advertising campaign or promotion to give, or
offer to give as a gift or prize any live animal, reptile, bird or fish of any description.
B. Cruel Or Unusual Uses Prohibited: It is unlawful for any owner, operator or agent of any carnival, fair or amusement park to use any live animal, reptile,
bird or fish as or for a target, or to use or handle any live animal, reptile, bird or fish in any cruel or unusual manner.
C. Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to, or prohibit, the proper display of animals, birds, fish or reptiles in proper facilities for
educational purposes. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-9: RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS:
Any person who rides, drives or leads any horse, mule, ox, sheep, cow or other animal upon any sidewalk of the City, except at regular crossings, or
suffers any such animal to stand, remain or go upon or obstruct any sidewalk is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-5-10: ADEQUATE SHELTER:
A. Animals shall have protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age, species, and physical condition of the animal so as to
maintain the animal in a good state of health and includes a shaded area. For the purpose of this section, the existence of a pet door access into a
structure may not be deemed as sufficient shelter if it prevents the animal from protection of the elements and weather conditions.
B. Shelter for animals which are not specified under chapter 3 of this title shall include one or more of the following:
1. A pethouse that is an enclosed structure with a roof and appropriate dimensions for the breed and size of the animal. The pethouse shall have dry,
clean bedding when the outdoor temperature is or is predicted to drop below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F);
2. A structure, including but not limited to, a garage, barn, or shed that is sufficiently insulated and ventilated to protect the animal from exposure
temperatures below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) or above eighty five degrees Fahrenheit (85°F) or, if not sufficiently insulated and ventilated,
contains a pethouse as provided in subsection B1 of this section that is accessible to the animal;
3. The interior height of such structure is six inches (6") or more in excess of the height of the animal as measured from the floor to the apex of its
shoulders while in a standing position, and the width and depth are six inches (6") or more in excess of the length of the animal as measured from
the end of its nose to the base of its tail. (Ord. 532, 1-9-2018, eff. 1-31-2018)
10-5-11: SHADING:
An owner of an animal shall provide shade by means of other structures, trees, or awnings, when the temperature is expected to rise above eighty five
degrees Fahrenheit (85°F) to protect the animal from direct sunlight that is likely to cause overheating or discomfort. In the event of a heat advisory issued
by the National Weather Service, additional mechanisms appropriate for the animal species, including but not limited to, misters, swamp coolers or air
conditioning, must be provided which will allow the animal to cool down the body temperature and prevent overheating. (Ord. 532, 1-9-2018, eff. 1-31-
2018)
Chapter 6
ANIMAL FACILITY REGULATIONS
10-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 560/565
For purposes of this chapter:
AMBIENT TEMPERATURE: The temperature directly and immediately affecting the animal.
DEALER: A person who, for compensation or profit, buys, sells, breeds, grades or imports animals for resale.
HOUSING FACILITY: A building, room or other area which contains one or more animal enclosures.
OPERATOR: A person responsible for the operation of a for profit or nonprofit animal shelter, a cattery, kennel or commercial establishment engaged in
the business of selling animals.
RETAILER: A person who acquires pets for resale. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-2: BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS; HOUSING FACILITIES:
An operator shall ensure that:
A. The buildings and grounds at all locations where animals are kept:
1. Are clean and in good repair; and
2. Do not become accumulated with trash.
B. Housing facilities:
1. Are constructed and maintained in such a manner as to:
a. Protect the animals inside from injury;
b. Prevent the animals inside from escaping; and
c. Restrict the entrance of other animals.
2. Have adequate and reliable sources of electrical power and potable water available. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-3: ENCLOSURE GENERALLY:
An operator shall:
A. Provide all animals with enclosures located indoors, except animals that are acclimated to the outdoor environment.
B. Ensure that the interior of a housing facility for indoor enclosures is constructed and maintained in such a manner as to be substantially impervious to
moisture as required by species and to facilitate regular cleaning.
C. Provide a suitable method to eliminate excessive water from the interior of a housing facility for indoor enclosures. All drains must be constructed and
maintained in such a manner as to avoid foul odors. Any closed system for drainage must be equipped with traps that prevent the release of sewage
into the housing facility.
D. Ensure that indoor enclosures are constructed and maintained in such a manner as to:
1. Protect the animals inside from excessive illumination while providing an amount of light, by natural or artificial means or both, of a sufficient
distribution and intensity to allow for routine inspection and cleaning.
2. Provide a sufficient amount of heat when necessary to protect the animals inside from cold and to maintain their health and comfort. The ambient
temperature of an indoor enclosure in which one or more animals are kept must not be allowed to fall below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F), unless
each animal is acclimated to a lower temperature.
3. Provide adequate ventilation at all times to maintain the health and comfort of the animal(s) inside as required by species. The system of ventilation
must provide fresh air by means of windows, doors, vents or air conditioning, and be designed to maintain drafts, odors and the condensation of
moisture at a minimum. If the ambient temperature reaches eighty five degrees Fahrenheit (85°F) or greater, air conditioning, exhaust fans and
vents, or other auxiliary ventilation must be provided. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-4: ANIMALS KEPT OUTDOORS:
If animals are kept outdoors, an operator shall:
A. Provide a suitable method for the rapid drainage of surface water from the area where each animal is kept.
B. Provide each animal with a sufficient amount of shelter to:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 561/565
1. Remain dry from rain and snow; and protected from wind when a high wind warning has been issued by the national weather service or which
creates a windchill of less than fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) unless each animal is acclimated to a lower temperature;
2. Have enough shade to protect itself from any direct sunlight that is likely to cause overheating or discomfort; and
3. Remain warm when the atmospheric temperature falls below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F). If the ambient temperature falls below the temperature
to which an animal is acclimated, the operator shall provide such an additional amount of clean bedding material or other protection as necessary for
the animal to remain warm.
C. After considering the ambient temperature, provide each animal with a sufficient amount of food and water necessary to sustain it in a healthy condition
at that temperature. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-5: PRIMARY ENCLOSURES GENERALLY:
An operator shall ensure that a primary enclosure is constructed and maintained in such a manner as to:
A. Protect the animals inside from injury;
B. Prevent the animals inside from escaping;
C. Keep other animals out;
D. Allow the animals inside convenient access to food and water;
E. Enable animals inside to remain clean and dry as required by species; and
F. Provide sufficient space for each animal inside to turn about freely and to stand, sit and lie in a comfortable normal position as appropriate for the
species. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-6: FLOOR SPACE OF PRIMARY ENCLOSURE FOR ANIMALS:
An operator shall ensure that a primary enclosure in which each mammal that is at least six (6) weeks old is kept has a minimum amount of floor space
which is calculated by finding the mathematical square of the sum of six inches (6") plus the length of the animal measured from the top of its nose to the
base of its tail, and dividing that amount by one hundred forty four (144), to arrive at the minimum amount of square footage required for the floor space
per animal. Floor space required for mice and rats shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 10-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 433, 1-26-
2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-7: ANIMALS KEPT IN ENCLOSURES TOGETHER:
If animals are kept in enclosures together, an operator shall ensure that:
A. Animals placed with other animals are compatible.
B. An animal that displays a vicious disposition is not placed together with any other animal.
C. A female animal is not placed together with any intact male animal during periods of estrus, except for supervised breeding.
D. An immature animal is not placed together with an adult animal, except with its mother or when permanently maintained in a breeding colony. (Ord. 433,
1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-8: FOOD AND WATER:
An operator shall ensure that:
A. Clean potable water is accessible to the animal at all times or except as directed by a veterinarian to provide adequate care.
B. Each animal is fed at least once each day, except as otherwise required to provide adequate care.
C. The food provided to an animal is wholesome, palatable, free from contamination, and of sufficient quality and nutritive value to meet the normal daily
requirements for the animal, based upon its condition and size.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 562/565
D. Supplies of perishable food are to be adequately refrigerated or properly stored to prevent spoilage.
E. Containers of food are:
1. Durable, except that disposable receptacles may be used if they are discarded after each feeding; and
2. Located so as to be accessible to the animals while reducing to a minimum any contamination from excreta.
F. Containers of food and water are kept clean. Self-feeders must not be used for the feeding of dry food unless they are cleaned regularly to prevent
molding, deterioration and the caking of food. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-9: SANITATION:
An operator shall ensure that:
A. Insects, ectoparasites and avian, mammalian and reptilian pests are kept under control.
B. Supplies of food and bedding material are stored in facilities that afford adequate protection from infestation or contamination by vermin.
C. Excreta are removed regularly from enclosures during business hours to prevent contamination and to reduce to a minimum odors and the risk of
disease. An enclosure must be disinfected at least once daily and before placing another animal in the enclosure. If a hosing or flushing method of
cleaning is used, all animals must be removed from the enclosure and adequate measures must be taken to protect the animals in other enclosures
from being contaminated with water and other wastes.
D. Pens or runs with hard surfaces, and cages and rooms, are sanitized at least once every two (2) weeks by:
1. Washing them with water of a temperature not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) and with soap or detergent; or
2. Washing all soiled surfaces with a safe and effective disinfectant; or
3. Cleaning all soiled surfaces with live steam.
E. Pens or runs with gravel, sand or dirt surfaces are cleaned as often as necessary by removing and replacing the soiled gravel, sand or dirt.
F. Sewage, solid wastes, soiled bedding, dead animals and debris are removed from housing facilities regularly during the business day and disposed of
properly.
G. Enclosures not in use are to be cleaned, washed and disinfected at least once every two (2) weeks to prevent any accumulation of debris or excreta
and to reduce to a practical minimum substances and organisms injurious to the health of animals or humans.
H. Facilities for disposal are maintained in such a manner as to reduce to a minimum odors and the risk of disease or infestation by vermin.
I. Adequate facilities, such as washrooms, basins or sinks, are provided for the cleanliness of persons handling animals. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-
2010)
10-6-10: PROGRAM TO CONTROL DISEASE AND CARE FOR HEALTH:
An operator shall, with the approval of a veterinarian, establish and maintain a program to control disease and care for the health of animals. As part of this
program, an operator shall ensure that:
A. Each animal is observed daily by the person directly responsible for its care, or by someone else under that person's direct supervision.
B. Blind, lame, injured, ill or diseased animals are provided with the appropriate veterinary care that is consistent with the purposes for which an animal is
being kept or humanely euthanized.
C. Any animals under quarantine or being treated for a communicable disease are kept separate from other animals. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-11: EXAMINATION BY VETERINARIAN; NOTICE OF TREATMENT OR MEDICATION TO PURCHASER; SALE OF AN
ANIMAL THAT REQUIRES IMMEDIATE TREATMENT PROHIBITED:
A. A retailer or dealer shall, after the acquisition of an animal for resale, cause the animal to be examined by a veterinarian. The retailer or dealer shall not
sell the animal before it is initially examined by a veterinarian.
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 563/565
B. A retailer or dealer shall cause an animal acquired for resale to be reexamined by a veterinarian:
1. Fourteen (14) days after the date of its initial examination; and
2. Every thirty (30) days after until sold.
C. If a veterinarian conducting an examination pursuant to this section finds that a dog or cat has no illness, disease or other condition that is terminal or
requires immediate hospitalization or immediate surgical intervention, he shall provide a written statement setting forth his findings to the retailer or
dealer.
D. A retailer or dealer shall provide to the purchaser of an animal, at the time of sale, written notice of any veterinary treatment or medication received by
the animal after it was acquired by the retailer or dealer, including a copy of any statement provided by a veterinarian pursuant to subsection C of this
section. The notice must be signed by the retailer or dealer, dated and include the dates on which the animal was examined and on which the animal
received medication or a vaccination.
E. A retailer or dealer shall not knowingly sell an animal if it has an illness, disease or other condition that is terminal or requires immediate hospitalization
or immediate surgical intervention.
F. For the purposes of this section, the presence of internal or external parasites does not constitute an illness, disease or other condition that is terminal
or requires immediate hospitalization or immediate surgical intervention unless the animal is clinically ill as a result of the parasite. (Ord. 433, 1-26-
2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-12: PROVISION OF WRITTEN STATEMENT FOR A DOG OR CAT:
A retailer or dealer shall provide upon request a written statement containing:
A. The name and address of the owner and date the dog or cat was born.
B. The name and address of the person from whom the retailer or dealer obtained the dog or cat, if the person holds a license issued by the United States
department of agriculture, and the person's federal identification number.
C. A record of any immunizations administered to the dog or cat before the time of sale, including the type of vaccine, date of administration, and name
and address of the veterinarian who prescribed the vaccine.
D. On a dog the registration numbers, if any, of the dog's sire and dam with the appropriate breed registry or any health certification organization such as
the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals or its successor organization, if any. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-13: NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION CONCERNING AN ANIMAL:
A retailer or dealer shall conspicuously post within close proximity to the primary enclosure of an animal offered for sale the following notice at least 100-
point type:
NEVADA AND CITY LAW REQUIRES THAT INFORMATION CONCERNING THE DATE OF BIRTH, SOURCE, LINEAGE AND MEDICAL HISTORY
OF DOGS OR CATS BE PROVIDED TO THE PURCHASER BEFORE COMPLETION OF ANY SALE
(Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-14: DUTIES UPON DETERMINATION THAT PET WAS SOLD WITH CONDITION THAT REQUIRES IMMEDIATE
TREATMENT:
If a person purchases a pet from a retailer or dealer and, within ten (10) days after the sale, a veterinarian determines that the pet has an illness, disease
or other condition that is terminal or requires immediate hospitalization or immediate surgical intervention and that was in existence on the date of the sale,
the retailer or dealer shall, at the option of the purchaser, either:
A. Refund the purchase price of the pet if the pet is returned or provide the purchaser with another pet of equal value; or
B. Reimburse the purchaser, in an amount not to exceed the purchase price of the pet, for expenses incurred by the purchaser in obtaining a diagnosis
and treatment for the pet from a veterinarian chosen by the retailer or dealer. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-15: SEPARATING ANIMAL FROM MOTHER:
A retailer, dealer or operator shall not separate an animal from its mother until it is accustomed to taking food or nourishment other than nursing. (Ord. 433,
1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 564/565
10-6-16: KNOWINGLY SELLING AN ANIMAL WITH CONDITION REQUIRING IMMEDIATE TREATMENT PROHIBITED;
PENALTIES:
A. A retailer or dealer who sells an animal that he knows has any illness, disease or other condition that is terminal or requires immediate hospitalization or
immediate surgical intervention at the time of sale is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any other penalty that may be imposed, the court may
prohibit a person convicted of a violation of this section from selling any animals for not more than one year.
B. For the purposes of this section, the presence of internal or external parasites does not constitute an illness, disease or other condition that is terminal
or requires clinically immediate hospitalization or immediate surgical intervention unless the animal is clinically ill as a result of the parasite. (Ord. 433,
1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-6-17: BIANNUAL INSPECTION OF PREMISES REQUIRED:
Any retailer, dealer or operator which is required to maintain a current business license shall have their premises inspected biannually by the animal
control officer to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and title. After March 1, 2010, any retailer, dealer or operator which is required to
obtain a business license shall have their premises inspected and approved by an animal control officer prior to the initial issuance of a business license to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and title. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
Chapter 7
SPAY/NEUTER OF DOGS AND CATS
10-7-1: MANDATORY SPAY/NEUTER OF DOGS AND CATS:
Subject to the exceptions provided in this chapter, no person shall harbor within the city of Mesquite any dog or cat over the age of six (6) months that has
not been spayed or neutered. For purposes of this section and chapter, "harbor" means legal ownership, of the providing of regular care or shelter,
protection, refuge or nourishment, or medical treatment; provided however that the term shall not include the providing of nourishment to a stray or feral
cat or dog. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-7-2: EXCEPTIONS TO SPAY/NEUTER REQUIREMENTS:
A. The spay/neuter requirement set forth in section 10-7-1 of this chapter shall not apply if a licensed veterinarian certifies in writing and under oath that a
specific dog or cat is medically unfit to undergo the required spay or neuter procedure because of a physical condition that would be substantially
aggravated by such procedure or would likely cause the animal's death. The certification shall indicate the medical basis therefor and whether the
unsuitability is permanent or temporary. If temporary, the certificate shall indicate the period of time anticipated that the unsuitability will last. For an
exemption to apply beyond that period, a new certificate must be obtained.
B. The spay/neuter requirement set forth in section 10-7-1 of this chapter shall not apply to animals harbored by a pound, shelter, humane society or
similar organization, whether public or private, the principal purpose of which is securing the adoption of dogs or cats provided that such organization
has a policy and rules requiring the spaying or neutering of all dogs and cats placed for adoption by such organization.
C. The spay/neuter requirement set forth in section 10-7-1 of this chapter shall not apply to any dog or cat harbored by a person holding a valid dog or cat
fancier's permit, as provided in sections 10-3-4 and 10-3-5 of this title.
D. The spay/neuter requirement set forth in section 10-7-1 of this chapter shall not apply to any dog or cat that has received appropriate training, is
certified by a recognized agency if such certification is required by the recognizing agency and is being used:
1. By a law enforcement agency for law enforcement activities;
2. By a search and rescue agency for search and rescue activities;
3. As a service animal, such as a guide animal, hearing animal, assistance animal, seizure alert animal, or social/therapy animal. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010,
eff. 3-1-2010)
10-7-3: FORFEITURE:
Kittens and puppies born to cats and dogs not spayed or neutered in violation of this chapter are subject to forfeiture and may be given to the care of a
local animal shelter for adoption. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-7-4: TIME FOR COMPLIANCE:
Persons harboring a dog or cat subject to the spay/neuter requirement of section 10-7-1 of this chapter have one hundred twenty (120) days from the
enactment of this title to comply therewith. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)
10-7-5: PENALTY:
7/6/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=455 565/565
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
1. For the first offense, by a fine of two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00).
2. For a second offense, by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
3. For a third and subsequent offense, by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. The penalty set forth in subsection A of this section shall be reduced by eighty percent (80%) if proof of sterilization of the dog or cat is produced within
thirty (30) days after issuance of the citation. (Ord. 433, 1-26-2010, eff. 3-1-2010)